Please allow me to extend my warm congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident
that, with your wisdom and experience, and with the
support and coordinated efforts of the member States,
the Millennium Assembly will successfully complete
all its work. At the same time, I would like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Gurirab for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its last session.
The Millennium Summit, which attracted
worldwide attention, has just concluded. The United
Nations Millennium Declaration is a consensus reached
by world leaders on how to meet the major challenges
facing mankind today. The Declaration reviews and
sums up the course that the United Nations has
travelled over the past 55 years. More importantly, it
offers a blueprint for the United Nations in the new
century and the new millennium and important
guidance to people around the world in their pursuit of
peace, development and common progress. I would like
to add my voice to the call to action made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan at the closing ceremony
of the Summit. We should work together to turn the
consensus reached at the Summit into action and usher
in a new era of peace and development for people all
over the world.
It is the primary mission of the United Nations in
the new century to uphold the purposes and principles
of its Charter, promote democracy in international
relations, maintain world peace and stability and
facilitate the development and prosperity of all
countries. The United Nations Charter is a
manifestation of the peoples' aspiration to equality,
justice and freedom. Over the past 55 years, the United
Nations has adhered to the Charter aims of
safeguarding peace, developing friendship and
promoting cooperation, as well as the core principles
guiding international relations, such as sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. It is precisely for these reasons that the United
Nations has grown in strength and its membership
increased from 51 to 189. This Organization is still
playing an irreplaceable role in world affairs.
The history of the past 55 years has amply proved
the effectiveness of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Today, global issues have
made our interests intertwined and modern technology
has made our communication easier. In these
circumstances, we need more than ever to face our
common challenges together on the basis of equality,
mutual respect and democratic consultation. The
purposes and principles of the Charter are by no means
outdated, but are rather of greater relevance today.
Democracy in international relations requires
compliance with the principle of sovereign equality, as
5

provided for in the United Nations Charter. Countries
differ in size, strength and wealth, but they are all
equal members of the international community. None
should be discriminated against and their state
sovereignty brooks no encroachment. The internal
affairs of a country should be managed by the people of
that country and major world affairs should be decided
by all countries through consultation. The response to
global challenges calls for worldwide cooperation and
coordination. This is a necessity of our times and a
prerequisite for the establishment of a fair and just new
international political order. It is also the foundation
and source of vitality for the United Nations in the new
century.
The reform of the United Nations should give full
expression to democracy in international relations. The
reform is aimed at better safeguarding the fundamental
rights and interests of all Member States and,
especially, at truly reflecting the will of developing
countries, which make up the bulk of United Nations
membership. It should not merely satisfy the needs of a
few countries. The reform of the Security Council
should seek primarily to increase representation of
developing countries and should be based on extensive
deliberations among Member States. It is against the
will of the overwhelming majority of Member States to
set arbitrar deadlines or to force the passage of
immature plans.
There is general agreement among the United
Nations Member States on basing the scale
methodology of regular budget and peacekeeping
assessment on the principle of the capacity to pay. This
methodology is also one that has been confirmed time
and again by the General Assembly through its
resolutions and should therefore be abided by in
whatever circumstances. Any adjustment to this
methodology should take into full account the specific
economic conditions of developing countries. Such
adjustments should be made only when there is
consensus among all Member States through extensive
consultation, thus facilitating the normal and sound
operation of the United Nations.
Another important historical task facing the
United Nations is to respond to globalization and to
achieve the common development of mankind. The
twentieth century has seen both unprecedented
economic prosperity and the greatest polarization. In
the last decade of the century, economic globalization
has advanced at the fastest pace, while the gap between
the North and the South has continued to widen.
According to the World Bank, the revenue of the low-
income countries accounts for only 6 per cent of the
world's total, although they make up more than half of
the world's population, while that of the developed
countries is 80 per cent with only one sixth of the
world population.
It is especially worrisome that there is an even
wider gap between developing and developed countries
in the field of advanced technology. The new economy
is so far benefiting only the rich countries. Most
developing countries are still information have-nots.
Should this situation be allowed to continue, many
developing countries will long remain deprived of the
opportunity to participate in technological progress and
economic growth and the world will be further
polarized.
To prevent poverty from swallowing up
achievements of development and to prevent social
injustice from shaking the basis of global stability, the
United Nations must play its due role in narrowing the
gap between the rich and the poor and bringing about
common prosperity to the world. It is an unavoidable
major responsibility of the United Nations in the new
century to promote the establishment of a new
international economic order based on cooperation on
an equal footing and aimed at common development
and to ensure that economic globalization benefits
everybody in the world.
The United Nations should give top priority to the
issue of development, make efforts to change the
current situation in which global economic affairs are
dominated by only a few countries and ensure
developing countries their right to equal participation
in economic decision-making. In making or revising
global economic rules of the game, consideration
should first be given to the need of developing
countries in order to facilitate their development and
reduce the risks they may face when participating in
globalization. The United Nations should also mobilize
all the resources available and encourage the
international community to narrow the “digital divide”,
and it should help developing countries to seize, as far
as they can, the opportunities brought about by the
scientific and technological advancement driven by the
information revolution. The United Nations also has
the responsibility for introducing new rules to the
world to make science and technology truly serve all of
6

mankind and the lofty cause of peace and development
in the world.
As drastic and profound changes are taking place
in the international situation, what kind of security
concept should be embraced is a major subject before
the United Nations and all its Member States. Global
strategic stability is the foundation on which world
security rests. And the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty is an important cornerstone for global
strategic stability. Any move to undermine the totality
and effectiveness of the Treaty will have a profound
negative impact on world peace and security. The
proposal for a national missile defence system that is
prohibited by the ABM Treaty is essentially aimed at
seeking unilateral military and strategic supremacy, and
thus a typical example of the cold war mentality. Such
a plan, if implemented, will only bring serious negative
consequences to the security of the whole world. The
adoption by the General Assembly of the resolution on
preservation of and compliance with the ABM Treaty
(A/54/54 A) at its fifty-fourth session by an
overwhelming majority is an indicator of the firm will
of most countries in the world to maintain and strictly
observe the ABM Treaty. The United Nations should
continue to show serious concern over the attempt by a
certain country to develop a missile defence system to
the detriment of global strategic stability, and it should
take necessary measures to stop this dangerous
development.
Security is mutual and relative. No country
should enhance its security at the expense of that of the
others. To seek absolute unilateral security is not
feasible and will lead to greater insecurity. With
increased international contacts and exchanges,
countries of the world will find themselves sharing
more common interests and facing more common
challenges. Security can only be realized through
dialogue on an equal footing and in the spirit of mutual
understanding and mutual accommodation. It can only
be maintained on the basis of mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence, and it can only be consolidated
through mutually beneficial cooperation and common
development. The only way to protect the fundamental
interests of all countries and enhance universal security
is to replace the old security concept based on military
alliances and military build-up with a new one that is
characterized by equality, mutual trust, mutual benefit,
cooperation and settlement of disputes through
dialogue.
In recent years, China, Russia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan have reached, within the
framework of the Shanghai Five and through
consultation and cooperation based on equality, an
agreement among themselves on confidence-building
in the military field and reduction of military forces in
the border areas. This offers something useful for the
international community to draw upon in its
exploratory efforts for a new security concept.
We have noted with pleasure the positive changes
in the situation on the Korean Peninsula and the
positive outcome of the successful historic summit
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea. It has shown once again
that dialogue and consultation based on equality serve
to enhance mutual trust and improve relations between
States. We appreciate the efforts made by both the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea to promote peace, stability and
development on the peninsula and in the region.
We deeply regret that the tripartite summit at
Camp David failed to produce any agreement. We
believe that the Middle East peace process will move
forward as long as the parties concerned earnestly,
patiently and unswervingly engage themselves in
negotiating and seriously implement the agreements
that have already be reached among them on the basis
of the relevant United Nation resolutions, in
accordance with the principle of land for peace and in
the spirit of mutual trust and mutual accommodation.
In the twentieth century, mankind suffered a great
deal from the scourges of war. In the twenty-first
century, humanitarian crises of a massive scale must be
prevented, and the tragedy of innocent people being
slaughtered on a large scale must not be allowed to
repeat itself. The United Nations shoulders a primary
responsibility for the maintenance of world peace, and
therefore it should work harder to stop conflicts and
eliminate wars.
In the present-day world, hegemony and power
politics still exist. Territorial disputes, ethnic feuds and
religious rifts have all led to incessant regional
conflicts. Some countries and regions hope that the
United Nations will assist them in stopping conflicts,
which we fully understand. At the same time, we must
not fail to see the complexity of international
intervention and the danger of inappropriate
intervention. The United Nations intervention should
7

aim at eliminating the root causes of a given conflict
rather than delaying its settlement. It should aim at
facilitating reconciliation between the conflicting
parties rather than deepening their hatred and hostility.
We are of the view that major powers and groups of
countries should respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned rather than
meddling in their internal affairs or triggering new
conflicts.
In the new circumstances, peacekeeping
operations remain an important means for the United
Nations to fulfil its obligations in safeguarding world
peace and security. In this regard, it is essential to
ensure and enhance the Security Council's
responsibility and political leadership in peacekeeping
operations and to ensure the observance of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
launched with a sense of realism and within the
capacities of the United Nations. The limited resources
should be put to where they are most needed.
Human beings are the most precious among all
the creatures on earth. To promote human development
and protect all the rights and interests of mankind is the
primary responsibility of all countries. China is the
most populous country in the world. The Chinese
Government has taken upon itself to safeguard the
independence and dignity of the Chinese nation and to
ensure the almost 1.3 billion Chinese the right to a
decent life and all-round development. It has regarded
this as its sacred duty and will do all it can to achieve
this end.
Human rights improvement is an ongoing
process. The human rights conditions of a country are
up to the people of that country to assess and improve.
Since people live under different circumstances, the
form in which human rights are embodied changes with
these circumstances and with time. Therefore, how to
protect and promote human rights depends on the
actual conditions and specific needs of a country. To
arbitrarily impose a fixed set of human rights rules,
regardless of the differences in the specific
environment and reality, will not serve the interests of
the people of any country. To interfere in other
countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting
human rights in order to advance one's own political
agenda is simply to blaspheme and betray the human
rights cause.
The United Nations should vigorously encourage
dialogues and exchanges among different civilizations
and countries on human rights and discourage
confrontation and exclusion — which are the general
trend of the human rights movement. In providing
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations should
give equal priority to the prevention of conflicts and
the protection of human rights, on the one hand, and to
the reduction and elimination of poverty and the
promotion of human development, on the other hand.
In this context, the United Nations should work in
close coordination and cooperation with the countries
and Governments concerned, instead of bypassing
them, and ensure human rights for the majority of the
people. Otherwise, such operations will trigger a
humanitarian disaster of a greater scale. Only when the
above-mentioned principles are abided by can the
United Nations play a useful role in protecting human
rights.
A few days ago, from this solemn podium
Chinese President Jiang Zemin proclaimed to the
whole world the Chinese people's firm determination
to turn China into a strong, prosperous and united
country with a high degree of democracy, and to
promote world peace and development. In the past 20
years and more since the inception of reform and
opening-up, China completed the first and second
phases of its modernization strategy. With the advent of
the new century, China will begin the third phase of the
strategy and enter a new stage of accelerated
modernization. Once China becomes a member of the
World Trade Organization (WTO), there will be major
breakthroughs in its opening-up. China will honour its
commitments and seriously fulfil its obligations, while
enjoying its rights.
Although there will be difficulties, risks and
challenges on the road ahead, China is capable of
removing every obstacle and achieving its grand
objective of modernization. China will unswervingly
stick to its independent foreign policy of peace and
further develop its friendly relations with the rest of the
world on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence. A strong and developed China will not
only benefit more than a billion Chinese people but
also serve prosperity and progress worldwide.
To resolve the question of Taiwan once and for all
and complete the reunification of the motherland is a
shared aspiration of the entire Chinese people,
including our Taiwan compatriots. Adherence to the
8

principle of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems in resolving the Taiwan question will serve the
development of the two sides on either side of the
straits, contribute to amity and unity among
compatriots on both sides, and facilitate peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese
Government and people have committed themselves
more strongly than anyone else to a peaceful
reunification. They have demonstrated the utmost
sincerity and made the greatest efforts to this end. We
are convinced that — with the concerted efforts of the
entire Chinese people, including those living in
Taiwan — China will be able to realize its complete
reunification at an earlier date.
We are entrusted with the important task of
charting a course for mankind for the coming century.
Let us join hands and work together to build a more
secure, prosperous and progressive world in the new
century.First of all I
would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as President of the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, and wish you every success with
your work. I would like to thank Foreign Minister
Gurirab for his dedication in chairing the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. I welcome Tuvalu as
the one hundred and eighty-ninth member of the United
Nations and congratulate it on its accession. I endorse
the statement of my French colleague, Hubert VÈdrine,
on behalf of the European Union.
At this session of the General Assembly, the first
in the new millennium, we are asked to determine the
future tasks of the United Nations and which reforms
are necessary in order to master them. The Millennium
Declaration, which we all adopted on 8 September,
shows us the way forward. The implementation of this
Declaration should be a main focus of the consultations
of this and future sessions of the General Assembly. I
propose that the Secretary-General make use of the
opportunity to draw up review reports at the beginning
of the next session of the General Assembly.
There was one issue in particular which
dominated this debate, namely globalization. It will
radically change the economy and finances, politics
and culture everywhere. The question is, will a new
order which guarantees peace, justice and an equal
share in our common progress be established or will a
new divide evolve in the world? Will the future of the
globalized world manifest its pluralist character in a
multilateral order? Only the future can provide the
answers to these questions.
Particularly for developing countries,
globalization offers great opportunities. If it
nevertheless provokes strong opposition, this lies in the
imbalances of this historical process. Indeed, just under
a decade after the end of the cold war, our world is
today at risk from a new divide, one between the
winners and losers of the economic globalization
process. In his impressive Millennium Report, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, rightly highlights
the growing inequalities in the distribution of income,
resources, investments and access to new technologies.
In view of this situation, the international
community must make every effort in the coming
decade to ensure that globalization benefits all peoples.
If market forces are not balanced by a political
corrective mechanism, it is to be expected that injustice
in the world will increase further. Those who have been
hitherto excluded from the advantages of globalization
must be included to a greater extent. They must be
given more say in the political decisions made about
steering global processes and they must be given an
opportunity to gain a fairer share in the development of
the world economy.
In the twenty-first century, we will, more than
ever before, need a form of global governance if we are
to solve global challenges. The United Nations will
play a key role here. It is the only organization within
which the injustice between rich and poor can be
overcome and where a reconciliation between peoples
and regions, global peace and sustainable development
can be achieved.
Greatly strengthening the United Nations capacity
to act is, therefore, a crucial question for the whole of
15

humanity in the twenty-first century. In addition to the
crucial reform of the Security Council, this will entail
the United Nations entering into creative partnerships
with industry and civil society.
Germany strongly supports the Secretary-
General's idea for a global compact with major
companies. The German initiative for a resolution in
the General Assembly on global partnerships will take
up this and other issues relating to the globalization
process.
Global poverty is the key problem in North-South
relations. It lies at the root of many global risks and
threats to peace. The Secretary-General provided
precise and stimulating analyses of this in his report.
The industrialized nations have a special
obligation to support the poorest of the poor. With the
Cologne debt initiative launched by Germany, we are
combining debt relief with a strategy to combat
poverty. The 20 poorest developing countries should be
debt-free by the end of the year.
The least developed countries should be granted
access to world markets with the greatest possible
exemption from duties and quotas. We must, also by
way of liberalization steps in the World Trade
Organization, prevent these countries from being
socially excluded even further.
This applies in particular to the new economy.
The United Nations and its Member States must
intensify their efforts to make it easier for these
countries to use the information and communication
technologies. This is contingent upon initiatives in the
field of education, as well as the availability of the
necessary resources.
However, how can poor countries ever catch up
economically if they are, at the same time, afflicted to a
much greater degree than the North by terrible
diseases? The fight against the disastrous spread of the
AIDS virus, particularly in Africa, must be priority for
us all. The focus must be on prevention. At the same
time, access to medicines must be improved and
vaccine research must be intensified. The World Bank's
promising idea of establishing a future fund for the
purchase of vaccines deserves every support.
Particularly in the fight against AIDS, new partnerships
between Governments and companies are crucial.
The second major issue of this General Assembly
is peacekeeping. The Secretary-General showed the
way ahead with the Brahimi report. The
recommendations it contains should be examined and
implemented as quickly as possible. Germany will play
its part. Peace missions need a more robust mandate, as
well as more personnel and equipment. Member States
must do considerably more to ensure the rapid
secondment of well-trained troops, police officers and
civilian experts. The further development of the police
concept is one of the most important tasks in this
connection  as the last few months and years have, in
fact been teaching us.
The German Government will offer German
training for civilian peace-mission personnel and offer
civilian capacities to the United Nations stand-by
system. In addition, we are drafting a plan for training
civilian experts for peace missions, thus creating a pool
of qualified personnel who can be deployed at short
notice.
The prevailing form of conflict today is conflict
within States. Therefore the main task of peacekeeping
must be to address the internal roots of conflicts. In
addition to focusing on an improvement in socio-
economic conditions, our efforts must focus on
promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, aptly said that the
human rights violations of today are the wars of
tomorrow.
Numerous concrete tasks are on the agenda. The
protocols relating to the involvement of children in
armed conflict and to the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography must enter into
force as early as possible. The equality of women must
be advanced in all spheres. I call upon all states to
ratify quickly the new Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and to abolish all laws
that discriminate against women by 2005. The World
Conference against racism, to be held in 2001, must
tackle all aspects of this issue. Out of a sense of
responsibility for our history, our State and our society
will stand up firmly against all forms of right-wing
radicalism, racism and anti-Semitism, both in our own
country and in the world.
I call upon all States to respect the integrity of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, to sign and
to ratify it, so that the Court can commence work soon.
There can be no exceptions to the Rome Statute.
16

One of the greatest dangers facing humanity
remains the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The risk of regional arms races,
particularly in South Asia, has increased. Further
developing the international arms-control regime
therefore continues to be one of the United Nations key
tasks. This will require resolute implementation of the
results of the sixth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Against this background, President Clinton's
decision not to commit now to the development of a
national missile defence system is very welcome. The
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty must remain as a
cornerstone of strategic stability and the basis for
further nuclear-disarmament measures.
In poor countries the excessive stockpiling of
small arms must be stopped. We must therefore do
everything we can to achieve tangible progress at the
United Nations small arms conference to be held in
2001. This presupposes the inclusion of all aspects,
including the legal transfer of production and
stockpiles.
Regional cooperation has proved to be an
extremely effective means of preventing conflicts. The
United Nations can do much to help here. Allow me to
mention two regions where progress is particularly
urgent. The triangle between Central Asia, the
Caucasus and the Middle East is full of destabilizing
factors  oil, religious fundamentalism, terrorism,
drugs and the nuclear arms race  and this area is
threatening to become the crisis region of the century
ahead. A new comprehensive regional process, along
the lines of the Helsinki model, which fosters
cooperation instead of confrontation, could play an
important stabilizing role. Germany is prepared to take
part in such a process.
In Africa, regional approaches have gained in
significance. In the main, however, it is, unfortunately,
too early to talk of effective peacekeeping structures.
Unfortunately, the efforts on the part of the United
Nations and of the Organization of African Unity to
resolve the conflicts in the Congo and Sierra Leone
have not achieved a breakthrough so far. In the conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea it is to be hoped that the
ceasefire that has finally been concluded will be
consolidated and that the United Nations peace mission
will be lent the full support of the parties to the
conflict.
The third issue, protection of our natural
environment, will probably become the crucial issue
affecting our planet. In the course of the twentieth
century the world's population quadrupled, while
consumption of energy and raw materials increased
tenfold. We must end the squandering of natural
resources and switch to renewable energy sources as
quickly as possible. This cannot only be a matter for
industrialized nations. We are witnessing at this very
moment what a burden high oil prices places on poor
countries in particular. It must be in the interest of all
States to bring about the transition from the oil to the
hydrogen age as quickly as possible. The most
important thing now is to finally overcome the
deadlock in the climate-protection negotiations and to
ensure that the Kyoto Protocol can be implemented by
2002, 10 years after the Rio Summit.
Another key issue for humanity, the future of
genetic engineering, can only be mastered within the
framework of a global consensus. Genetic engineering
has the potential to revolutionalize medicine and
agriculture. At the same time, it raises more ethical and
human rights questions than any other technology. Do
we not need clear, binding rules for dealing with such a
powerful new technology? Why do we not seriously
consider within the United Nations creating under
international law a convention that meaningfully
promotes genetic engineering and safeguards the
freedom to research and the findings of this research,
while, at the same time, defining an ethical basis and
guaranteeing protection against abuse?
The Millennium Declaration points the way
ahead. But what help will that be if an increasing
number of Members allow the world's real problems to
be dealt with and decided somewhere else? If we do
not succeed in adapting the United Nations to deal with
the challenges of the twenty-first century and in
modernizing it fully, it will be sidelined, with fatal
consequences for peace and development, human
rights, the environment and social progress.
We will all, rich and poor, lose out.
We must therefore muster the strength to
resolutely implement the Millennium Declaration. We
need a world Organization that is strong and we must
use its scarce resources more effectively. An important
prerequisite for this is that the United Nations be
placed finally on a solid financial footing. Together
with its European Union partners, Germany has put
17

forward proposals for a fairer, more balanced scale of
assessments, which must continue to be based on
Member States' ability to pay..
The Security Council no longer reflects the
political reality of our world at the dawn of the new
millennium. We share the Secretary-General's view
that this central steering organ of the international
community must become more representative,
legitimate and effective, also involving the developing
countries. Last week Chancellor Schroeder reaffirmed
Germany's willingness to take on more responsibility
in this connection. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank my friend and colleague Robin Cook for the
clear language that he used before the General
Assembly just a few minutes ago.
The General Assembly must structure its work,
debate global problems in a more focused fashion than
hitherto and identify courses of action. The synergetic
potential between United Nations organizations, for
example in the environmental field, must be better used
and resources pooled to a greater extent by merging
organizations.
Reform of the United Nations will play a decisive
role in ensuring that the twenty-first century is safer
and more just than the twentieth century. Allow me to
conclude with a quote from the Secretary-General's
Millennium Report:
No shift in the way we think or act can be
more critical than this: we must put people at the
centre of everything we do ... Only when that
begins to happen will we know that globalization
is indeed becoming inclusive, allowing everyone
to share its opportunities.'I have
the honour of speaking this year on behalf of the
European Union, which France is presiding over until
the end of December.
In this capacity, it is a great pleasure for me to
congratulate the President on his election. It
symbolizes the respect the international community has
both for his country and for himself.
I would also like to thank your predecessor, Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, for his skill in guiding the
proceedings of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, Mr. Sam Nujoma and Ms. Tarja Halonen for
their work with you, Mr. President, as Co-Chairpersons
of the Millennium Summit.
19

I would like to commend the Secretary-General
of the Organization, Mr. Kofi Annan. His international
action, his independence and his vision have made a
decisive contribution to asserting the key role the
United Nations plays and must continue to play. The
European Union wishes to assure him of its support for
his work and for the Organization and its
representatives.
The Millennium Summit, an unprecedented
gathering of 155 heads of State and Government,
allowed us to address the main challenges facing the
world community and the role of the United Nations in
the twenty-first century, which will begin on 1 January
2001.
The Union notes with great satisfaction that the
Summit produced a political document setting forth a
road-map for the Organization for the years to come.
These guidelines are based on ideas outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. It is now up to the General
Assembly to implement them. The Union will
contribute actively to this.
Peacekeeping, strengthening international
security and defending human rights are the central
principles underpinning the European Union's foreign
policy. Recent crises on Europe's very doorstep have
convinced us that we cannot remain idle when these
fundamental principles are violated. In this regard, the
European Union approves of the priority given to
peacekeeping during last week's meetings. Mr.
Brahimi's report offers an in-depth analysis on this
subject. It presents useful recommendations for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, operational
planning in New York and deployment. It presents a
unique opportunity to strengthen the United Nations
capacity for peace operations. The European Union
will actively participate in considering these
recommendations.
The Union has decided to equip itself to be a
major political actor and to play its full role on the
international stage. To this end, and within a very short
time-frame, it has undertaken decisive measures. New
decision-making, action-oriented political and military
bodies have been set up: a political and security
committee, a military committee, a European Union
military staff, a situation centre and a committee for
civilian crisis management. These bodies will enable
the European Union to intervene quickly and credibly
in the management of international crises.
The European Union has also announced its
intention to establish by 2003 a force of 60,000 troops
for international missions involving the whole range of
conflict-prevention and crisis-management operations,
with the requisite air and naval support for deployment
within 60 days for a period of at least one year. This
autumn there will be a conference for the commitment
of capability at which each Member State shall pledge
its contribution to this joint endeavour.
The Union has also set ambitious and realistic
targets for developing collective capabilities. In
addition to its military resources, it will develop
civilian intervention capabilities, including a corps of
civilian police, whose contribution to peacekeeping is
invaluable. In this connection, Member States have set
themselves the goal of being able, by 2003, to provide
up to 5,000 police officers, 1,000 of whom will be
deployment-ready within 30 days.
These decisions now enable the European Union
to complement its already sizeable economic and
humanitarian programmes with the full range of
resources required for crisis management. Of course,
these activities are designed in full respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter. Now more
than ever, it is vital to establish working ties with the
United Nations. To initiate this cooperation, the
European Union troika will discuss this issue for the
first time with the Secretary-General. On behalf of the
European Union, I hereby invite Mr. Kofi Annan to go
to Brussels for a working meeting with the organs of
the Union.
The European Union hails the considerable
efforts and determination shown by the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Prime Minister
during recent negotiations to reach a final agreement
between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We
welcome in particular the renewed vigour with which
very sensitive issues have been addressed at this time.
We commend President Clinton and the Secretary
of State for their unflagging efforts to facilitate
negotiations. Circumstances favourable to reconciling
positions continue to exist. We urge the parties to seize
this historic opportunity, show courage in decisive
choices, take fully into account human realities and the
recognized rights of all, and thereby achieve a final
agreement.
The European Union welcomes Israel's
withdrawal from the zone it occupied in southern
20

Lebanon. It welcomes the redeployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the presence of a
joint security force, sent to the area by the Lebanese
Government. It urges all parties to fulfil their
responsibilities in order to defuse tensions. The
European Union believes that only a comprehensive
settlement encompassing every track of the peace
process, including the Israeli-Syrian track, is likely to
guarantee lasting stability in the region. It will continue
to support the efforts of the parties to this end and
contribute to the implementation of any agreements
that may be reached.
Turning to Europe, the situation in the western
Balkans is a matter of serious concern to the entire
international community. Ten years of conflict have
ravaged the region, leading to severe human suffering
and to politically unstable and therefore dangerous
situations. But beyond accumulated hardships and the
lagging economic and social development of many of
those countries, all of the peoples and nearly all of the
leaders of the region have realized that it does have a
future, and that future is Europe. Today, all Europeans
now share the belief that these countries are bound one
day to join the European Union.
This is why the European Council has reiterated
that its goal is to firmly attach the countries of the
region to Europe. This means the greatest possible
integration into the political, economic and social
currents of Europe through the stabilization and
association process, political dialogue, trade
liberalization, the harmonization of their laws with
those of the European Union, and cooperation in justice
and domestic affairs.
The assistance provided by the European Union
to countries of the region over the last 10 years —
nearly 8 billion euros — is considerable. The European
Union will continue to sustain this stabilization and
association process by providing the western Balkan
countries with massive technical, economic and
financial assistance and by granting them asymmetrical
trade advantages in farming and industry very soon,
which will pave the way for the creation of a free trade
zone with the European Union. In the context of
elections concerning almost the entire region, we will
encourage them to develop regional cooperation and to
continue to make determined efforts for political,
economic and social reform in order to consolidate
democracy and human rights, to build the rule of law
and lay the groundwork for sustainable development.
In this context, the European Union has reaffirmed its
determination to continue to be the driving force in the
Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe, which
represents a new vision of cooperation between the
countries of the region and the international
community.
The summit to be held shortly in Croatia of the
European Union and the Western Balkan countries —
on the basis of a French proposal — will signal our
common resolve to overcome the divisions of the past.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will not be
able to participate in the conference, as the nature of its
present regime does not allow it to do so. But the Serbs
know that they have their place in the European family
and that the European Union is looking forward to the
day when the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is in a
position to participate fully in the stabilization and
association process and to recover its rightful place in
Europe. The elections to be held on 24 September
could be decisive in this respect.
In Kosovo the international community, acting on
the basis of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
has achieved praiseworthy results. Thanks must be
given to all those who have made this possible in spite
of enormous difficulties, especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations staff and the Kosovo Force soldiers, the many
international organizations there on the ground and the
non-governmental organizations. The first democratic
municipal elections in Kosovo, to be held in a few
weeks' time, will constitute a major step in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). I would
forcefully reiterate that the international community
will not allow unacceptable acts of violence, whatever
their motivation, to cause the democratic electoral
process under way to fail. We will not let extremists
from whatever faction sabotage the work accomplished
over the past year under the auspices of the United
Nations.
The European Union considers the status quo in
Cyprus unacceptable, and it supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General to reach a negotiated,
comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement consistent
with relevant Security Council resolutions. It reiterates
its commitment to stability and prosperity throughout
the Mediterranean region. With talks beginning right
here under the auspices of the Secretary-General, it
21

invites the parties concerned to enter into substantive
talks.
The European Union is equally determined in its
support for efforts to prevent and settle conflicts in
Africa, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
subregional organizations and in accordance with the
objectives agreed at the Africa-Europe Summit, held
last April in Cairo under the Portuguese presidency of
the European Union. It will lend its backing to the
measures taken jointly by the OAU and the United
Nations to implement the peace settlement between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. In supporting the deployment of
international observers, the European Union is also
willing to lend its support to the establishment and
demarcation of borders, to demining and to assistance
to refugees and displaced persons. It is endeavouring to
provide assistance to the war-stricken populations of
both countries, whose immense suffering has been
compounded by drought.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls on all parties to the Lusaka Agreement
to implement their commitments, including those made
at Kampala. This will allow for progress with respect
to the military and political provisions, all of which are
under threat due to the continued fighting and the
deadlock in preparing for a national dialogue. It also
urges them to abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1304 (2000), which
calls for an orderly withdrawal of foreign forces from
Congolese territory and for the cooperation of all
parties in the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) through the lifting of restrictions
on the freedom of movement of MONUC personnel
and by ensuring their security.
The illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a violation of
the country's sovereignty, is also unacceptable. The
European Union therefore commends the establishment
by the Secretary-General on 15 August last of a group
of experts in charge of analysing ties between the
illegal exploitation of those riches and the continuation
of the conflict.
We are pleased to note greater awareness about
the illicit trade in diamonds and other minerals, which
directly fuels conflicts. This is the case in particular
with the illicit trade in diamonds in Angola, whereby
UNITA has been funding its war effort. We underscore
the importance of complying with Security Council
resolutions on this matter. We welcome the decision to
place this important question on the General
Assembly's agenda. The discussion should be based on
the Kimberley process. It should reflect the work of the
preparatory conference co-chaired by the United
Kingdom and Russia. Lastly, it should examine the
proposal made at Miyazaki to establish a standing
group of independent experts to formulate ways of
preventing illicit trade.
The European Union reiterates its support for
resolution 1306 (2000) on Sierra Leone, which
tightened existing arms sanctions and established an
embargo on raw diamonds illegally exported from
Sierra Leone. The European Union calls on all the
parties to the conflict to comply with the principles and
objectives of the Lomé Agreement and to be fully
involved in the re-establishment of peace and stability
and compliance with human rights in Sierra Leone.
The European Union and its member States will
continue to contribute to African capacity and means of
action in conflict prevention and resolution, in
particular through support for the OAU and
subregional organizations and initiatives.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the
situation in Myanmar. It asks the Myanmar authorities
to immediately restore Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi's
freedom of speech, movement and communication with
the outside. It is urgent for dialogue to begin between
the Myanmar authorities and the democratic
opposition, including the National League for
Democracy and national minorities. The Union
supports the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Burma, Mr. Razali, in his efforts to find a solution.
The European Union expresses its solidarity with
the people of East Timor and commends the work done
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) in close cooperation with the
political authorities of East Timor. It is in favour of
accelerating reconstruction assistance in order to
guarantee a successful transition and avoid any delay in
the timetable leading to independence.
We are extremely concerned by the instability
caused by the militias in both East and West Timor.
The new outbreaks of violence by them have taken the
lives of two “blue beret” peacekeepers and, more
22

recently, of three personnel of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The European Union calls on the Indonesian authorities
to adopt effective measures to control the militias
without delay.
The European Union also calls for the termination
of terrorist activity in Kashmir, the implementation of
confidence- and security-building measures and strict
respect for the line of control in order to restore a
peaceful local climate and enable the dialogue between
Pakistan and India to resume in the spirit of the Lahore
Declaration. The European Union will be looking
closely for such signs from the parties involved and
will encourage initiatives likely to resolve all the
disputes between the two countries.
It is important for the specific measures laid
down in Security Council resolution 1172 (1998) to be
implemented and for Pakistan and India to subscribe to
the international non-proliferation regime and sign the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Having advocated direct dialogue between the
two Koreas for many years, the European Union
welcomes the historic inter-Korean Summit that took
place in Pyongyang from 13-15 June this year. This is
an important step on the road to reconciliation between
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, opening bright prospects for
strengthening the stability of the region. We invite the
two countries, who have been members of the United
Nations since 1991, to continue this process in order to
help the Korean people heal the wounds of the past.
On the subject of Haiti, the European Union
recalls that full respect for the constitutional provisions
concerning the elections and electoral legislation
currently in force is the basis of democracy and the rule
of law.
The threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems is a crucial issue
that the European Union — which shares the concern
for international peace and security that ought to
inspire the nations represented here — is resolved to
combat relentlessly. To this end, international
cooperation must be stressed, along with the
development of multilateral standards for non-
proliferation, arms control and disarmament.
This is particularly true of chemical and
biological weapons, which have now been banned. The
Union is working towards the early conclusion of a
protocol containing reliable and effective verification
measures to strengthen the 1972 Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction. We are equally
determined to ensure nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, where so much progress has been made
since the signing of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to which 187 States are
now parties.
Since the end of the cold war, effective
instruments for ending the arms race and achieving
disarmament have begun to see the light of day, with
the halt to testing, the treaty enshrining it, the first two
START agreements to reduce the largest nuclear
arsenals and a host of unilateral decisions following the
same trend. Our priority must be to consolidate this
mechanism. A start was made with the Review
Conferences of 1995 and 2000; the results, which we
welcome, must be fully implemented.
We must give full weight to strengthening the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) through the widespread implementation of the
measures contained in the 1997 Model Protocol and to
remain alert to the issue of NPT compliance. We must
also revive the momentum of the multilateral
negotiations.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty, the completion of the operational readiness
of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO) and the negotiation at the Disarmament
Conference of a fissile material cut-off treaty are all
necessary steps that are of concern and ought to
mobilize all States, be they parties to the NPT or not.
The start of this negotiation implies urgent negotiations
on a working programme in the Conference on
Disarmament. International standards in this field can
only be effective if they are universal. Arsenal
reductions, which are the prime responsibility of the
nuclear-weapon States, must also be continued. This
will enable us to move closer to our common
objectives — namely, the elimination of nuclear
weapons and general, comprehensive disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
The issue of small arms and light weapons is just
as sensitive in many regions of the world. It deserves
special attention. The 15 European Union members
23

will contribute to the preparation of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will take place
during the summer of 2001, with the objective of
obtaining a positive and enforceable plan of action to
combat the destabilizing accumulation and spread of
small arms and light weapons. At the same time, the
Union shall continue its drive for the implementation
of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on their Destruction. It will join in the
efforts to achieve the total elimination of anti-
personnel mines.
On the very important subject of human rights,
the European Union will continue to support the efforts
of the United Nations to reach the goal set by the
Secretary-General to put human rights at the heart of
every aspect of its work. The best guarantee of solid
progress in this area is each person's awareness of the
importance of human rights and democracy and the
emergence of groups who actively promote them in
every country. In this connection, the European Union
welcomes the designation, thanks to the support of
many countries, of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders, Ms.
Jilani; we welcome her appointment and assure her of
our full backing as she undertakes her duties.
This year the United Nations has once again
demonstrated that it is the main forum of progress in
setting standards for human rights, as witnessed by the
adoption of two optional protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the sexual exploitation of
children and on children in armed conflicts. This
represents a major step forward in favour of the
protection of children. The European Union intends to
contribute actively to the special session of the United
Nations General Assembly for the follow-up to the
World Children's Summit, to be held next year, which
will give the international community yet another
opportunity to help this cause move forward.
Another important task, the World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, lies ahead. At the European
Preparatory Conference, to be held in October under
the auspices of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
the European Union will demonstrate its commitment
to combat all expressions of racism, whatever form
they take. The Union, all of whose members have
abolished the death penalty, calls on States that have
not yet done so to adopt a moratorium as a first step
towards the eventual abolition of this punishment,
which is contrary to human dignity.
The European Union will endeavour to strengthen
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
and will play an active role in the negotiations to be
held to that end. It earnestly hopes that this General
Assembly will adopt the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols at the
Palermo Conference next December. Given that such
crime, that one of its most odious manifestations is the
trafficking in human beings, and that it poses an ever-
growing threat to our societies, it is vital for the
international community to develop the means to
cooperate and fight against it effectively.
Lastly, the European Union looks forward to the
early establishment of the International Criminal Court.
I would like to recall that ratification by 42 States is
still needed for this.
By way of conclusion, I would like to stress one
last point, and that is sustainable development. The
European Union's contribution to international
cooperation is substantial. With 30 per cent of the
global gross domestic product, the Union contributes
36 per cent of the United Nations regular budget and
39 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. As you know,
it also contributes the rather large amount of around 55
per cent of the world total of official development
assistance. We are pleased with everything that was
said last week on this extremely important matter, and
we will continue our exemplary work on sustainable
development. Indeed, we believe that development is
one of the key ways of resolving all of the problems
facing us throughout the world, as outlined in my
statement, and the European Union wishes to express
its strong, continuing commitment to that end.I am conscious that
the central problem for all of us when we rise to speak
to the General Assembly is that there are too many
issues of concern to hope to address them all in one
speech. There is no shortage of challenges to the
United Nations as we meet for the first time in a new
century to debate the issues of a modern world.
It is a world united by the new technologies of
communication. We have never had so much
opportunity to share the know-how for economic
growth. Yet our world has never before been so divided
between rich and poor. In the year ahead, we must
make sure that all the United Nations agencies and its
international financial institutions work together in a
coordinated way to promote development and to reduce
debt.
It is also a world bound together by growth in
trade between our countries. But we failed at Seattle to
make further progress on removing the obstacles to that
trade. In the year ahead, we must launch a world trade
development round which is fair to those countries
whose main exports are agricultural rather than
industrial.
It is a world which faces a common threat to its
global climate. We are each learning the alarming rate
at which that climate is changing as the result of our
own actions. Before the end of the year, we must try to
reach agreement at the sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change to bring into effect the Kyoto
measures to stabilize climate change.
Each of these is an important challenge. Each of
them is a strategic priority for our work programme for
the coming year. This morning, though, I wish to focus
my remarks on the central theme of the Millennium
Summit and of this fifty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
How do we equip the United Nations with the
capacity in peacekeeping that matches the real
demands for it around our world?
In his opening address, the Secretary-General
invited us to give a swift response to the Brahimi
report on peacekeeping (A/55/305). The United
Kingdom is happy to respond to that invitation by
offering our support for the report's conclusions and
pledging our commitment to its implementation. The
report begins by reminding us that the United Nations
was founded, in the words of its Charter, to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war'. Too
often, though, we have failed to save those who needed
our protection from the suffering, the pain and the
terror of brutal conflict. We must be frank in facing up
to those failures if we are to learn their lessons. And
we must be determined to improve the capacity of this
Organization to keep the peace if we are to succeed in
the future.
I want to set out six tasks which we must address
if we are not to repeat past failures. First, we must
equip the United Nations with a more effective and
more rapid capacity for peacekeeping. In the space of
about one year, the number of troops on United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the globe has trebled.
The United Kingdom has forces operating in eight
different theatres where peacekeeping has been
authorized by the United Nations.
8

But it is not the new size of our peacekeeping
effort that demands changes. It is the different
character of the peacekeeping challenge. It used to be
the case that United Nations forces were typically
deployed to observe a ceasefire between two States
both of which wanted to end the fighting. Today, our
peacekeepers are typically deployed within States, not
between them, and often where one or more parties to
the conflict is not seriously committed to peace. In
those circumstances, United Nations peacekeepers need
a robust mandate. As the Brahimi report puts it, where
one side is violating a peace agreement, treating both
sides equally can amount to complicity with evil.
United Nations peacekeepers who witness violence
against civilians should be presumed to be mandated to
halt it.
But if those peacekeepers are to act with
determination, then we must equip them with the
capacity to do so. The United Nations needs a
Headquarters unit capable of rapid deployment within a
few weeks, not a few months, of a Security Council
resolution. And each of us must develop the number of
troops who are trained in the principles and practice of
peacekeeping whom we can commit to the United
Nations. That is why the United Kingdom has proposed
a permanent staff college for United Nations
peacekeeping. The United Kingdom has offered to host
such a resource for United Nations peacekeeping, if
that is welcome to other members of the General
Assembly.
The second task is to be more rapid and more
imaginative in tackling tension before it results in
conflict. By definition, any mission to restore peace is
an admission of failure to prevent conflict. As well as
coping with the consequences of conflict, we need to
address the root causes of conflict: poverty, bad
governance and the denial of freedom or of minority
rights. I welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
submit a report on conflict prevention early next year.
It will be a natural companion to the Brahimi report. I
hope it can enable us to develop an early warning
system which will alert us to potential conflict and give
our agencies the chance to offer help before it becomes
a real conflict.
Too often, internal conflict is fuelled by the
external demand for the illicit trade in diamonds or the
evil trade in drugs. Measures to ban conflict diamonds
from international sale or to defeat the drugs barons
must be key elements of any comprehensive strategy of
conflict prevention.
The third task is to take tighter control of the
flows of arms which supply conflict. As an
international community, we have put much effort into
controlling weapons of mass destruction. The good
progress we all made at the Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Treaty on the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) underlines the
importance which each of us attaches to this strategic
issue. The United Kingdom has ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, has reduced
by half its planned strategic nuclear warheads, and has
supplied greater transparency on our nuclear arsenal.
Yet, over the past decade, the true weapons of
mass destruction have been small arms, which have
killed 5 million people in conflicts around the globe.
Overwhelmingly, those killed were civilians rather than
soldiers. And, overwhelmingly, they were killed in
countries which do not manufacture firearms. We must
make a success next year of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects. We need to reach
agreement to mark firearms at the point of production
so that they can be traced. The United Kingdom would
support at that conference the presumption that military
firearms should not be licensed for sale other than to
legitimate Government bodies. And we must seek the
help of the international economic agencies, including
the World Bank, to fund and to reward with
development aid the surrender of firearms.
The fourth task is to provide the United Nations
with the civilian resources to promote reconciliation
and reconstruction. In Kosovo, and again now in East
Timor, we have learned that the end of conflict is only
the starting point. When the troops have brought peace,
we need judges and administrators to bring justice and
development. The peacekeepers must be followed by
peace-builders. In particular, we need to muster the
civilian police who can establish law and order in place
of violence and conflict. I was astonished to read in the
Brahimi report that this mighty international
organization has only nine civilian police on its
Headquarters staff, administering 8,600 civilian police
in the field around the world. I am confident that every
one of them is the very best, in keeping with the
tradition of United Nations staff. But if we are serious
about succeeding on the ground, we need a more
serious back-up at the centre. Four times in the past
9

decade, the United Nations has been called upon to
undertake a transitional civilian administration. We
need a better, permanent, capacity here at the centre to
support our operations in the field.
The fifth task is to enforce the international law
on crimes against humanity. If we are to have
international justice, we must have an international
court. The United Kingdom has given strong support to
the International Criminal Court, and we have just
published our draft legislation to ratify the treaty
setting up such a Court. The International Criminal
Court will send a strong warning to any future tyrants
that they will be called to account for their crimes
before the bar of international justice. It will be one of
the most powerful advances for human rights since we
agreed 50 years ago to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
And finally, we must strengthen the authority of
the United Nations. In 50 years, there has been no new
permanent member of the Security Council. The
Security Council needs to represent the world as it is in
this century, not the world as it was in the middle of the
last century. It needs to be made representative of the
100 or more countries that have joined as Members
since the Security Council was set up. The United
Kingdom supports a doubling of the permanent
membership to include Germany, Japan and three
countries from each of the continents of Asia, Africa
and Latin America. We also want more members
among those who are elected, in order that the Security
Council can be more representative of the General
Assembly.
For seven years, we have been debating this
question. It is becoming an issue of credibility for the
United Nations. How can we pretend to end conflict if
we cannot end this disagreement among ourselves? A
more representative, modern Security Council would
speak with more authority when it challenges those
who breach the peace.
I have been frank about where we must improve
our capacity for peacekeeping and strengthen our will
to halt conflict. But we should not underrate the
immense achievement of the United Nations. Our
Charter begins by recalling the untold sorrow to
mankind inflicted by two world wars. It was a Charter
written by ministers and officials determined to end
war between States. And in this they were remarkably
successful. External aggression between States is now
unusual.
But the benefits have been unevenly shared. The
industrialized nations have enjoyed half a century of
peace. That has provided the security and good order in
which their prosperity has advanced at a rate without
precedent in history. Yet, in the same half century,
people elsewhere in the globe have lived through
violence and conflict which have broken their human
rights and impoverished their standards of living. It is
largely poor countries that now experience the scourge
of war which our Charter sought to banish.
The challenge for the United Nations is to ensure
that the peace and security which have been enjoyed by
many Member States are shared by all. None of us can
prevent humanitarian catastrophe by acting alone. But
this United Nations can, if we act together.
The Brahimi report tells us what we need to do.
As an organization, we publish many reports. Nobody
could fault the capacity of the United Nations to
produce reports. But we are not always as good at
implementing them. Let us make sure that the Brahimi
report does not gather dust on library shelves but is put
into practice before we meet again next year. Let us
show the determination and the conviction that the
right in our Charter to be preserved from war is an
equal right for the people of all our nations, large and
small, rich and poor.India congratulates Mr. Harri
Holkeri on his election as President of the first General
Assembly of this millennium. We are encouraged that
he intends to take the Millennium Declaration as the
mandate for the work of the Organization during his
presidency.
I take this opportunity to sincerely compliment
and to place on record our high appreciation of Foreign
Minister Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia for his
guidance of the General Assembly in the past year,
which included three special sessions and, of course,
meticulous preparations for and a successful
conclusion to the Millennium Summit.
I join India's voice to those of other delegations
in noting with appreciation the dedication with which
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has served the United
Nations at a critical point.
I am delighted on this occasion to warmly
welcome Tuvalu as the newest Member of the United
Nations.
Just 10 days ago, almost 150 heads of State and
Government assembled here for the Millennium
Summit. Their assembly in such large numbers was as
unique as was the occasion itself. The Millennium
Declaration that was then adopted encapsulates a
shared vision that the international community work
together in constructive cooperation to meet collective
challenges, within the framework of the United
Nations. It was in this spirit that my Prime Minister
spoke, as did many others, of the need for the United
Nations to truly reflect the world of the twenty-first
century, to make it an effective instrument to translate
17

our vision into reality. The United Nations is the house
that we all share. We must strengthen it and ensure that
it is equal to our collective expectations and our joint
aspirations.
Peace, collective security and development
inspire the spirit of the United Nations. We enter the
twenty-first century with extraordinary collective
intellectual and technical capabilities. These are our
global tools for overcoming the challenges before us.
Peace and security for all is not just possible but is well
within our grasp. Stability and development are the
essential building blocks for the maintenance of peace
and security. Threats to peace can and do arise from
different sources. It is not just weapons of mass
destruction or an arms race that endanger peace, but
also dehumanizing poverty and lack of development.
We must act as confident nation States committed
to collective action and international cooperation, for
these are our means to provide wider effects of peace
and progress. We must reaffirm the principle of respect
for State sovereignty and non-interference in internal
affairs of countries. Thus, self-evidently, we must
abjure unilateral action. Whenever circumstances
warrant action by the Security Council, that action
must be firmly rooted in Charter provisions.
The Brahimi Panel's report contains a number of
proposals. We recommend that the General Assembly
examine this important report carefully and take
appropriate decisions to strengthen this vital United
Nations function of peacekeeping.
We support the Middle East peace process and
find the trend encouraging.
The historic summit between the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
too, augurs well for peace in the Korean peninsula.
Disarmament — global nuclear disarmament in
particular — is essential to engender a greater sense of
security among Member States. India has been and will
continue to be in the forefront of efforts towards global
nuclear disarmament and genuine non-proliferation.
We welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General in his report to the Millennium Summit to
convene an international conference on eliminating
nuclear danger. We urge commencement of
negotiations on a nuclear-weapons convention to bring
about a nuclear-weapon-free world. India remains
ready to participate in agreed and irreversible steps,
such as de-alerting of nuclear forces, thus lowering
nuclear danger, through accidental use or otherwise, as
well as a global agreement on no-first-use and on non-
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.
The situation with regard to the entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and the lack of progress on a programme of
work at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva
show the importance of building a consensus, both
within and amongst nations, on issues that affect
national and international security. We are conscious
that 155 countries are at present signatories of the
CTBT. We reiterate to them our continuing
commitment that India does not wish to stand in the
way of entry into force of the CTBT. India volunteered
to observe, and continues to observe, a moratorium on
further explosive nuclear testing. This meets the basic
obligations of the CTBT. India also remains ready to
engage in meaningful negotiations in the Conference
on Disarmament, including on a global treaty to ban
the future production of fissile material for weapons
purposes.
The illicit transfer, manufacture and circulation of
small arms, particularly by States to non-State actors
and to terrorist groups, and their intrinsic linkage with
terrorism and narco-trafficking are matters of very deep
concern to the world community. When they are
combined with religious fanaticism and military
adventurism, a threat is posed to the global civilized
norms to which we strive to adhere. The international
community can no longer afford to permit these
purveyors of death, outrage and destruction to continue
to inflict untold suffering upon innocents. We look
forward to a successful outcome of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to be held next year.
Terrorism is the global menace of our age. For
some, it tends to replace ideology and policy. India has
been the object of State-sponsored, cross-border
terrorism in its most inhuman manifestations for more
than a decade. Even as the international community
works together to curb, control and stamp out the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, we need to
continually focus our attention on the users of such
weapons — the terrorists. Terrorism is an assault on
human decency, a violation of the basic precepts of
democracy and the very antithesis of what the United
Nations represents and stands for. Because its principal
18

targets are the innocent, it is indeed the most flagrant
violation of basic human rights. It constitutes a crime
against humanity. It is also a threat to international
peace and security, especially when terrorists are
armed, financed and backed by Governments or their
agencies.
I urge all Members to work to strengthen the
international consensus and legal regimes against
terrorism. We have proposed the draft of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. I
urge all Members of the United Nations to give their
total support to this initiative.
Let me now dwell briefly on the instrument of our
choice to accomplish our global agenda: the United
Nations. There is but one United Nations; none
replicate it, nor can any replace it.
The membership of the United Nations has
increased manifold in the last half century, and today
stands at 189. Yet the Security Council continues to
have the same basic structure as in the colonized world
of 1945. The need for expansion of the membership of
the Security Council in both permanent and non-
permanent categories is self-evident. The impact of
actions of the Security Council is felt, with near total
exclusivity, by the developing countries. Yet they have
little influence in its decision-making. We have a
global consensus that the form taken by the Security
Council in the aftermath of the Second World War is
outmoded and that it must reflect the logic of an
enlarged membership. At the Millennium Summit more
than 150 States, at the highest level, endorsed the need
for a Council reformed in its representation. An
unrepresentative Security Council will lack the range
and depth of sensitivity, perceptiveness and
understanding of the realities that it will have to deal
with or the moral authority to take decisions. I reaffirm
India's willingness to take on the responsibilities of
permanent membership.
The General Assembly is the most important
organ of the United Nations. It is here that all States,
irrespective of considerations of strength, economy or
size, sit together as equals, embodying the democratic
principle of sovereign equality. There is a growing
feeling among Member States that the functioning and
role of the General Assembly has to be made more
effective. As the revolutions of the digital age reduce
distance to the click of a mouse, bringing us together
into a new global neighbourhood as never before in
history, and as forces of globalization inexorably lead
us to increasing interdependence, our canvas of
international cooperation and collective action has
rapidly expanded. It has also become vastly more
complex. The General Assembly has therefore to be
central in accepting this new responsibility, this new
challenge.
Even as we week to strengthen democratic
principles and practices in the United Nations, and
even as the spreading sweep of democracy casts aside
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes, we have
unfortunately witnessed some instances of regression
as well. Such acts move against the currents of our
times. The international community should oppose
these assaults on the spirit of our times and
uncompromisingly support and strengthen democratic
impulses, practices and norms. It should show its
solidarity with the people of such countries. The
Organization of African Unity and the Commonwealth
deserve our commendation for the steps they have
taken in this regard.
Developments in Fiji since 19 May this year have
caused us deep concern. We appreciate the action taken
by the Commonwealth after the overthrow of the
constitutionally elected democratic Government there.
We hope that Fiji will return immediately to the
constitutional base of 1997 and restore the rule by law
at the earliest opportunity by putting an end to racial
discrimination. This is in Fiji's own long-term interest.
We hope that the international community will exercise
its collective authority and influence to bring Fiji back
to the road of democracy and the rule of law.
It appears, sadly, that the world has forgotten
Afghanistan. The fratricidal conflict in that country
continues on account of the Taliban's pursuit of the
mirage of military success. It also continues because of
outside support, military and financial, to the Taliban.
This conflict and the Taliban's mediaeval obscurantist
ideologies continue to cause untold suffering to the
Afghan people. This adversely affects the peace and
security of the entire neighbourhood, from West to
Central Asia to South Asia. The negatives that emanate
from the Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan, in
the shape of terrorism, drug trafficking and the flow of
arms, cause justifiable concern all over the world. The
Taliban and their mentor must heed the world's
demands and abandon the path of conflict. We stand for
a comprehensive settlement in Afghanistan that
19

restores peace at the earliest and ensures the interests
and aspirations of all sections of that society.
We have consistently called upon the United
Nations to increase its development orientation and
engagement, which is a core responsibility. We
welcome and support the declaration of the Secretary-
General last week to the United Nations Development
Programme's ministerial meeting that deficit in
development will put in jeopardy all other goals of the
United Nations. To address the root causes of poverty
meaningfully, we need firm international commitments
to re-order and reshape international relations, in
consequence providing for equitable opportunities to
developing countries for resource earnings. Our call is
even more relevant in today's fast integrating world.
Developing countries and their people cannot
thrive on a diet of advice and goodwill alone. We
therefore hope that the forthcoming conference on
financing for development would endorse concrete
initiatives for mobilization of the required external
resources for development, whether from trade or
concessional flows, and treat this as a shared global
goal. In this context, it would be useful to establish the
difference that would be made if there was universal
adherence to the agreed official development
assistance(ODA) target of 0.7 per cent of Gross
National Product(GNP), within a specified time frame.
Nowhere is this more important than in the
continent of Africa. Africa's efforts need to be
adequately supported by the international community.
We believe that issues relating to the development of
African countries must remain at the forefront of the
work of the General Assembly.
The process of globalization, with revolutionary
leaps in communications and the great advance in
information technology and increased mobility of
capital, trade and technology, has produced new
potential for sustained economic growth. The benefits
of globalization have, however, not percolated to the
vast sections who live mired in poverty, without
shelter, in hunger and in deprivation. Globalization has
often been accompanied by enhanced poverty,
unemployment and consequent social disintegration.
This poses a major challenge. We have to determine an
inclusive concept of growth and development. We have
to strive for the uplifting of people in the largest sense,
and not simply in terms of sectoral advances. While
GDP growth rates and selective indicators may point to
growth in an economy, the elimination of poverty and
enhancement of the quality of life and creation of real
choices must be integral to the process of assessing the
success of development efforts.
In India, we have formulated development
strategies on the premise that economic and social
policies must subserve the primacy of the human being,
and in particular the poorest. Market forces and growth
alone are not the answer. Intervention to guarantee
social justice is crucial. Development based on uneven
rewards will not be supported by those who are not its
beneficiaries. It places great stress on the social fabric.
The fullest possible participation of the people in the
development process is the best guarantee for the
success of any growth strategy.
Many challenges lie ahead of us. Impediments to
sustained economic growth for developing countries
abound. Protectionist tendencies in developed
countries, a lack of political will to implement
commitments undertaken regarding development
finance and tardy alleviation of the debt burden of
developing countries aggravate the situation. Special
and differential treatment for developing countries
guaranteed under World Trade Organization (WTO)
provisions must be translated into operational reality.
Developed countries should not seek to restrict market
access to goods and services and free movement of
natural persons, especially at a time when developing
countries are being asked to open up their economies
and compete in the international economic domain.
Another challenge relates to reconciling the needs
of economic and industrial growth with the need for
preservation and protection of the environment. A safe
and healthy environment for our peoples is an
imperative. At the same time, all development cannot
be sacrificed at the absolutist altar of environmental
preservation. Sustainability of growth strategy and
environmental conservation cannot and should not
imply maintenance of poverty.
Developing countries have done commendable
work in the implementation of Agenda 21, in the
context of an exceptionally difficult global
environment. The promised resources from developed
countries have failed to materialize. The transfer of
technologies on preferential and concessional terms has
not been forthcoming. Indeed, impediments are placed
on technology transfer even on commercial terms. The
special session of the United Nations General
20

Assembly on the review and appraisal of the
implementation of Agenda 21 in 2002 should
concentrate on finding solutions in addressing such
unfulfilled commitments and providing reality and
operational content to the declaration that “eradication
of poverty is the over-riding priority of developing
countries”.
Children and issues relating to them are a priority.
We hope that the special session of the General
Assembly next year will concentrate on the
implementation of the Declaration of the World
Summit on Children.
Advancement of the democratic spirit and
overcoming challenges to it, growth with equity,
economic development with social justice and, as the
prize that we seek, the creation of a world where
injustice and deprivation give way to fulfilment and
welfare for all are among the goals that we should set
for ourselves at the dawn of this new century. The
challenge is nothing less than collective enlightened
global ownership.
The General Assembly once again faces a heavy
and challenging agenda on this long road before us. Let
us wish ourselves success in our endeavours.








I stand here today as
Israel's messenger of peace. The establishment of the
State of Israel was the fulfilment of the dream of a
people forced into exile 2,000 years ago. The
destruction of the Second Temple and the dissolution
of Jewish statehood were the result of our failure as a
nation to assume the proper political course, to opt for
accommodation with reality instead of engaging in
messianic hallucinations. Our punishment was very
severe indeed, but maybe it can serve as a lesson to
those nations and leaders who today may be tragically
led to believe that the dangerous inertia of romantic
mythology and unrealistic dreams is preferable to the
banality of a wise and prudent political course.
Most revolts are uprisings against a system.
Zionism was a revolt against destiny. It is this
expression of our re-encounter with the world of
political realities that eventually led us to the
restoration of Jewish statehood in 1948. Tragically,
however, historical and geopolitical circumstances
have put us in a prolonged, bitter conflict with the
Palestinian people.
It was thanks to the leadership of Prime Minister
Rabin and Chairman Arafat that, seven years ago,
Palestinians and Israelis were put on a track leading to
peace and reconciliation. We have been engaged in the
past seven years, but more intensely in the last year, in
a major effort, unprecedented in both scope and depth,
to resolve this 100-year-old conflict. This negotiating
process, and it alone, should be the foundation of a
peace agreement.
At this point, I would like to address my
colleagues from the Arab and Muslim world. I hope
that my words will convince them of the Israeli
Government's sincere intentions to achieve a
comprehensive peace based on respect, dignity and
fairness, which will end the Middle East conflict and
best serve the vital interests of the entire region.
The Jewish people have no quarrel with Islam.
On the contrary, we have the deepest respect for that
great Islamic civilization under whose wings Jewish
history — from Al-Andalus to Turkey, from Egypt to
Iraq, from the Jewish quarters of Tangier to Aleppo in
Syria — has known some of its finest hours and most
glorious cultural achievements. But even at the height
of the “Golden Age”, in the midst of the delights and
wonders of Muslim Spain, our people never abandoned
their dream of and yearning for Jerusalem, as expressed
in the words of the poet Yehuda Halevi more than 800
years ago:
“My heart is in the East, and I am in the furthest
reaches of the West. To thee my soul yearns from
the depth of the West.”
We are a small nation decimated by holocaust and
dispersion, but our heritage is rich. It was from our
eternal capital, Jerusalem — which, according to a
Muslim source,
“in the days of the people of Israel, was an area
larger than Cairo and Baghdad” —
that the message of monotheism was projected to
humanity. The Jewish holy sites and shrines in
Jerusalem are the very heart of the Jewish faith,
identity and history. For the past 2,000 years, Jews
have turned towards Temple Mount in prayer three
times a day.
“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget its cunning. Let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth if I do not recall thee”,
they pledged in joy and in sorrow.
For the past 30 years, Israel has consistently
demonstrated its commitment to freedom of religion
10

and worship in Jerusalem. Heads of the various
religious denominations in Jerusalem will attest to the
fact that the city has never been so open to all
believers. During the last month of Ramadan, a record
number, unheard of in the annals of Islam in Jerusalem,
of more than 400,000 Muslim worshippers attended
Friday prayers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I note this as an example of the deep respect
which Israel has for Islam and its followers. Just as we
do not question the sincerity of the sentiments of others
towards their holy sites in Jerusalem, we expect that
others will not question the Jewish people's deep, awe-
inspired attachment to Jerusalem and its holy sites,
from which we will never again be parted.
Politicians need not distort God's intentions for
the sake of negotiations. How refreshing it is that a
great number of Muslim scholars should attest to the
fact that, as the Supreme Court Judge Mujir el-din al-
Hanbali wrote in his History of Jerusalem and Hebron,
“David reigned for 40 years and before he died he
passed the monarchy on to his son Solomon and
told him to build the beit al-miqdas —  the
Temple”.
The expression beit al-miqdas —  that is, the House of
the Temple — became in many Muslim sources a
synonym of the word “Jerusalem”.
It is a travesty of historical truth to present the
Palestinian refugee problem as the result of mass
expulsion. There is no denying, however, that once the
Jews — who for thousands of years waited with
humility for their redemption — made their re-
encounter with history as a sovereign nation, they had
to assume the inherent immorality of war. The
suffering of the civilian population will always be a
burden on the conscience of any nation at war. The
Arab-Israeli conflict has no monopoly on this maxim.
Clearly, the Palestinian refugees were victims of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel, however, can assume
neither political nor moral responsibility for this
tragedy that was the direct result of the all-out
onslaught against reborn Israel — an onslaught
launched by the Arab armies in 1948. The Palestinian
refugee problem was born as the land was bisected by
the sword — not by design, Jewish or Arab. The
problem was largely the inevitable by-product of Arab
and Jewish fears and the protracted bitter fighting.
We believe that, once established, it is the
Palestinian State that should provide for the vindication
of the Palestinian claim for the right of return. The
notion is preposterous that a nation should create a
State only in order to gather its exiles in a
neighbouring State. Israel, however, has expressed its
willingness to actively participate in any international
effort and fund aimed at providing the financial
foundations for the resolution of the refugee problem.
Out of humanitarian considerations, Israel may also
accept a small and limited number of refugees within a
scheme of family reunification.
Let there be no doubt. The peace process is not
the objective, we need not sanctify the process. Peace,
not the process, is the objective. Peace is not about
more conventions, summits and resolutions; it is about
the future of our children, and about the seemingly
unattractive banalities of building the mechanisms of
cohabitation.
To the Palestinians we say: we need to
disentangle ourselves from this seemingly insoluble
conundrum. We know that unless your and our wounds
are healed, peace — not only the political peace but
also that of the mind and the conscience — will not be
complete. Yet, at the same time we realize that the total
satisfaction of our respective dreams or presumed
rights will lead us to perdition. Hence it is incumbent
on us to devise realistic ways to heal without opening
new wounds, to dignify our existence as free peoples
without putting into jeopardy the collective existence
of each other. Peace is not about twisting each other's
arms; it is about defining a common interest. I believe
that such an ideal compromise is not impossible to
achieve, while banishing the sword from this land of
God.
Peace has not materialized in full yet, but I
believe that we are moving in the right direction. In the
past year the Government of Prime Minister Ehud
Barak has made bold, courageous and unprecedented
moves towards peace. At Camp David we have
contemplated ideas and explored concepts relating to
the most sensitive and supposedly intractable issues.
Our sense is that breakthrough is possible, just as
failure may lead to breakdown. We have turned the sea
that separated us into a river. But, do we have the
courage and the determination to cross it?
I know I may not sound too objective by
vouching for Prime Minister Barak. But, I have come


here with the power of conviction that no Prime
Minister before him — and let no illusions be
harboured, no Prime Minister after him — will touch as
he has the outer limits of his options as an Israeli and a
Jew.
I do not underestimate the dilemmas facing
Chairman Arafat. He is the great leader of the
Palestinian people, and I know that the decision is not
easy for him either. But this is the destiny of leaders: to
always be prophets without honour. They should not
expect the applause of their constituencies, what really
matters is the judgement of future generations. I call
upon our Palestinian partners to realize that history has
brought us to a moment of truth and decision from
which we are not allowed to escape empty-handed
without inflicting severe punishments on our own
peoples.
Israel aspires to achieve a comprehensive peace
in the region and help move it into the future. Twenty
one years ago we signed a cornerstone peace treaty
with Egypt, followed by a peace treaty with Jordan and
an incipient but promising process of normalization
with the Maghreb and Gulf States. Eighteen years of
Israeli military presence in Lebanon have been
terminated by the Barak Government, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, and thanks
especially to the efforts and dedication of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. We have also delved into the
possibilities of reaching peace with Syria. We hope that
talks with Syria will resume as soon as possible and
that a fair and equitable agreement can be achieved.
Israel is determined to pursue peace and take the
calculated risks attached to it. But Israel will not
compromise — not now and not ever — on those
security and national interests that we deem vital.
While building our peace with the Palestinians we
cannot ignore security concerns inherent in the fact that
peace with the Palestinians is not our last peace. We
still have a dispute pending with Syria, and we are still
exposed to the most serious regional threats emanating
from revolutionary powers in the area.
Peace requires the active involvement of the
international community. The critical role played by
the United States, and especially the relentless
dedication and unequivocal commitment of President
Bill Clinton, has been massive and constructive. Once
again the United States has proven to be the
indispensable nation. We have also seen the European
Union rising to the task, and we commend the role of
the French Presidency and that of other key European
Governments. Peace needs the advice of the
international community and it will need that support
to cement peace once it is achieved.
We expect also to work closely with the Egyptian
Government for the cause of regional peace. I believe
that it is also important that Russia and the Arab world
express their opinions that now is the time to make
historical decisions. Time is an elusive and perishable
commodity. We are all running out of it.
We are open to developing wide spaces of
cooperation with our Palestinian neighbours and indeed
with all the countries of the Middle East, with dignity
and mutuality. But, we do not intend to impose our
experience on anybody, nor is it our intention to assert
our economic or technological presence amidst those of
our neighbours who do not want it. The leaders and the
elites throughout the Middle East do not need our
advice to know what are the real challenges ahead of us
all: modernizing the economy and combating disease,
hunger, poverty and illiteracy. Indeed, small islands of
excellence notwithstanding, the Middle East is in grave
danger of being on the wrong side of the digital divide.
In his inaugural speech in 1961, the late President
Kennedy invited his generation to join him in a
struggle:
“Now the trumpet summons us again — not as a
call to bear arms, though arms we need; not as a
call to battle, though embattled we are — but a
call to bear the burden of a long twilight
struggle, ... a struggle against the common
enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease and
war itself.”
Nothing will make us happier than joining hands
with our Arab neighbours with dignity and mutuality in
this most noble of struggles.
The Middle East is not tranquil yet. It is still
replete with armed conflicts, political hostilities and
animosities. Israel believes that regional arrangements
are crucial for arms control. A step-by-step approach,
commensurate with progress towards comprehensive
peace, is the right approach.
We are concerned by the expanding stockpiles of
conventional weapons in the region, as well as by
attempts made by Iran and Iraq to acquire and develop
12

non-conventional weapons, and by an increasing
missile threat.
Israel attaches great importance to the eventual
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the region. In order to reach that goal,
direct negotiations between all States of the region
must be held.
Last year saw a turnaround in Israel's relations
with the United Nations. After years of anomaly, Israel
was temporarily admitted to the Western European and
Other Group (WEOG) in New York. We hope that
Israel's admission to the Western Group in
international organizations based outside New York
will soon be secured.
The United Nations, and indeed most of its
Member States, played a major role in demanding that
Iran treat fairly the 13 Jews falsely accused, convicted
and sentenced for ludicrous charges of espionage. It is
in such instances that the international community has
the opportunity to express its discontent and exert
pressure on countries that break the norms of
behaviour.
On the issue of the reform of the Security
Council, is our opinion that the Security Council
should faithfully reflect the present geopolitical
picture, a picture that has changed beyond recognition
since the last enlargement of the Council in 1965. We
subscribe to the view that the right of veto — a safety
net against the possible arbitrariness of the General
Assembly — should remain in the hands of a limited
number of States.
Allow me a final reflection on the Israeli-
Palestinian dilemma.
The tragedy of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
stemmed from discrepant historical rhythms. The
history of our modern national movement has been
characterized by realistic responses to objective
historical conditions. The Palestinians have
consistently fought for the solutions of yesterday —
those they had rejected a generation or two earlier. This
persistent attempt to turn back the clock of history lies
at the root of many of the misfortunes that have
befallen the peoples of the region. Now it is time for all
of us to overcome dire memories and look forward.
Neither the physical nor the rhetorical war of images
will bring us any closer to peace and reconciliation. No
one has a monopoly on the mythology of suffering and
atrocities. In this tragic dispute we have all committed
acts of violence that we ought not to be proud of. To
the Palestinians we say, we are excited by the prospects
to overcome the troubled history of our relations in
order to shape our dreams of peace. Let us then join
hands in asking the world, which has been watching,
perplexed at, and sometimes even fuelling our wars, to
mobilize its resources for the benefit of our peoples.
And, let us be full partners in this international effort to
lay down the foundations of the Middle East of the
future. The creative energies of our peoples should at
long last be put to work in the service of peace, for as
the wisest of kings, King Solomon, the builder of the
Temple in Jerusalem, wrote thousands of years ago,
there is:
“A time for slaying and a time for healing ... a
time for war and a time for peace”. (The Holy
Bible, Ecclesiastes 3:3-8)







I begin by joining
others who have congratulated you, Mr. President, on
your election. I also assure you of the New Zealand
delegation's full cooperation as you carry out your
important duties.
I also welcome the admission last week of our
neighbour and friend Tuvalu into the United Nations.
The admission of four new Pacific nations in the space
of a year contributes to the truly universal character of
the Organization.
This general debate is taking place at the start of
a new century and a new millennium. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan has called upon the Member
States of the United Nations to harness the symbolic
power of the millennium to meet the real and urgent
needs of people in every part of the world. This is an
appropriate time to recommit ourselves to the beliefs,
the values and the principles that led to the birth of the
Organization 55 years ago.
Like many other Members of the Organization,
New Zealand is a small country that tries to take a
principled and independent view of the world. In 1945,
in San Francisco, we played an active part through the
Labour Prime Minister of the day, Peter Fraser, in
framing the Charter in which heads of State and
Government reaffirmed their faith here last week.
We have always viewed the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the practical task
of peacekeeping, as key roles of the United Nations.
We are currently making our largest-ever contribution
to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in East
Timor. This commitment underlines our full support for
the central role of the United Nations in building a
stable, democratic and economically viable East Timor
in partnership with its people. So do the non-military
personnel and development assistance we have
provided to help the East Timorese create essential
services.
Just over a year ago, the East Timorese people
voted overwhelmingly for an independent future, and I
had the privilege of being part of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) group that oversaw
that electoral process. We recall the horrors which
followed as pro-integration militias laid waste to the
territory, slaughtered innocent people and forced
thousands of East Timorese into West Timor.
Relative calm and stability has been restored in
most of East Timor, and we remember here today the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers from Australia,
Bangladesh, Nepal and my own country who in recent
24

months laid down their lives to help achieve this. But
the militias continue to hold sway in the border areas
among the refugees in West Timor. Unless brought
under control, these militias will destabilize both West
and East Timor.
The murder last week of three United Nations
humanitarian workers in Atambua in West Timor
repelled us all. New Zealand was able to respond
quickly, along with Australia, to the United Nations
call for help in evacuating their colleagues and non-
governmental organization personnel from Atambua.
We committed helicopters with security and medical
elements from our forces serving on the border with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). This airborne evacuation, which had
the cooperation of Indonesian forces, was successful.
But the pain and the outrage we feel at the murder of
three United Nations humanitarian workers remains
undiminished.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1319
(2000), insisted that the Government of Indonesia
disarm and disband the militia immediately to ensure
safety and security in the refugee camps and for
humanitarian workers, and to prevent cross-border
incursions into East Timor. It also called for those who
have carried out attacks on international personnel to
be brought to justice. These are binding obligations.
The world awaits action to implement them without
further delay.
Besides East Timor, New Zealand is at present
contributing to 12 other peacekeeping operations,
including in Kosovo, on the borders of Syria, Israel and
Lebanon, in the Prevlaka peninsula and in Sierra
Leone. New Zealand personnel also serve with the
Peace Monitoring Group in Bougainville, the
Multinational Force Organization (MFO) in Sinai and
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) in Bosnia. Being
conscious of the many challenges faced by the United
Nations in meeting its peacekeeping responsibilities,
we greatly welcome the Brahimi report. We trust that
the report's important recommendations will receive
serious and expeditious consideration during this
Millennium Assembly session, with a view to their
early implementation.
As the Brahimi report points out, weak mandates
and poor resourcing underlie most of those operations
which did not succeed in their objectives. We are
concerned too at the tendency to rely overly on
“coalitions of the willing” to carry out operations that
should be undertaken by the United Nations. The
failure of some Member States to pay their assessed
contributions on time, in full and without conditions
imposes an impossible burden on the Organization and
on troop contributors. We agree that the scale of
assessments for peacekeeping needs revision to make it
more equitable and transparent. Any revision must be
established in accordance with the longstanding
principle of apportioning expenses according to
Member States' capacity to pay.
Heads of State or Government agreed at the
Millennium Summit to intensify their efforts to achieve
a comprehensive reform of the Security Council in all
its aspects. In the past seven years of debate on this
matter, it has been shown just how difficult an issue it
is, especially in regard to how the Council might be
enlarged. There is no agreement on this aspect at this
time. And yet I am sure that most Member States
would agree that the Council must be made more
representative of today's membership as well as more
transparent in its working methods and more
democratic in its decision-making. If there is to be
progress towards an overall package deal on reform,
then compromises will have to be made.
At the heart of any reform, in New Zealand's
view, must be the curtailment of the veto, if indeed it
cannot be eliminated. We have argued this case since
1945, and we believe that it is even more relevant
today. A device which 50 years ago might have had the
utility of preventing the permanent members from
using the Organization to make war on one another has
in recent times served to frustrate the will of the wider
membership. I believe there is very broad agreement in
the General Assembly on the need to deal with the veto
urgently, so that the Security Council can be more
effective in carrying out its important responsibilities.
I would not want to suggest that there has been no
progress at all on Council reform. There have, in fact,
been some major steps forward in opening up the
Council's meetings and briefings to participation by
non-members. We are grateful for that. I would also
like to reaffirm New Zealand's strong support for the
Open-ended Working Group on Security Council
reform, whose deliberations have contributed to this
progress. In our view, the Working Group continues to
be the appropriate forum in which to pursue efforts
aimed at reforming the Council, because it is essential
for the health of the Organization that any reform
25

package enjoy the widest support and buy-in. Council
reform is too important a matter for back-room deals.
The Millennium Declaration contains some
important guidance on human rights, democracy and
good governance. For example, all countries are
enjoined to strengthen their capacity to implement the
principles and practices of democracy and respect for
human rights, including minority rights. This could not
be more timely for my own region, the South Pacific,
where over the past year we have seen the collapse of
democracy and governance in some countries in the
face of disputes over land and economic disparities and
as a result of ethnic tensions.
There are no easy solutions to some of the
problems the region faces, but one thing is clear, and
that is that the answer to these problems is not to adopt
political systems that discriminate against particular
ethnic groups, as some in Fiji this year have sought to
do. To do so simply breeds a deeper sense of frustration
and exclusion, which is a recipe for further instability.
Small States, especially small developing countries like
our neighbours in the Pacific, face particular challenges
from globalization. They are uniquely vulnerable to
external impacts. We need to find fresh and more
effective means to development.
It is essential to help countries build for
themselves inclusive and democratic forms of
government that in turn take account of cultural values.
Underpinning this must be robust and accountable
institutions, respect for the rule of law, independence
of the judiciary, an effective press, strong civil society
and, above all, greater public education to foster a
more widespread understanding of democratic values
and processes.
The Millennium Summit provided heads of State
or Government the opportunity to take action on a
range of treaties which are fundamental to the
development of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. My Prime Minister
took action in respect of six, and I record here in
particular New Zealand's ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
The practices of child prostitution, child
pornography and the appalling exploitation of children
to fight wars are a disgrace and a crime against
humanity which must be expunged. We encourage
others also to sign and ratify these agreements. I should
also add that we greatly welcome the recent decision
by the Economic and Social Council to establish a
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
At the Millennium Summit, world leaders agreed
to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear weapons. The outcome
of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
May, where the five nuclear-weapon States gave an
unequivocal political undertaking to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, demonstrates
a new determination to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons. This is a matter of real urgency. We must
promote the implementation of the new commitments.
New Zealand, with its new agenda partners, will submit
a draft resolution during this session of the General
Assembly.
New Zealand will also, in partnership with Brazil,
promote a southern hemisphere free of nuclear
weapons. In addition, we will, along with Australia,
Mexico and Japan, urge all countries that have yet to
do so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. We will also support further
preparations for the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and join calls for adherence to the Ottawa
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction.
New Zealand urges caution regarding decisions
on missile developments that could impact negatively
on nuclear disarmament, lead to a new nuclear arms
race or be inconsistent with the commitment to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. This is no time
for complacency. The United Nations disarmament and
arms-control machinery must engage again in
negotiations and other work on the new programme of
action agreed at the NPT Conference.
Leaders also declared their resolve to minimize
the adverse effects of United Nations economic
sanctions on innocent populations. Sanctions are an
important tool at the Security Council's disposal to
encourage compliance with its resolutions, but they
must be appropriately targeted for maximum effect.
They should not impose blanket measures which harm
26

innocent populations and even strengthen the grip of
despotic regimes. We support efforts within the
Organization to develop proposals for smarter, more
effective sanctions which apply pressure where it we
will have maximum impact.
The Millennium Declaration also speaks of the
need to protect our common environment. My Prime
Minister announced during the Summit our intention to
become party to the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by
mid-2002. I also wish to recall a particular
achievement over the past year in the holding of the
inaugural session of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and
the law of the sea. This is a significant step forward in
providing an appropriate forum for discussion of cross-
cutting oceans issues. The success of this process
should be judged by the extent to which there is
enhanced global understanding of oceans issues and an
increased willingness to cooperate and coordinate
cross-sectorally to address them.
Finally, the Millennium Declaration sets some
key goals for development and poverty eradication and
urges meeting the special needs of Africa. This year,
New Zealand was able to increase its core funding of
the United Nations Development Programme by more
than a third and of the United Nations Children's Fund
by almost a half. We believe that the United Nations
has a key role to play in the coordination of official
development assistance delivery. The preparations for
the event on financing for development are an excellent
demonstration of leadership by the Organization and a
significant step forward in furthering cooperation with
the Bretton Woods institutions. The crushing and
seemingly never-ending debt burden, especially on the
countries of Africa, must be urgently reduced. We must
also address more effectively the scourge of
HIV/AIDS.
Leaders at last week's Summit provided this
Millennium Assembly with a clear direction and a
strong mandate. Our countries have delegated us the
responsibility to realize that vision of a better world
and we must ensure through our efforts and
determination that we do not fail them.The Millennium Summit has given all of us
the priority task of establishing a new and equitable
world order — an order which would meet the interests
of all and every member of the international
community and ensure adequate solutions to the
problems with which the twenty-first century is
confronting us.
I am convinced that in this era of globalization
and enormous scientific and technological progress,
humankind can and should have a comprehensive and
forward-looking strategy. While in the past century
human civilization's main task was that of survival,
today we are confronted with significantly more
difficult problems which are much more varied in
terms of their scope and orientation.
The strategy of survival must give way to a
strategy of sustainable development aimed at ensuring
the prosperity of humankind. It must be based on the
recognition of the indivisibility of international
security, the use of modern scientific and technological
achievements for the benefit of the entire international
6

community, and a gradual closing of the development
gap between the various States.
These ambitious goals can be achieved only
through the preservation and strengthening of strategic
stability in its very broadest sense.
Strategic stability means further progress in the
disarmament process, reliable prevention of the spread
of weapons of mass destruction. Today nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are no longer the
subject of exclusive interaction between Russia, the
United States and other nuclear Powers. What is
needed is the effective involvement of multilateral
United Nations mechanisms and the entire world
community in those processes.
The outcome of the Millennium Summit provides
additional opportunities for the achievement of a major
breakthrough in disarmament in the twenty-first
century. This will require consistent joint efforts aimed
at strict compliance with the agreements already
concluded; a step-by-step reduction and eventual
elimination of weapons of mass destruction under
effective international control, and the limitation of
other types of armaments; and prevention of the arms
race in new spheres.
The time has come to give a new impetus to the
work of the Conference on Disarmament, which has
proved in practice the effectiveness of multilateral
diplomacy under the auspices of the United Nations.
Russia advocates the resumption of substantive work at
that forum on major issues on the disarmament agenda.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) provides an indispensable international
legal basis for nuclear disarmament. This has once
again been reaffirmed in full by the 2000 Review
Conference. Russia will work to ensure that the
decisions of the Millennium Assembly promote the
practical implementation of the agreements reached
during that Conference. It is precisely for that purpose
that the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir
Putin, put forward an initiative on the development and
implementation, under the auspices of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of an international
project designed to phase out the use of enriched
uranium and pure plutonium in the civilian nuclear
energy sector.
We are satisfied to note the increasing number of
States acceding to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT). Its speedy entry into force is in the interests of
the entire international community. Having ratified the
Treaty, we call on those that have yet not done so to
follow suit.
We expect that the United States will follow
Russia in completing ratification of the Treaty on the
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II), which will help make it
operational. We are ready to actively continue the
process of nuclear disarmament and to move towards
the conclusion of a START III Treaty with an even
lower threshold of nuclear warheads — down to 1,500
units. But this will be feasible only if the 1972 Anti-
Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty remains intact. It is
universally acknowledged that this major Treaty
concerns the vital security interests of the international
community as a whole. Its preservation is a key
element of global stability and a strong barrier to the
arms race in regard to nuclear weapons, missiles and
other weapons of mass destruction.
Russia will be introducing a draft resolution in
support of the ABM Treaty. We hope that, as was the
case last year, our initiative will receive broad support
within the United Nations.
A peaceful earth needs a peaceful outer space. At
the Millennium Summit the President of Russia
proposed the convening in Moscow of an international
conference on the prevention of the weaponization of
outer space, to take place in the spring of 2001, when
the fortieth anniversary of the first manned flight to
outer space is to be commemorated. We hope that this
proposal will be actively supported.
Strategic stability means reliable safeguarding of
international information security and counteracting
the use of scientific and technological achievements for
purposes incompatible with universal progress and the
maintenance of international peace. Aware of the great
importance of resolving these most urgent issues,
Russia will introduce for consideration by the General
Assembly a draft resolution entitled “Developments in
the field of informatization and telecommunications in
the context of international information security”.
Strategic stability also means enhancing peace
and security on all continents, settling existing regional
conflicts and preventing new ones and cutting off
external support for them. Millions of people must be
spared the death and suffering caused by local crises.
7

How can this goal be achieved? It is only through
the joint efforts of all States collectively responsible
for the world's destiny. Experience has shown that
unilateral enforcement actions cannot guarantee a
lasting and fair settlement of crisis situations.
The notions of sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of States are still very much alive. Disregard
for these principles and military intervention
circumventing the Security Council, whatever
humanitarian pretexts may be used, undermine the very
foundations of the world order and pave the way for
arbitrariness in international affairs.
The prevention and settlement of crises should
become a key element of international security in the
twenty-first century. When there is collective
determination and goodwill, even the most complex
and major problems lend themselves to a political
resolution.
All of this calls for improvement of the
peacekeeping potential of our Organization. People in
“hotbeds” of the planet — from Africa and Lebanon to
East Timor — rightly associate with the United Nations
“Blue Helmets” their hopes for an end to bloody
conflicts and for the beginning of complex
reconciliation processes. They expect rapid and
effective steps from us.
We hope that the Millennium Assembly will
provide us with an opportunity to engage in a
comprehensive analysis of the work of United Nations
peacekeeping mechanisms and outline ways to increase
their efficiency. Such is the objective of the report
(A/55/305) prepared under the aegis of the Secretary-
General by the Brahimi Panel. It is important to
considerably enhance the United Nations capacity for
the prompt deployment of peacekeeping operations.
This can be done through the early completion of the
system of standby arrangements. Peacekeeping units of
the United Nations Secretariat need to be strengthened,
with provision for professional planning, control and
command of operations.
Russia consistently advocates the expansion of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
structures in the field of peacekeeping. Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter remains the basis for such
interaction. Any regional or “coalition” operation
should be conducted under conditions of transparency
and of reporting to the United Nations Security
Council, whereas operations with enforcement
elements should be carried out only with the
authorization of the Security Council.
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
is a major regional partner of the United Nations in
peacekeeping. In many respects, it was the close
cooperation between the United Nations and the CIS
that made it possible to successfully resolve the
conflict in Tajikistan. Such interaction will
undoubtedly intensify along with the development of
the CIS anti-crisis potential. At the same time, for a
stable peace to prevail in the conflict-affected regions
in the CIS area the volume of international economic
and humanitarian aid for their rehabilitation should be
increased.
Russia attaches primary importance to the
expansion of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional mechanisms in Africa to
provide for more effective crisis response on the
continent. This is evidenced by the Russian
participation in peacekeeping operations in a number of
African countries.
The entire experience of United Nations
peacekeeping activities in recent years clearly shows
the priority of political and diplomatic methods of
conflict settlement. It is precisely these methods that
make it possible to minimize the suffering of the
civilian population and to find ways to a stable peace.
Strategic stability means the security and
tranquillity of civil society and of the individual. This
task can be accomplished only through the combined
efforts of the international community to counter
contemporary threats and challenges. These include,
inter alia, aggressive separatism and religious
extremism, illicit arms trafficking and organized crime.
Such an abhorrent manifestation of extremism as
international terrorism poses a direct threat to security
and stability. Today, terrorists of every stripe
sometimes act in a more organized fashion than does
the world community confronting them. We expect that
the United Nations will step up its mobilization of
international capacities to counteract terrorism. Such
cooperation must be based on the clear principles set
forth in the Security Council resolution 1269 (1999):
no support whatsoever, no safe havens for terrorists,
the inevitability of punishment for every terrorist act.
As to those who violate these principles the Security
Council must be ready to take measures against them
provided for in the United Nations Charter.
8

Russia intends to ratify the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Financing elaborated under
United Nations auspices. There is an urgent need to
complete work on the convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, and that work on a
comprehensive anti-terrorism convention should be
stepped up.
Terrorism is often closely linked with drug
trafficking and organized crime. We welcome the
completion of the development of an international
convention against organized crime. Russia intends to
sign it in the nearest future. We also support the
proposal on drafting an international convention on the
fight against corruption.
Strategic stability means promoting human rights
and freedoms everywhere. This area is an important
component of the United Nations activities aimed at
establishing a new world order based on international
law.
Russia contributes significantly to strengthening
the universal legal regime. Our country has signed the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Speaking of pooling the efforts of States to
resolve the twofold task of maintaining international
security and ensuring human security, human rights and
freedoms, we should constantly bear in mind that in the
twentieth century the rule of the ideology of racial
hatred cost mankind scores of millions of human lives.
Unfortunately, today, 55 years after the great victory it
is still premature to speak of total eradication of the
bacillus of national superiority.
We cannot accept a situation in which people do
not have the right to use their mother tongue, are
deprived of their citizenship and jobs on ethnic
grounds, when fighters against fascism are put behind
bars while former fascists find favour with the
authorities. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
should firmly respond to all such manifestations.
Strategic stability must be based on a solid
material foundation. The twenty-first century will go
down in history as the century of mankind's
breakthrough to a qualitatively new level of
development only if we manage to preserve peace and
international security and at the same time impart
necessary dynamism and depth to the process of
economic and technological equalization between the
enormous number of developing countries and the
comparatively small group of leading countries. This
goal cannot be achieved overnight. This will require —
under the unifying and guiding hand of the United
Nations — a mechanism for collective democratic
management of the international monetary, trade and
economic systems. They must become more rational
and fair and be targeted against poverty and
underdevelopment.
It is important to make the most of those
opportunities which have been opened up by the new
technological revolution in order to initiate the process
of bridging the gap in the levels of development.
Information and communications technologies whose
potential for speeding up global development is only
comparable to the invention of written language can
serve as a driving force of that process. A chance has
emerged to skip over several traditional stages of
development through the introduction of global
computer literacy and information technologies.
Mankind, equipped with this powerful instrument, will
obtain a real opportunity to begin creating conditions
for a decent life and the all-around development of
human beings everywhere on earth.
Strategic stability means the preservation of a
clean and healthy environment for the present and
future generations. The United Nations has done a
great deal to mobilize international efforts in that
important field. The “Rio+10” Forum, to be held in
2002, will provide an opportunity not only to sum up
the results of those activities but also to outline a
future-oriented follow-up programme.
Russia supports the expansion of international
cooperation within the United Nations framework in
the areas of biodiversity, climate, combating
desertification, as well as of forest preservation.
The recent increase over the last few years in the
number of natural and man-made disasters and the
consequent growth of the scope of human and material
losses have made disaster management one of the most
formidable global challenges facing mankind. While
intensifying the United Nations efforts to promote
international cooperation in this field, special attention
must be paid to the use of state-of-the-art specialized
technologies for disaster management and to the search
for innovative mechanisms for their use in the interests
of the entire international community.
9

The United Nations — a unique universal forum
in every respect, which has demonstrated in practice its
central role in managing international affairs — should
become a guarantor of such comprehensive strategic
stability. Russia welcomes the consensus reached at the
Millennium Summit on consolidating the United
Nations as the axis of the present world order. The time
has come for concrete collective measures to transform
the Organization into a sort of operational headquarters
for coordinating activities aimed at ensuring a new
strategic stability based on the principles of
multilateralism, equality and solidarity in resolving
global problems.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again that the Russian Federation, for its part, is open
to the closest interaction with all members of the
international community in order to make strategic
stability a cornerstone of the world order in the twenty-
first century and the United Nations its reliable
guarantor.





I am
honoured to address the Assembly on behalf of the
United States and to reinforce the eloquent message
President C1inton conveyed during last week's
Millennium Summit. Because my father worked here
when I was young, I have always considered myself a
child of the United Nations. And because I had the
privilege to serve here as America's Permanent
Representative, I feel at home and so will speak
plainly.
The members of this body reflect virtually every
culture, ethnicity and geographical region. We are city
and country, inland and island, tropical and temperate,
developing and industrialized. We are as diverse as
humanity.
And yet, in responding to the daunting demands
of this new era, we are bound together by the interests
we share and the ideals to which we aspire.
We all have a stake in building peace and
relieving poverty, championing development and
curbing disease. We all want to see the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction reduced, refugees
cared for, children nourished, the environment
protected, and the status of women advanced.
We all believe the benefits of globalization must
be allocated more broadly within and among societies.
Because if the new technologies are to ease the old
problems, they must help the many who today lack
access and skills, so that every village becomes a home
to opportunity and every school a midwife to hope.
As the Millennium Summit reflected, we have no
shortage of worthy goals. We are right to aim high and
take on the mightiest tasks.
But as the Secretary-General has said, progress
depends on working together. We need all hands on
deck, pulling in the same direction. For each of us, that
responsibility begins at home because the international
community cannot help any nation that is not striving
to help itself.
Each Government has an obligation to observe
international norms on human rights, uphold the rule of
law, fight corruption and raise awareness about
HIV/AIDS. But in the twenty-first century, no nation
can protect and serve its people simply by going it
alone and that is why we  all benefit from
strengthening regional bodies such as the Organization
of American States (OAS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Because of their unique expertise and regional
legitimacy, they can be instruments for solving some of
the hardest challenges we face. But they will succeed
only if we raise our expectations of these
organizations, call upon them to act boldly and back
them when they do.
Regional bodies can contribute much to the
purposes outlined in the Charter, and the goals
established during the Millennium Summit. But here
again, they cannot do it all.
8

The role of the United Nations is also vital,
because no other institution combines a comprehensive
mandate with near universal representation and global
reach.
We all have an interest in the success of the
United Nations. That is its greatest strength, and also
its burden, because 189 nations have to work very hard
if they are to agree.
I remember when I came to New York in 1993, I
was told by cynics that the United Nations was too
bureaucratic to change, and too big ever to achieve
consensus on measures to improve its governance.
Those cynics were wrong. With support from
many countries, we have made impressive progress.
Compared to seven years ago, the United Nations
accomplishes more and wastes less. Accountability has
increased and duplication diminished.
The Internal Oversight Office, which did not exist
in 1993, has grown steadily more rigorous and is
responsible for tens of millions of dollars of savings. A
culture of transparency and results is slowly but surely
taking hold. Moreover, both United Nations
Headquarters and the entire United Nations system are
better led than they have ever been.
United Nations leaders and Members can take
pride in the gains made, but we all know there is much
more work to be done.
That is why we must back the Secretary General's
efforts to further improve United Nations management,
recognizing that every dollar wasted is a dollar lost to
the fight against poverty and to the achievement of
other urgent goals.
We must also move ahead rapidly to strengthen
peacekeeping, because it is the most visible and vital
yardstick of United Nations success and, for people in
strife-torn regions, often means the difference between
a normal life and no life at all.
There is no magic formula for curing the ills that
have plagued United Nations peace operations in the
past. But the report, just prepared by Ambassador
Brahimi's team, is a solid place to start.
As President Clinton said last week, we need to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers can be
deployed with the right training and equipment and the
right rules of engagement so they can achieve, not
merely attempt, their missions.
This will require a larger peacekeeping staff, on
permanent assignment, comprised of the best talent and
experience we can find.
It will require military planners the world over to
recognize that training for peace operations is a
legitimate part of every nation's security strategy. It
will require the ability to deploy rapidly not only
United Nations military forces, but also civilian police
and experts in law enforcement and judicial reform. It
will demand improved coordination between military
peacekeepers and civilian builders of peace, so that
missions begun are completed and recovery bred by
reconciliation can take hold.
And it will require additional resources from my
Government and from each of yours. And by
“additional”, I mean resources that should not come at
the expense of other core United Nations goals.
The United States will heed the Secretary-
General's request that we work together to consider
and implement the best recommendations of the
Brahimi report.
Whether for peacekeeping or programmes, the
United Nations also needs a sustainable and equitable
system of financing. We do not have that today.
Member States, including my own, must do a better job
of making payments on time. But we must also look
afresh at the method used to allocate responsibility for
United Nations costs.
Last week, the Security Council called for
adjustments in the scale of assessments. This plea has
been echoed by dozens of other countries and should
be acted upon by the General Assembly this fall.
A more equitable system should provide a much
stronger foundation for United Nations programmes
and missions. It should preserve the special
responsibility for peacekeeping of the Security
Council's permanent members. It should retain a
heavily discounted rate for the poorest countries. And
it should reduce the United Nations overall reliance on
payments from the United States, while at the same
time enabling my Government to write a check to the
United Nations for nearly $600 million in prior
obligations.
9

Clearly, adjustments are long overdue. The
United Nations needs a firm and reliable financial base.
In the weeks ahead, the United States will be pleased to
work with members to accomplish this landmark goal.
Further improvements in management and
peacekeeping and a sounder financial base are a vital
step towards a stronger and more effective United
Nations. But we must also stand up to the campaign
launched by Baghdad against the United Nations
authority and international law.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) provides
an effective plan for protecting world security through
resumed weapons inspections and monitoring inside
Iraq. It has expanded the oil-for-food programme that
has delivered $8 billion in humanitarian supplies to
Iraqi civilians, with $6 billion more on the way. And it
would enable Iraq, through compliance with the
resolution's terms, to achieve an early suspension of
sanctions. Thus far, Baghdad has flatly refused to
accept the resolution. The regime's strategy is to ignore
its United Nations Charter obligations and to seek to
preserve at all costs its capacity to produce the
deadliest weapons humanity has ever known.
We must continue to do all we can to ease the
hardships faced by Iraq's people. But we must also
defend the integrity of this institution, our security and
international law.
The Millennium Summit illustrated the United
Nations long-standing role as a forum for articulating
consensus goals. But achieving these objectives will
require action at all levels, from local to global. It will
also require a willingness to move well beyond the
limits and habits of the past.
Today, the United Nations is taking on a wide
array of new issues, what I call “people issues”,
because they so directly affect the lives of our citizens.
They include the challenge of protecting our planet by
limiting greenhouse gas emissions; securing safe water
supplies; halting desertification; and putting a stop to
trafficking in human beings. They especially include
the fight against HIV/AIDS, which was highlighted in
a letter to the Secretary-General signed by the women
Foreign Ministers last night. These and similar
challenges are sure to be important components of
twenty-first century diplomacy, and because they are
global in scope, require a global response.
The United Nations is also playing an increased
role in areas where cold war divisions once held it
back. Over the past decade, United Nations entities
have contributed much by prosecuting war criminals,
promoting democracy, supporting human rights and
aiding the fight against illegal drugs.
These issues require a willingness to take a stand,
as the United Nations has done in holding accountable
the perpetrators of ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and the
Balkans; striving to end rebel outrages in Sierra Leone;
and expressing opposition to the long-standing and
ongoing violation of basic human rights in Burma.
Let me say this morning that when the Burmese
Government tries to blame the victims for the crime,
and say that Aung San Suu Kyi and her party are
responsible for their own repression, I can only reply
that much the same was once said about Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Václav
Havel. The world is not fooled, and we must not be
silent.
Some argue that speaking out in defence of
human rights constitutes interference in internal affairs.
I believe it helps to fulfil the purposes of the United
Nations Charter, because when international norms are
assaulted, the United Nations must do more than
simply observe injustice, or report upon it, or
sympathize with the victims. We must do all we can,
where we can, to stop the perpetrators.
This requires the active backing and participation
of United Nations Members, so that respect for
international law becomes steadily more universal and
the incentives for observing global standards
progressively more clear.
The result, if we are united and determined
enough, will be a world of greater security, justice and
peace. Realistically, this is essential, if we are to
achieve the ambitious social goals we have set.
But there is one other essential element as well,
and that is democracy. This past summer in Poland, for
the first time, more than 100 nations came together to
reaffirm democratic principles and ensure that the
democratic tide remains a rising one around the world.
We did this not because democracy always
produces good Governments, for it does not. But we
are convinced by the evidence of the old century that
the hopes we share for the new will more readily be
10

accomplished if people are able to live and work in
freedom.
Democracy is the one road we can all walk down
together and the best system yet devised for sowing
and growing the seeds of economic opportunity.
In promoting democracy, we are not attempting to
impose our values on anyone else. In fact, this is not
possible, because democracy, by definition, enables
citizens within a country to shape their own destinies in
accordance with their own convictions and ideals.
Make no mistake. In any country, at any time,
dictatorship is an imposition. Democracy is a choice.
As we have learned during the last 55 years, the
United Nations provides no guarantees of global peace
or prosperity. But it can play a vital role as catalyst and
coordinator, and as a bridge connecting the
contributions of one to another.
To those who would judge it harshly, I would
respond not by pointing first to the deliberations of
diplomats such as myself, in surroundings such as
these. Instead, I would point to the day-to-day efforts
of United Nations workers caring for refugees, feeding
children, providing shelter and preventing disease.
I would point to the men and women on the front
lines, from Port-au-Prince to Freetown, and from
Kosovo to Kisangani, doing some of the world's
hardest work, and, as we have been reminded by the
recent slayings of employees of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
East Timor, also the most dangerous. It is their efforts
and sacrifice, in partnership with so many indigenous
and other non-governmental organizations, that truly
remind us of the United Nations purpose and of our
kinship with one another.
This is, I expect, my last official speech to a
United Nations audience. As I stand before you, I am
deeply conscious not only of our many
accomplishments, but also of the tasks not yet
completed.
I am grieved by the conflicts that still rage, and
the basic rights and freedoms still denied. I am
frustrated by the gaps that still exist between our ideals
and actions, and alarmed by the deepening material
divide that ultimately threatens every nation, rich and
poor alike.
There are those who say it is naïve to think that
the future can be made better than the past. I am
reminded that this institution was founded by men and
women who were as realistic as any human beings
could be, for they were the survivors of the worst
conflict our world has known and determined that
succeeding generations should be saved from holocaust
and war. They had faith. Surely we, as well, must have
faith that by working together within and outside this
Organization, we can move together, step by step
towards the lofty goals we have set, and thereby bring
about a world more peaceful, prosperous and free than
it has ever been. Since 1993, it has been my privilege
to work with so many of you, from every part of the
globe, in support of the interests we have in common
and the dreams our people share.
This morning, I want to thank you for your
friendship; pledge my cooperation in the months
immediately ahead; and ask respectfully, in turn, for
yours. I promise, as well, to serve the cause of
international progress and individual liberty not only
for as long as I am in office, but for as long as I am
alive.﻿Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this historic Assembly and also to
congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab,
on his sterling guidance of the Assembly's work during
the previous session.
The dawn of the new millennium offers us a
unique opportunity to reflect on the successes and
failures of the United Nations since its inception. It
also provides us with an opportunity to dream about the
future of humanity in the third millennium. The
founders of the United Nations based the Charter on
the assertion of human dignity, human rights and the
equality of women and men and the aim of promoting
better social standards. Indeed, billions of people today
enjoy human rights and live in dignity, free from
disease, ignorance and fear, enjoying the benefits of
technology and scientific advances and able to take full
advantage of the process of globalization. Equally,
there are billions who are humiliated, degraded and
stripped of their innate human dignity and worth by
poverty, disease, ignorance, homelessness, hunger and
wars.
This Assembly, following the very inspiring
Millennium Summit, provides us with an opportunity
to reflect on the wise words of the leaders of the world
and on the Declaration they adopted. Global consensus
has at last emerged and confirms that we live in one
world and belong to the same human race; therefore,
while each Government has the responsibility to take
care of its citizens, we all have to work together for the
good of humanity as a whole. This means that we have
to create a people-centred world that is more caring,
with a strong sense of solidarity, where we are all our
brothers' and sisters' keepers, if I may borrow those
words from the Bible.
There is also universal consensus now that while
billions of people are being degraded and dehumanized
by poverty, disease and hunger, there are indeed
enough resources in the world to feed, educate and
restore the dignity of all human beings and make this
world a better place for all. It is therefore clear that the
eradication of hunger and poverty should be the
priority of all priorities and should be our collective
responsibility.
There is also agreement that we have a collective
responsibility in dealing with infectious diseases, such
as malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted
diseases, especially HIV/AIDS. There is a need to
mobilize material and human resources, provide better
infrastructure, provide health education and ensure
access to affordable medicine.
There is also consensus that Africa poses the
biggest development challenge. The success or failure
of the United Nations and of humankind as a whole in
this century will be determined by their success in
dealing with the African development challenge.
We would like to urge the United Nations, in
partnership with the Organization of African Unity and
regional organizations, to accelerate the work towards
peace and stability in many of the countries of our
continent, such as Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Eritrea,
Somalia, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sudan and Burundi, so that these countries may
take their rightful place in the continent, be seized with
the needs of their people, promote development,
produce and export goods and not be areas of perpetual
suffering and war that result in their being the net
exporters of refugees. We welcome the Brahimi report
and are studying it, as it contains very serious
suggestions about the future operations of the United
Nations.
The United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, is humanity's principal agent for collective
security and it needs urgent reform so as to be able to
live up to this solemn responsibility. The world has
changed dramatically and continues to do so. It is
imperative that the composition and role of the
Security Council reflect that change and not remain
obsolete. The Bretton Woods institutions are equally in
need of urgent reform in order to discharge their
mandate and respond to the new development
12

challenge. The World Trade Organization has to adapt
its international trade rules so that they are equitable
and fair and take account of global development
challenges.
It is a source of great concern to the developing
countries that, increasingly, decisions are taken outside
the United Nations and other global structures by
developed and rich countries when these decisions
have a great impact on the poorer countries and
directly affect the lives of billions of poor people. That
is why a partnership between poor and rich countries
and dialogue between North and South are so critical.
Nuclear weapons still constitute a threat to our
planet. We have to pursue the path of universal
disarmament and the destruction of all weapons of
mass destruction.
The need to protect the environment has assumed
greater importance and we can succeed only if we work
together.
The self-determination of the people of East
Timor, Western Sahara and Palestine must be a concern
to all of us. To this end, we urge the United Nations to
do all it can to expedite the processes in East Timor
and Western Sahara. We commend the peace efforts in
the Middle East and the role of the United States. We
would like to pledge our support to the Palestinian and
Israeli leaderships as they try to find creative solutions
to their problems. They must be urged to take
advantage of this unique historic moment, as it seems
that a real possibility exists for a solution.
The equality of women and men still remains a
subject of great concern. All we need to do is look
around this Hall to realize how far we are from
realizing the vision of the founding Members of the
United Nations. Secondly, the feminization of poverty
is a big problem. The marginalization of women, both
in their countries and in the multilateral forums, means
that our countries and organizations, including the
United Nations, are functioning at half-capacity and are
deprived of the unique qualities, energies and creativity
that women would bring. In this context, I cannot
forget the plight of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma. She
deserves active support from this gathering and the
world.
The United Nations was founded in part to make
sure that the monsters of fascism and racism should not
rear their ugly heads again. Unfortunately, all over the
world racism and xenophobia are on the increase.
Some countries and regions are responding by
developing a new fortress mentality, which does not
help the situation. This should flash red warning lights
to all of us and activate our utmost vigilance against
the scourges of racism and xenophobia.
It is only when we turn our backs on racism,
xenophobia and other forms of discrimination that we
can succeed in building a caring world where we feel
diminished by the suffering and hunger of other human
beings. It was for this reason that we felt a sense of
obligation and agreed to host the world racism
Conference next year. Of course, our country and
people experienced the most systematic, most brutal
and most inhumane form of racism, which the United
Nations declared a crime against humanity. We are
happy to take our place in the fight against racism in
our country and in the world. It is our fervent hope that
the Conference will come up with a programme of
action against racism, xenophobia and other forms of
discrimination.
In conclusion, let us all put our collective will,
courage and intellectual creativity together in shaping
the dream of a better world; a world of solidarity; a
world where no child should starve or die of
preventable and curable diseases; a world where no
child will be deprived of schooling; a world where
children will not be sent to war; a world where no child
can be a slave or be used as an object for trafficking; a
world where children grow up as children and play
with toys and do not have to be breadwinners or worry
about where their next meal is going to come from; a
world where women will enjoy all rights and where the
eradication of poverty and war is our collective
responsibility.
The dream for the new millennium is indeed
realisable. If we act with courage and determination,
we can turn the hopes of billions across the world into
reality.Please allow me to extend my warm congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident
that, with your wisdom and experience, and with the
support and coordinated efforts of the member States,
the Millennium Assembly will successfully complete
all its work. At the same time, I would like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Gurirab for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its last session.
The Millennium Summit, which attracted
worldwide attention, has just concluded. The United
Nations Millennium Declaration is a consensus reached
by world leaders on how to meet the major challenges
facing mankind today. The Declaration reviews and
sums up the course that the United Nations has
travelled over the past 55 years. More importantly, it
offers a blueprint for the United Nations in the new
century and the new millennium and important
guidance to people around the world in their pursuit of
peace, development and common progress. I would like
to add my voice to the call to action made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan at the closing ceremony
of the Summit. We should work together to turn the
consensus reached at the Summit into action and usher
in a new era of peace and development for people all
over the world.
It is the primary mission of the United Nations in
the new century to uphold the purposes and principles
of its Charter, promote democracy in international
relations, maintain world peace and stability and
facilitate the development and prosperity of all
countries. The United Nations Charter is a
manifestation of the peoples' aspiration to equality,
justice and freedom. Over the past 55 years, the United
Nations has adhered to the Charter aims of
safeguarding peace, developing friendship and
promoting cooperation, as well as the core principles
guiding international relations, such as sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. It is precisely for these reasons that the United
Nations has grown in strength and its membership
increased from 51 to 189. This Organization is still
playing an irreplaceable role in world affairs.
The history of the past 55 years has amply proved
the effectiveness of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Today, global issues have
made our interests intertwined and modern technology
has made our communication easier. In these
circumstances, we need more than ever to face our
common challenges together on the basis of equality,
mutual respect and democratic consultation. The
purposes and principles of the Charter are by no means
outdated, but are rather of greater relevance today.
Democracy in international relations requires
compliance with the principle of sovereign equality, as
5

provided for in the United Nations Charter. Countries
differ in size, strength and wealth, but they are all
equal members of the international community. None
should be discriminated against and their state
sovereignty brooks no encroachment. The internal
affairs of a country should be managed by the people of
that country and major world affairs should be decided
by all countries through consultation. The response to
global challenges calls for worldwide cooperation and
coordination. This is a necessity of our times and a
prerequisite for the establishment of a fair and just new
international political order. It is also the foundation
and source of vitality for the United Nations in the new
century.
The reform of the United Nations should give full
expression to democracy in international relations. The
reform is aimed at better safeguarding the fundamental
rights and interests of all Member States and,
especially, at truly reflecting the will of developing
countries, which make up the bulk of United Nations
membership. It should not merely satisfy the needs of a
few countries. The reform of the Security Council
should seek primarily to increase representation of
developing countries and should be based on extensive
deliberations among Member States. It is against the
will of the overwhelming majority of Member States to
set arbitrar deadlines or to force the passage of
immature plans.
There is general agreement among the United
Nations Member States on basing the scale
methodology of regular budget and peacekeeping
assessment on the principle of the capacity to pay. This
methodology is also one that has been confirmed time
and again by the General Assembly through its
resolutions and should therefore be abided by in
whatever circumstances. Any adjustment to this
methodology should take into full account the specific
economic conditions of developing countries. Such
adjustments should be made only when there is
consensus among all Member States through extensive
consultation, thus facilitating the normal and sound
operation of the United Nations.
Another important historical task facing the
United Nations is to respond to globalization and to
achieve the common development of mankind. The
twentieth century has seen both unprecedented
economic prosperity and the greatest polarization. In
the last decade of the century, economic globalization
has advanced at the fastest pace, while the gap between
the North and the South has continued to widen.
According to the World Bank, the revenue of the low-
income countries accounts for only 6 per cent of the
world's total, although they make up more than half of
the world's population, while that of the developed
countries is 80 per cent with only one sixth of the
world population.
It is especially worrisome that there is an even
wider gap between developing and developed countries
in the field of advanced technology. The new economy
is so far benefiting only the rich countries. Most
developing countries are still information have-nots.
Should this situation be allowed to continue, many
developing countries will long remain deprived of the
opportunity to participate in technological progress and
economic growth and the world will be further
polarized.
To prevent poverty from swallowing up
achievements of development and to prevent social
injustice from shaking the basis of global stability, the
United Nations must play its due role in narrowing the
gap between the rich and the poor and bringing about
common prosperity to the world. It is an unavoidable
major responsibility of the United Nations in the new
century to promote the establishment of a new
international economic order based on cooperation on
an equal footing and aimed at common development
and to ensure that economic globalization benefits
everybody in the world.
The United Nations should give top priority to the
issue of development, make efforts to change the
current situation in which global economic affairs are
dominated by only a few countries and ensure
developing countries their right to equal participation
in economic decision-making. In making or revising
global economic rules of the game, consideration
should first be given to the need of developing
countries in order to facilitate their development and
reduce the risks they may face when participating in
globalization. The United Nations should also mobilize
all the resources available and encourage the
international community to narrow the “digital divide”,
and it should help developing countries to seize, as far
as they can, the opportunities brought about by the
scientific and technological advancement driven by the
information revolution. The United Nations also has
the responsibility for introducing new rules to the
world to make science and technology truly serve all of
6

mankind and the lofty cause of peace and development
in the world.
As drastic and profound changes are taking place
in the international situation, what kind of security
concept should be embraced is a major subject before
the United Nations and all its Member States. Global
strategic stability is the foundation on which world
security rests. And the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty is an important cornerstone for global
strategic stability. Any move to undermine the totality
and effectiveness of the Treaty will have a profound
negative impact on world peace and security. The
proposal for a national missile defence system that is
prohibited by the ABM Treaty is essentially aimed at
seeking unilateral military and strategic supremacy, and
thus a typical example of the cold war mentality. Such
a plan, if implemented, will only bring serious negative
consequences to the security of the whole world. The
adoption by the General Assembly of the resolution on
preservation of and compliance with the ABM Treaty
(A/54/54 A) at its fifty-fourth session by an
overwhelming majority is an indicator of the firm will
of most countries in the world to maintain and strictly
observe the ABM Treaty. The United Nations should
continue to show serious concern over the attempt by a
certain country to develop a missile defence system to
the detriment of global strategic stability, and it should
take necessary measures to stop this dangerous
development.
Security is mutual and relative. No country
should enhance its security at the expense of that of the
others. To seek absolute unilateral security is not
feasible and will lead to greater insecurity. With
increased international contacts and exchanges,
countries of the world will find themselves sharing
more common interests and facing more common
challenges. Security can only be realized through
dialogue on an equal footing and in the spirit of mutual
understanding and mutual accommodation. It can only
be maintained on the basis of mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence, and it can only be consolidated
through mutually beneficial cooperation and common
development. The only way to protect the fundamental
interests of all countries and enhance universal security
is to replace the old security concept based on military
alliances and military build-up with a new one that is
characterized by equality, mutual trust, mutual benefit,
cooperation and settlement of disputes through
dialogue.
In recent years, China, Russia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan have reached, within the
framework of the Shanghai Five and through
consultation and cooperation based on equality, an
agreement among themselves on confidence-building
in the military field and reduction of military forces in
the border areas. This offers something useful for the
international community to draw upon in its
exploratory efforts for a new security concept.
We have noted with pleasure the positive changes
in the situation on the Korean Peninsula and the
positive outcome of the successful historic summit
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea. It has shown once again
that dialogue and consultation based on equality serve
to enhance mutual trust and improve relations between
States. We appreciate the efforts made by both the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea to promote peace, stability and
development on the peninsula and in the region.
We deeply regret that the tripartite summit at
Camp David failed to produce any agreement. We
believe that the Middle East peace process will move
forward as long as the parties concerned earnestly,
patiently and unswervingly engage themselves in
negotiating and seriously implement the agreements
that have already be reached among them on the basis
of the relevant United Nation resolutions, in
accordance with the principle of land for peace and in
the spirit of mutual trust and mutual accommodation.
In the twentieth century, mankind suffered a great
deal from the scourges of war. In the twenty-first
century, humanitarian crises of a massive scale must be
prevented, and the tragedy of innocent people being
slaughtered on a large scale must not be allowed to
repeat itself. The United Nations shoulders a primary
responsibility for the maintenance of world peace, and
therefore it should work harder to stop conflicts and
eliminate wars.
In the present-day world, hegemony and power
politics still exist. Territorial disputes, ethnic feuds and
religious rifts have all led to incessant regional
conflicts. Some countries and regions hope that the
United Nations will assist them in stopping conflicts,
which we fully understand. At the same time, we must
not fail to see the complexity of international
intervention and the danger of inappropriate
intervention. The United Nations intervention should
7

aim at eliminating the root causes of a given conflict
rather than delaying its settlement. It should aim at
facilitating reconciliation between the conflicting
parties rather than deepening their hatred and hostility.
We are of the view that major powers and groups of
countries should respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned rather than
meddling in their internal affairs or triggering new
conflicts.
In the new circumstances, peacekeeping
operations remain an important means for the United
Nations to fulfil its obligations in safeguarding world
peace and security. In this regard, it is essential to
ensure and enhance the Security Council's
responsibility and political leadership in peacekeeping
operations and to ensure the observance of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
launched with a sense of realism and within the
capacities of the United Nations. The limited resources
should be put to where they are most needed.
Human beings are the most precious among all
the creatures on earth. To promote human development
and protect all the rights and interests of mankind is the
primary responsibility of all countries. China is the
most populous country in the world. The Chinese
Government has taken upon itself to safeguard the
independence and dignity of the Chinese nation and to
ensure the almost 1.3 billion Chinese the right to a
decent life and all-round development. It has regarded
this as its sacred duty and will do all it can to achieve
this end.
Human rights improvement is an ongoing
process. The human rights conditions of a country are
up to the people of that country to assess and improve.
Since people live under different circumstances, the
form in which human rights are embodied changes with
these circumstances and with time. Therefore, how to
protect and promote human rights depends on the
actual conditions and specific needs of a country. To
arbitrarily impose a fixed set of human rights rules,
regardless of the differences in the specific
environment and reality, will not serve the interests of
the people of any country. To interfere in other
countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting
human rights in order to advance one's own political
agenda is simply to blaspheme and betray the human
rights cause.
The United Nations should vigorously encourage
dialogues and exchanges among different civilizations
and countries on human rights and discourage
confrontation and exclusion — which are the general
trend of the human rights movement. In providing
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations should
give equal priority to the prevention of conflicts and
the protection of human rights, on the one hand, and to
the reduction and elimination of poverty and the
promotion of human development, on the other hand.
In this context, the United Nations should work in
close coordination and cooperation with the countries
and Governments concerned, instead of bypassing
them, and ensure human rights for the majority of the
people. Otherwise, such operations will trigger a
humanitarian disaster of a greater scale. Only when the
above-mentioned principles are abided by can the
United Nations play a useful role in protecting human
rights.
A few days ago, from this solemn podium
Chinese President Jiang Zemin proclaimed to the
whole world the Chinese people's firm determination
to turn China into a strong, prosperous and united
country with a high degree of democracy, and to
promote world peace and development. In the past 20
years and more since the inception of reform and
opening-up, China completed the first and second
phases of its modernization strategy. With the advent of
the new century, China will begin the third phase of the
strategy and enter a new stage of accelerated
modernization. Once China becomes a member of the
World Trade Organization (WTO), there will be major
breakthroughs in its opening-up. China will honour its
commitments and seriously fulfil its obligations, while
enjoying its rights.
Although there will be difficulties, risks and
challenges on the road ahead, China is capable of
removing every obstacle and achieving its grand
objective of modernization. China will unswervingly
stick to its independent foreign policy of peace and
further develop its friendly relations with the rest of the
world on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence. A strong and developed China will not
only benefit more than a billion Chinese people but
also serve prosperity and progress worldwide.
To resolve the question of Taiwan once and for all
and complete the reunification of the motherland is a
shared aspiration of the entire Chinese people,
including our Taiwan compatriots. Adherence to the
8

principle of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems in resolving the Taiwan question will serve the
development of the two sides on either side of the
straits, contribute to amity and unity among
compatriots on both sides, and facilitate peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese
Government and people have committed themselves
more strongly than anyone else to a peaceful
reunification. They have demonstrated the utmost
sincerity and made the greatest efforts to this end. We
are convinced that — with the concerted efforts of the
entire Chinese people, including those living in
Taiwan — China will be able to realize its complete
reunification at an earlier date.
We are entrusted with the important task of
charting a course for mankind for the coming century.
Let us join hands and work together to build a more
secure, prosperous and progressive world in the new
century.First of all I
would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as President of the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, and wish you every success with
your work. I would like to thank Foreign Minister
Gurirab for his dedication in chairing the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. I welcome Tuvalu as
the one hundred and eighty-ninth member of the United
Nations and congratulate it on its accession. I endorse
the statement of my French colleague, Hubert VÈdrine,
on behalf of the European Union.
At this session of the General Assembly, the first
in the new millennium, we are asked to determine the
future tasks of the United Nations and which reforms
are necessary in order to master them. The Millennium
Declaration, which we all adopted on 8 September,
shows us the way forward. The implementation of this
Declaration should be a main focus of the consultations
of this and future sessions of the General Assembly. I
propose that the Secretary-General make use of the
opportunity to draw up review reports at the beginning
of the next session of the General Assembly.
There was one issue in particular which
dominated this debate, namely globalization. It will
radically change the economy and finances, politics
and culture everywhere. The question is, will a new
order which guarantees peace, justice and an equal
share in our common progress be established or will a
new divide evolve in the world? Will the future of the
globalized world manifest its pluralist character in a
multilateral order? Only the future can provide the
answers to these questions.
Particularly for developing countries,
globalization offers great opportunities. If it
nevertheless provokes strong opposition, this lies in the
imbalances of this historical process. Indeed, just under
a decade after the end of the cold war, our world is
today at risk from a new divide, one between the
winners and losers of the economic globalization
process. In his impressive Millennium Report, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, rightly highlights
the growing inequalities in the distribution of income,
resources, investments and access to new technologies.
In view of this situation, the international
community must make every effort in the coming
decade to ensure that globalization benefits all peoples.
If market forces are not balanced by a political
corrective mechanism, it is to be expected that injustice
in the world will increase further. Those who have been
hitherto excluded from the advantages of globalization
must be included to a greater extent. They must be
given more say in the political decisions made about
steering global processes and they must be given an
opportunity to gain a fairer share in the development of
the world economy.
In the twenty-first century, we will, more than
ever before, need a form of global governance if we are
to solve global challenges. The United Nations will
play a key role here. It is the only organization within
which the injustice between rich and poor can be
overcome and where a reconciliation between peoples
and regions, global peace and sustainable development
can be achieved.
Greatly strengthening the United Nations capacity
to act is, therefore, a crucial question for the whole of
15

humanity in the twenty-first century. In addition to the
crucial reform of the Security Council, this will entail
the United Nations entering into creative partnerships
with industry and civil society.
Germany strongly supports the Secretary-
General's idea for a global compact with major
companies. The German initiative for a resolution in
the General Assembly on global partnerships will take
up this and other issues relating to the globalization
process.
Global poverty is the key problem in North-South
relations. It lies at the root of many global risks and
threats to peace. The Secretary-General provided
precise and stimulating analyses of this in his report.
The industrialized nations have a special
obligation to support the poorest of the poor. With the
Cologne debt initiative launched by Germany, we are
combining debt relief with a strategy to combat
poverty. The 20 poorest developing countries should be
debt-free by the end of the year.
The least developed countries should be granted
access to world markets with the greatest possible
exemption from duties and quotas. We must, also by
way of liberalization steps in the World Trade
Organization, prevent these countries from being
socially excluded even further.
This applies in particular to the new economy.
The United Nations and its Member States must
intensify their efforts to make it easier for these
countries to use the information and communication
technologies. This is contingent upon initiatives in the
field of education, as well as the availability of the
necessary resources.
However, how can poor countries ever catch up
economically if they are, at the same time, afflicted to a
much greater degree than the North by terrible
diseases? The fight against the disastrous spread of the
AIDS virus, particularly in Africa, must be priority for
us all. The focus must be on prevention. At the same
time, access to medicines must be improved and
vaccine research must be intensified. The World Bank's
promising idea of establishing a future fund for the
purchase of vaccines deserves every support.
Particularly in the fight against AIDS, new partnerships
between Governments and companies are crucial.
The second major issue of this General Assembly
is peacekeeping. The Secretary-General showed the
way ahead with the Brahimi report. The
recommendations it contains should be examined and
implemented as quickly as possible. Germany will play
its part. Peace missions need a more robust mandate, as
well as more personnel and equipment. Member States
must do considerably more to ensure the rapid
secondment of well-trained troops, police officers and
civilian experts. The further development of the police
concept is one of the most important tasks in this
connection  as the last few months and years have, in
fact been teaching us.
The German Government will offer German
training for civilian peace-mission personnel and offer
civilian capacities to the United Nations stand-by
system. In addition, we are drafting a plan for training
civilian experts for peace missions, thus creating a pool
of qualified personnel who can be deployed at short
notice.
The prevailing form of conflict today is conflict
within States. Therefore the main task of peacekeeping
must be to address the internal roots of conflicts. In
addition to focusing on an improvement in socio-
economic conditions, our efforts must focus on
promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, aptly said that the
human rights violations of today are the wars of
tomorrow.
Numerous concrete tasks are on the agenda. The
protocols relating to the involvement of children in
armed conflict and to the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography must enter into
force as early as possible. The equality of women must
be advanced in all spheres. I call upon all states to
ratify quickly the new Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and to abolish all laws
that discriminate against women by 2005. The World
Conference against racism, to be held in 2001, must
tackle all aspects of this issue. Out of a sense of
responsibility for our history, our State and our society
will stand up firmly against all forms of right-wing
radicalism, racism and anti-Semitism, both in our own
country and in the world.
I call upon all States to respect the integrity of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, to sign and
to ratify it, so that the Court can commence work soon.
There can be no exceptions to the Rome Statute.
16

One of the greatest dangers facing humanity
remains the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The risk of regional arms races,
particularly in South Asia, has increased. Further
developing the international arms-control regime
therefore continues to be one of the United Nations key
tasks. This will require resolute implementation of the
results of the sixth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Against this background, President Clinton's
decision not to commit now to the development of a
national missile defence system is very welcome. The
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty must remain as a
cornerstone of strategic stability and the basis for
further nuclear-disarmament measures.
In poor countries the excessive stockpiling of
small arms must be stopped. We must therefore do
everything we can to achieve tangible progress at the
United Nations small arms conference to be held in
2001. This presupposes the inclusion of all aspects,
including the legal transfer of production and
stockpiles.
Regional cooperation has proved to be an
extremely effective means of preventing conflicts. The
United Nations can do much to help here. Allow me to
mention two regions where progress is particularly
urgent. The triangle between Central Asia, the
Caucasus and the Middle East is full of destabilizing
factors  oil, religious fundamentalism, terrorism,
drugs and the nuclear arms race  and this area is
threatening to become the crisis region of the century
ahead. A new comprehensive regional process, along
the lines of the Helsinki model, which fosters
cooperation instead of confrontation, could play an
important stabilizing role. Germany is prepared to take
part in such a process.
In Africa, regional approaches have gained in
significance. In the main, however, it is, unfortunately,
too early to talk of effective peacekeeping structures.
Unfortunately, the efforts on the part of the United
Nations and of the Organization of African Unity to
resolve the conflicts in the Congo and Sierra Leone
have not achieved a breakthrough so far. In the conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea it is to be hoped that the
ceasefire that has finally been concluded will be
consolidated and that the United Nations peace mission
will be lent the full support of the parties to the
conflict.
The third issue, protection of our natural
environment, will probably become the crucial issue
affecting our planet. In the course of the twentieth
century the world's population quadrupled, while
consumption of energy and raw materials increased
tenfold. We must end the squandering of natural
resources and switch to renewable energy sources as
quickly as possible. This cannot only be a matter for
industrialized nations. We are witnessing at this very
moment what a burden high oil prices places on poor
countries in particular. It must be in the interest of all
States to bring about the transition from the oil to the
hydrogen age as quickly as possible. The most
important thing now is to finally overcome the
deadlock in the climate-protection negotiations and to
ensure that the Kyoto Protocol can be implemented by
2002, 10 years after the Rio Summit.
Another key issue for humanity, the future of
genetic engineering, can only be mastered within the
framework of a global consensus. Genetic engineering
has the potential to revolutionalize medicine and
agriculture. At the same time, it raises more ethical and
human rights questions than any other technology. Do
we not need clear, binding rules for dealing with such a
powerful new technology? Why do we not seriously
consider within the United Nations creating under
international law a convention that meaningfully
promotes genetic engineering and safeguards the
freedom to research and the findings of this research,
while, at the same time, defining an ethical basis and
guaranteeing protection against abuse?
The Millennium Declaration points the way
ahead. But what help will that be if an increasing
number of Members allow the world's real problems to
be dealt with and decided somewhere else? If we do
not succeed in adapting the United Nations to deal with
the challenges of the twenty-first century and in
modernizing it fully, it will be sidelined, with fatal
consequences for peace and development, human
rights, the environment and social progress.
We will all, rich and poor, lose out.
We must therefore muster the strength to
resolutely implement the Millennium Declaration. We
need a world Organization that is strong and we must
use its scarce resources more effectively. An important
prerequisite for this is that the United Nations be
placed finally on a solid financial footing. Together
with its European Union partners, Germany has put
17

forward proposals for a fairer, more balanced scale of
assessments, which must continue to be based on
Member States' ability to pay..
The Security Council no longer reflects the
political reality of our world at the dawn of the new
millennium. We share the Secretary-General's view
that this central steering organ of the international
community must become more representative,
legitimate and effective, also involving the developing
countries. Last week Chancellor Schroeder reaffirmed
Germany's willingness to take on more responsibility
in this connection. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank my friend and colleague Robin Cook for the
clear language that he used before the General
Assembly just a few minutes ago.
The General Assembly must structure its work,
debate global problems in a more focused fashion than
hitherto and identify courses of action. The synergetic
potential between United Nations organizations, for
example in the environmental field, must be better used
and resources pooled to a greater extent by merging
organizations.
Reform of the United Nations will play a decisive
role in ensuring that the twenty-first century is safer
and more just than the twentieth century. Allow me to
conclude with a quote from the Secretary-General's
Millennium Report:
No shift in the way we think or act can be
more critical than this: we must put people at the
centre of everything we do ... Only when that
begins to happen will we know that globalization
is indeed becoming inclusive, allowing everyone
to share its opportunities.'I have
the honour of speaking this year on behalf of the
European Union, which France is presiding over until
the end of December.
In this capacity, it is a great pleasure for me to
congratulate the President on his election. It
symbolizes the respect the international community has
both for his country and for himself.
I would also like to thank your predecessor, Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, for his skill in guiding the
proceedings of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, Mr. Sam Nujoma and Ms. Tarja Halonen for
their work with you, Mr. President, as Co-Chairpersons
of the Millennium Summit.
19

I would like to commend the Secretary-General
of the Organization, Mr. Kofi Annan. His international
action, his independence and his vision have made a
decisive contribution to asserting the key role the
United Nations plays and must continue to play. The
European Union wishes to assure him of its support for
his work and for the Organization and its
representatives.
The Millennium Summit, an unprecedented
gathering of 155 heads of State and Government,
allowed us to address the main challenges facing the
world community and the role of the United Nations in
the twenty-first century, which will begin on 1 January
2001.
The Union notes with great satisfaction that the
Summit produced a political document setting forth a
road-map for the Organization for the years to come.
These guidelines are based on ideas outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. It is now up to the General
Assembly to implement them. The Union will
contribute actively to this.
Peacekeeping, strengthening international
security and defending human rights are the central
principles underpinning the European Union's foreign
policy. Recent crises on Europe's very doorstep have
convinced us that we cannot remain idle when these
fundamental principles are violated. In this regard, the
European Union approves of the priority given to
peacekeeping during last week's meetings. Mr.
Brahimi's report offers an in-depth analysis on this
subject. It presents useful recommendations for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, operational
planning in New York and deployment. It presents a
unique opportunity to strengthen the United Nations
capacity for peace operations. The European Union
will actively participate in considering these
recommendations.
The Union has decided to equip itself to be a
major political actor and to play its full role on the
international stage. To this end, and within a very short
time-frame, it has undertaken decisive measures. New
decision-making, action-oriented political and military
bodies have been set up: a political and security
committee, a military committee, a European Union
military staff, a situation centre and a committee for
civilian crisis management. These bodies will enable
the European Union to intervene quickly and credibly
in the management of international crises.
The European Union has also announced its
intention to establish by 2003 a force of 60,000 troops
for international missions involving the whole range of
conflict-prevention and crisis-management operations,
with the requisite air and naval support for deployment
within 60 days for a period of at least one year. This
autumn there will be a conference for the commitment
of capability at which each Member State shall pledge
its contribution to this joint endeavour.
The Union has also set ambitious and realistic
targets for developing collective capabilities. In
addition to its military resources, it will develop
civilian intervention capabilities, including a corps of
civilian police, whose contribution to peacekeeping is
invaluable. In this connection, Member States have set
themselves the goal of being able, by 2003, to provide
up to 5,000 police officers, 1,000 of whom will be
deployment-ready within 30 days.
These decisions now enable the European Union
to complement its already sizeable economic and
humanitarian programmes with the full range of
resources required for crisis management. Of course,
these activities are designed in full respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter. Now more
than ever, it is vital to establish working ties with the
United Nations. To initiate this cooperation, the
European Union troika will discuss this issue for the
first time with the Secretary-General. On behalf of the
European Union, I hereby invite Mr. Kofi Annan to go
to Brussels for a working meeting with the organs of
the Union.
The European Union hails the considerable
efforts and determination shown by the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Prime Minister
during recent negotiations to reach a final agreement
between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We
welcome in particular the renewed vigour with which
very sensitive issues have been addressed at this time.
We commend President Clinton and the Secretary
of State for their unflagging efforts to facilitate
negotiations. Circumstances favourable to reconciling
positions continue to exist. We urge the parties to seize
this historic opportunity, show courage in decisive
choices, take fully into account human realities and the
recognized rights of all, and thereby achieve a final
agreement.
The European Union welcomes Israel's
withdrawal from the zone it occupied in southern
20

Lebanon. It welcomes the redeployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the presence of a
joint security force, sent to the area by the Lebanese
Government. It urges all parties to fulfil their
responsibilities in order to defuse tensions. The
European Union believes that only a comprehensive
settlement encompassing every track of the peace
process, including the Israeli-Syrian track, is likely to
guarantee lasting stability in the region. It will continue
to support the efforts of the parties to this end and
contribute to the implementation of any agreements
that may be reached.
Turning to Europe, the situation in the western
Balkans is a matter of serious concern to the entire
international community. Ten years of conflict have
ravaged the region, leading to severe human suffering
and to politically unstable and therefore dangerous
situations. But beyond accumulated hardships and the
lagging economic and social development of many of
those countries, all of the peoples and nearly all of the
leaders of the region have realized that it does have a
future, and that future is Europe. Today, all Europeans
now share the belief that these countries are bound one
day to join the European Union.
This is why the European Council has reiterated
that its goal is to firmly attach the countries of the
region to Europe. This means the greatest possible
integration into the political, economic and social
currents of Europe through the stabilization and
association process, political dialogue, trade
liberalization, the harmonization of their laws with
those of the European Union, and cooperation in justice
and domestic affairs.
The assistance provided by the European Union
to countries of the region over the last 10 years —
nearly 8 billion euros — is considerable. The European
Union will continue to sustain this stabilization and
association process by providing the western Balkan
countries with massive technical, economic and
financial assistance and by granting them asymmetrical
trade advantages in farming and industry very soon,
which will pave the way for the creation of a free trade
zone with the European Union. In the context of
elections concerning almost the entire region, we will
encourage them to develop regional cooperation and to
continue to make determined efforts for political,
economic and social reform in order to consolidate
democracy and human rights, to build the rule of law
and lay the groundwork for sustainable development.
In this context, the European Union has reaffirmed its
determination to continue to be the driving force in the
Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe, which
represents a new vision of cooperation between the
countries of the region and the international
community.
The summit to be held shortly in Croatia of the
European Union and the Western Balkan countries —
on the basis of a French proposal — will signal our
common resolve to overcome the divisions of the past.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will not be
able to participate in the conference, as the nature of its
present regime does not allow it to do so. But the Serbs
know that they have their place in the European family
and that the European Union is looking forward to the
day when the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is in a
position to participate fully in the stabilization and
association process and to recover its rightful place in
Europe. The elections to be held on 24 September
could be decisive in this respect.
In Kosovo the international community, acting on
the basis of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
has achieved praiseworthy results. Thanks must be
given to all those who have made this possible in spite
of enormous difficulties, especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations staff and the Kosovo Force soldiers, the many
international organizations there on the ground and the
non-governmental organizations. The first democratic
municipal elections in Kosovo, to be held in a few
weeks' time, will constitute a major step in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). I would
forcefully reiterate that the international community
will not allow unacceptable acts of violence, whatever
their motivation, to cause the democratic electoral
process under way to fail. We will not let extremists
from whatever faction sabotage the work accomplished
over the past year under the auspices of the United
Nations.
The European Union considers the status quo in
Cyprus unacceptable, and it supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General to reach a negotiated,
comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement consistent
with relevant Security Council resolutions. It reiterates
its commitment to stability and prosperity throughout
the Mediterranean region. With talks beginning right
here under the auspices of the Secretary-General, it
21

invites the parties concerned to enter into substantive
talks.
The European Union is equally determined in its
support for efforts to prevent and settle conflicts in
Africa, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
subregional organizations and in accordance with the
objectives agreed at the Africa-Europe Summit, held
last April in Cairo under the Portuguese presidency of
the European Union. It will lend its backing to the
measures taken jointly by the OAU and the United
Nations to implement the peace settlement between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. In supporting the deployment of
international observers, the European Union is also
willing to lend its support to the establishment and
demarcation of borders, to demining and to assistance
to refugees and displaced persons. It is endeavouring to
provide assistance to the war-stricken populations of
both countries, whose immense suffering has been
compounded by drought.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls on all parties to the Lusaka Agreement
to implement their commitments, including those made
at Kampala. This will allow for progress with respect
to the military and political provisions, all of which are
under threat due to the continued fighting and the
deadlock in preparing for a national dialogue. It also
urges them to abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1304 (2000), which
calls for an orderly withdrawal of foreign forces from
Congolese territory and for the cooperation of all
parties in the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) through the lifting of restrictions
on the freedom of movement of MONUC personnel
and by ensuring their security.
The illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a violation of
the country's sovereignty, is also unacceptable. The
European Union therefore commends the establishment
by the Secretary-General on 15 August last of a group
of experts in charge of analysing ties between the
illegal exploitation of those riches and the continuation
of the conflict.
We are pleased to note greater awareness about
the illicit trade in diamonds and other minerals, which
directly fuels conflicts. This is the case in particular
with the illicit trade in diamonds in Angola, whereby
UNITA has been funding its war effort. We underscore
the importance of complying with Security Council
resolutions on this matter. We welcome the decision to
place this important question on the General
Assembly's agenda. The discussion should be based on
the Kimberley process. It should reflect the work of the
preparatory conference co-chaired by the United
Kingdom and Russia. Lastly, it should examine the
proposal made at Miyazaki to establish a standing
group of independent experts to formulate ways of
preventing illicit trade.
The European Union reiterates its support for
resolution 1306 (2000) on Sierra Leone, which
tightened existing arms sanctions and established an
embargo on raw diamonds illegally exported from
Sierra Leone. The European Union calls on all the
parties to the conflict to comply with the principles and
objectives of the Lomé Agreement and to be fully
involved in the re-establishment of peace and stability
and compliance with human rights in Sierra Leone.
The European Union and its member States will
continue to contribute to African capacity and means of
action in conflict prevention and resolution, in
particular through support for the OAU and
subregional organizations and initiatives.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the
situation in Myanmar. It asks the Myanmar authorities
to immediately restore Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi's
freedom of speech, movement and communication with
the outside. It is urgent for dialogue to begin between
the Myanmar authorities and the democratic
opposition, including the National League for
Democracy and national minorities. The Union
supports the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Burma, Mr. Razali, in his efforts to find a solution.
The European Union expresses its solidarity with
the people of East Timor and commends the work done
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) in close cooperation with the
political authorities of East Timor. It is in favour of
accelerating reconstruction assistance in order to
guarantee a successful transition and avoid any delay in
the timetable leading to independence.
We are extremely concerned by the instability
caused by the militias in both East and West Timor.
The new outbreaks of violence by them have taken the
lives of two “blue beret” peacekeepers and, more
22

recently, of three personnel of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The European Union calls on the Indonesian authorities
to adopt effective measures to control the militias
without delay.
The European Union also calls for the termination
of terrorist activity in Kashmir, the implementation of
confidence- and security-building measures and strict
respect for the line of control in order to restore a
peaceful local climate and enable the dialogue between
Pakistan and India to resume in the spirit of the Lahore
Declaration. The European Union will be looking
closely for such signs from the parties involved and
will encourage initiatives likely to resolve all the
disputes between the two countries.
It is important for the specific measures laid
down in Security Council resolution 1172 (1998) to be
implemented and for Pakistan and India to subscribe to
the international non-proliferation regime and sign the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Having advocated direct dialogue between the
two Koreas for many years, the European Union
welcomes the historic inter-Korean Summit that took
place in Pyongyang from 13-15 June this year. This is
an important step on the road to reconciliation between
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, opening bright prospects for
strengthening the stability of the region. We invite the
two countries, who have been members of the United
Nations since 1991, to continue this process in order to
help the Korean people heal the wounds of the past.
On the subject of Haiti, the European Union
recalls that full respect for the constitutional provisions
concerning the elections and electoral legislation
currently in force is the basis of democracy and the rule
of law.
The threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems is a crucial issue
that the European Union — which shares the concern
for international peace and security that ought to
inspire the nations represented here — is resolved to
combat relentlessly. To this end, international
cooperation must be stressed, along with the
development of multilateral standards for non-
proliferation, arms control and disarmament.
This is particularly true of chemical and
biological weapons, which have now been banned. The
Union is working towards the early conclusion of a
protocol containing reliable and effective verification
measures to strengthen the 1972 Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction. We are equally
determined to ensure nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, where so much progress has been made
since the signing of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to which 187 States are
now parties.
Since the end of the cold war, effective
instruments for ending the arms race and achieving
disarmament have begun to see the light of day, with
the halt to testing, the treaty enshrining it, the first two
START agreements to reduce the largest nuclear
arsenals and a host of unilateral decisions following the
same trend. Our priority must be to consolidate this
mechanism. A start was made with the Review
Conferences of 1995 and 2000; the results, which we
welcome, must be fully implemented.
We must give full weight to strengthening the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) through the widespread implementation of the
measures contained in the 1997 Model Protocol and to
remain alert to the issue of NPT compliance. We must
also revive the momentum of the multilateral
negotiations.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty, the completion of the operational readiness
of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO) and the negotiation at the Disarmament
Conference of a fissile material cut-off treaty are all
necessary steps that are of concern and ought to
mobilize all States, be they parties to the NPT or not.
The start of this negotiation implies urgent negotiations
on a working programme in the Conference on
Disarmament. International standards in this field can
only be effective if they are universal. Arsenal
reductions, which are the prime responsibility of the
nuclear-weapon States, must also be continued. This
will enable us to move closer to our common
objectives — namely, the elimination of nuclear
weapons and general, comprehensive disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
The issue of small arms and light weapons is just
as sensitive in many regions of the world. It deserves
special attention. The 15 European Union members
23

will contribute to the preparation of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will take place
during the summer of 2001, with the objective of
obtaining a positive and enforceable plan of action to
combat the destabilizing accumulation and spread of
small arms and light weapons. At the same time, the
Union shall continue its drive for the implementation
of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on their Destruction. It will join in the
efforts to achieve the total elimination of anti-
personnel mines.
On the very important subject of human rights,
the European Union will continue to support the efforts
of the United Nations to reach the goal set by the
Secretary-General to put human rights at the heart of
every aspect of its work. The best guarantee of solid
progress in this area is each person's awareness of the
importance of human rights and democracy and the
emergence of groups who actively promote them in
every country. In this connection, the European Union
welcomes the designation, thanks to the support of
many countries, of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders, Ms.
Jilani; we welcome her appointment and assure her of
our full backing as she undertakes her duties.
This year the United Nations has once again
demonstrated that it is the main forum of progress in
setting standards for human rights, as witnessed by the
adoption of two optional protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the sexual exploitation of
children and on children in armed conflicts. This
represents a major step forward in favour of the
protection of children. The European Union intends to
contribute actively to the special session of the United
Nations General Assembly for the follow-up to the
World Children's Summit, to be held next year, which
will give the international community yet another
opportunity to help this cause move forward.
Another important task, the World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, lies ahead. At the European
Preparatory Conference, to be held in October under
the auspices of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
the European Union will demonstrate its commitment
to combat all expressions of racism, whatever form
they take. The Union, all of whose members have
abolished the death penalty, calls on States that have
not yet done so to adopt a moratorium as a first step
towards the eventual abolition of this punishment,
which is contrary to human dignity.
The European Union will endeavour to strengthen
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
and will play an active role in the negotiations to be
held to that end. It earnestly hopes that this General
Assembly will adopt the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols at the
Palermo Conference next December. Given that such
crime, that one of its most odious manifestations is the
trafficking in human beings, and that it poses an ever-
growing threat to our societies, it is vital for the
international community to develop the means to
cooperate and fight against it effectively.
Lastly, the European Union looks forward to the
early establishment of the International Criminal Court.
I would like to recall that ratification by 42 States is
still needed for this.
By way of conclusion, I would like to stress one
last point, and that is sustainable development. The
European Union's contribution to international
cooperation is substantial. With 30 per cent of the
global gross domestic product, the Union contributes
36 per cent of the United Nations regular budget and
39 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. As you know,
it also contributes the rather large amount of around 55
per cent of the world total of official development
assistance. We are pleased with everything that was
said last week on this extremely important matter, and
we will continue our exemplary work on sustainable
development. Indeed, we believe that development is
one of the key ways of resolving all of the problems
facing us throughout the world, as outlined in my
statement, and the European Union wishes to express
its strong, continuing commitment to that end.I am conscious that
the central problem for all of us when we rise to speak
to the General Assembly is that there are too many
issues of concern to hope to address them all in one
speech. There is no shortage of challenges to the
United Nations as we meet for the first time in a new
century to debate the issues of a modern world.
It is a world united by the new technologies of
communication. We have never had so much
opportunity to share the know-how for economic
growth. Yet our world has never before been so divided
between rich and poor. In the year ahead, we must
make sure that all the United Nations agencies and its
international financial institutions work together in a
coordinated way to promote development and to reduce
debt.
It is also a world bound together by growth in
trade between our countries. But we failed at Seattle to
make further progress on removing the obstacles to that
trade. In the year ahead, we must launch a world trade
development round which is fair to those countries
whose main exports are agricultural rather than
industrial.
It is a world which faces a common threat to its
global climate. We are each learning the alarming rate
at which that climate is changing as the result of our
own actions. Before the end of the year, we must try to
reach agreement at the sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change to bring into effect the Kyoto
measures to stabilize climate change.
Each of these is an important challenge. Each of
them is a strategic priority for our work programme for
the coming year. This morning, though, I wish to focus
my remarks on the central theme of the Millennium
Summit and of this fifty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
How do we equip the United Nations with the
capacity in peacekeeping that matches the real
demands for it around our world?
In his opening address, the Secretary-General
invited us to give a swift response to the Brahimi
report on peacekeeping (A/55/305). The United
Kingdom is happy to respond to that invitation by
offering our support for the report's conclusions and
pledging our commitment to its implementation. The
report begins by reminding us that the United Nations
was founded, in the words of its Charter, to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war'. Too
often, though, we have failed to save those who needed
our protection from the suffering, the pain and the
terror of brutal conflict. We must be frank in facing up
to those failures if we are to learn their lessons. And
we must be determined to improve the capacity of this
Organization to keep the peace if we are to succeed in
the future.
I want to set out six tasks which we must address
if we are not to repeat past failures. First, we must
equip the United Nations with a more effective and
more rapid capacity for peacekeeping. In the space of
about one year, the number of troops on United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the globe has trebled.
The United Kingdom has forces operating in eight
different theatres where peacekeeping has been
authorized by the United Nations.
8

But it is not the new size of our peacekeeping
effort that demands changes. It is the different
character of the peacekeeping challenge. It used to be
the case that United Nations forces were typically
deployed to observe a ceasefire between two States
both of which wanted to end the fighting. Today, our
peacekeepers are typically deployed within States, not
between them, and often where one or more parties to
the conflict is not seriously committed to peace. In
those circumstances, United Nations peacekeepers need
a robust mandate. As the Brahimi report puts it, where
one side is violating a peace agreement, treating both
sides equally can amount to complicity with evil.
United Nations peacekeepers who witness violence
against civilians should be presumed to be mandated to
halt it.
But if those peacekeepers are to act with
determination, then we must equip them with the
capacity to do so. The United Nations needs a
Headquarters unit capable of rapid deployment within a
few weeks, not a few months, of a Security Council
resolution. And each of us must develop the number of
troops who are trained in the principles and practice of
peacekeeping whom we can commit to the United
Nations. That is why the United Kingdom has proposed
a permanent staff college for United Nations
peacekeeping. The United Kingdom has offered to host
such a resource for United Nations peacekeeping, if
that is welcome to other members of the General
Assembly.
The second task is to be more rapid and more
imaginative in tackling tension before it results in
conflict. By definition, any mission to restore peace is
an admission of failure to prevent conflict. As well as
coping with the consequences of conflict, we need to
address the root causes of conflict: poverty, bad
governance and the denial of freedom or of minority
rights. I welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
submit a report on conflict prevention early next year.
It will be a natural companion to the Brahimi report. I
hope it can enable us to develop an early warning
system which will alert us to potential conflict and give
our agencies the chance to offer help before it becomes
a real conflict.
Too often, internal conflict is fuelled by the
external demand for the illicit trade in diamonds or the
evil trade in drugs. Measures to ban conflict diamonds
from international sale or to defeat the drugs barons
must be key elements of any comprehensive strategy of
conflict prevention.
The third task is to take tighter control of the
flows of arms which supply conflict. As an
international community, we have put much effort into
controlling weapons of mass destruction. The good
progress we all made at the Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Treaty on the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) underlines the
importance which each of us attaches to this strategic
issue. The United Kingdom has ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, has reduced
by half its planned strategic nuclear warheads, and has
supplied greater transparency on our nuclear arsenal.
Yet, over the past decade, the true weapons of
mass destruction have been small arms, which have
killed 5 million people in conflicts around the globe.
Overwhelmingly, those killed were civilians rather than
soldiers. And, overwhelmingly, they were killed in
countries which do not manufacture firearms. We must
make a success next year of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects. We need to reach
agreement to mark firearms at the point of production
so that they can be traced. The United Kingdom would
support at that conference the presumption that military
firearms should not be licensed for sale other than to
legitimate Government bodies. And we must seek the
help of the international economic agencies, including
the World Bank, to fund and to reward with
development aid the surrender of firearms.
The fourth task is to provide the United Nations
with the civilian resources to promote reconciliation
and reconstruction. In Kosovo, and again now in East
Timor, we have learned that the end of conflict is only
the starting point. When the troops have brought peace,
we need judges and administrators to bring justice and
development. The peacekeepers must be followed by
peace-builders. In particular, we need to muster the
civilian police who can establish law and order in place
of violence and conflict. I was astonished to read in the
Brahimi report that this mighty international
organization has only nine civilian police on its
Headquarters staff, administering 8,600 civilian police
in the field around the world. I am confident that every
one of them is the very best, in keeping with the
tradition of United Nations staff. But if we are serious
about succeeding on the ground, we need a more
serious back-up at the centre. Four times in the past
9

decade, the United Nations has been called upon to
undertake a transitional civilian administration. We
need a better, permanent, capacity here at the centre to
support our operations in the field.
The fifth task is to enforce the international law
on crimes against humanity. If we are to have
international justice, we must have an international
court. The United Kingdom has given strong support to
the International Criminal Court, and we have just
published our draft legislation to ratify the treaty
setting up such a Court. The International Criminal
Court will send a strong warning to any future tyrants
that they will be called to account for their crimes
before the bar of international justice. It will be one of
the most powerful advances for human rights since we
agreed 50 years ago to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
And finally, we must strengthen the authority of
the United Nations. In 50 years, there has been no new
permanent member of the Security Council. The
Security Council needs to represent the world as it is in
this century, not the world as it was in the middle of the
last century. It needs to be made representative of the
100 or more countries that have joined as Members
since the Security Council was set up. The United
Kingdom supports a doubling of the permanent
membership to include Germany, Japan and three
countries from each of the continents of Asia, Africa
and Latin America. We also want more members
among those who are elected, in order that the Security
Council can be more representative of the General
Assembly.
For seven years, we have been debating this
question. It is becoming an issue of credibility for the
United Nations. How can we pretend to end conflict if
we cannot end this disagreement among ourselves? A
more representative, modern Security Council would
speak with more authority when it challenges those
who breach the peace.
I have been frank about where we must improve
our capacity for peacekeeping and strengthen our will
to halt conflict. But we should not underrate the
immense achievement of the United Nations. Our
Charter begins by recalling the untold sorrow to
mankind inflicted by two world wars. It was a Charter
written by ministers and officials determined to end
war between States. And in this they were remarkably
successful. External aggression between States is now
unusual.
But the benefits have been unevenly shared. The
industrialized nations have enjoyed half a century of
peace. That has provided the security and good order in
which their prosperity has advanced at a rate without
precedent in history. Yet, in the same half century,
people elsewhere in the globe have lived through
violence and conflict which have broken their human
rights and impoverished their standards of living. It is
largely poor countries that now experience the scourge
of war which our Charter sought to banish.
The challenge for the United Nations is to ensure
that the peace and security which have been enjoyed by
many Member States are shared by all. None of us can
prevent humanitarian catastrophe by acting alone. But
this United Nations can, if we act together.
The Brahimi report tells us what we need to do.
As an organization, we publish many reports. Nobody
could fault the capacity of the United Nations to
produce reports. But we are not always as good at
implementing them. Let us make sure that the Brahimi
report does not gather dust on library shelves but is put
into practice before we meet again next year. Let us
show the determination and the conviction that the
right in our Charter to be preserved from war is an
equal right for the people of all our nations, large and
small, rich and poor.India congratulates Mr. Harri
Holkeri on his election as President of the first General
Assembly of this millennium. We are encouraged that
he intends to take the Millennium Declaration as the
mandate for the work of the Organization during his
presidency.
I take this opportunity to sincerely compliment
and to place on record our high appreciation of Foreign
Minister Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia for his
guidance of the General Assembly in the past year,
which included three special sessions and, of course,
meticulous preparations for and a successful
conclusion to the Millennium Summit.
I join India's voice to those of other delegations
in noting with appreciation the dedication with which
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has served the United
Nations at a critical point.
I am delighted on this occasion to warmly
welcome Tuvalu as the newest Member of the United
Nations.
Just 10 days ago, almost 150 heads of State and
Government assembled here for the Millennium
Summit. Their assembly in such large numbers was as
unique as was the occasion itself. The Millennium
Declaration that was then adopted encapsulates a
shared vision that the international community work
together in constructive cooperation to meet collective
challenges, within the framework of the United
Nations. It was in this spirit that my Prime Minister
spoke, as did many others, of the need for the United
Nations to truly reflect the world of the twenty-first
century, to make it an effective instrument to translate
17

our vision into reality. The United Nations is the house
that we all share. We must strengthen it and ensure that
it is equal to our collective expectations and our joint
aspirations.
Peace, collective security and development
inspire the spirit of the United Nations. We enter the
twenty-first century with extraordinary collective
intellectual and technical capabilities. These are our
global tools for overcoming the challenges before us.
Peace and security for all is not just possible but is well
within our grasp. Stability and development are the
essential building blocks for the maintenance of peace
and security. Threats to peace can and do arise from
different sources. It is not just weapons of mass
destruction or an arms race that endanger peace, but
also dehumanizing poverty and lack of development.
We must act as confident nation States committed
to collective action and international cooperation, for
these are our means to provide wider effects of peace
and progress. We must reaffirm the principle of respect
for State sovereignty and non-interference in internal
affairs of countries. Thus, self-evidently, we must
abjure unilateral action. Whenever circumstances
warrant action by the Security Council, that action
must be firmly rooted in Charter provisions.
The Brahimi Panel's report contains a number of
proposals. We recommend that the General Assembly
examine this important report carefully and take
appropriate decisions to strengthen this vital United
Nations function of peacekeeping.
We support the Middle East peace process and
find the trend encouraging.
The historic summit between the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
too, augurs well for peace in the Korean peninsula.
Disarmament — global nuclear disarmament in
particular — is essential to engender a greater sense of
security among Member States. India has been and will
continue to be in the forefront of efforts towards global
nuclear disarmament and genuine non-proliferation.
We welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General in his report to the Millennium Summit to
convene an international conference on eliminating
nuclear danger. We urge commencement of
negotiations on a nuclear-weapons convention to bring
about a nuclear-weapon-free world. India remains
ready to participate in agreed and irreversible steps,
such as de-alerting of nuclear forces, thus lowering
nuclear danger, through accidental use or otherwise, as
well as a global agreement on no-first-use and on non-
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.
The situation with regard to the entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and the lack of progress on a programme of
work at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva
show the importance of building a consensus, both
within and amongst nations, on issues that affect
national and international security. We are conscious
that 155 countries are at present signatories of the
CTBT. We reiterate to them our continuing
commitment that India does not wish to stand in the
way of entry into force of the CTBT. India volunteered
to observe, and continues to observe, a moratorium on
further explosive nuclear testing. This meets the basic
obligations of the CTBT. India also remains ready to
engage in meaningful negotiations in the Conference
on Disarmament, including on a global treaty to ban
the future production of fissile material for weapons
purposes.
The illicit transfer, manufacture and circulation of
small arms, particularly by States to non-State actors
and to terrorist groups, and their intrinsic linkage with
terrorism and narco-trafficking are matters of very deep
concern to the world community. When they are
combined with religious fanaticism and military
adventurism, a threat is posed to the global civilized
norms to which we strive to adhere. The international
community can no longer afford to permit these
purveyors of death, outrage and destruction to continue
to inflict untold suffering upon innocents. We look
forward to a successful outcome of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to be held next year.
Terrorism is the global menace of our age. For
some, it tends to replace ideology and policy. India has
been the object of State-sponsored, cross-border
terrorism in its most inhuman manifestations for more
than a decade. Even as the international community
works together to curb, control and stamp out the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, we need to
continually focus our attention on the users of such
weapons — the terrorists. Terrorism is an assault on
human decency, a violation of the basic precepts of
democracy and the very antithesis of what the United
Nations represents and stands for. Because its principal
18

targets are the innocent, it is indeed the most flagrant
violation of basic human rights. It constitutes a crime
against humanity. It is also a threat to international
peace and security, especially when terrorists are
armed, financed and backed by Governments or their
agencies.
I urge all Members to work to strengthen the
international consensus and legal regimes against
terrorism. We have proposed the draft of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. I
urge all Members of the United Nations to give their
total support to this initiative.
Let me now dwell briefly on the instrument of our
choice to accomplish our global agenda: the United
Nations. There is but one United Nations; none
replicate it, nor can any replace it.
The membership of the United Nations has
increased manifold in the last half century, and today
stands at 189. Yet the Security Council continues to
have the same basic structure as in the colonized world
of 1945. The need for expansion of the membership of
the Security Council in both permanent and non-
permanent categories is self-evident. The impact of
actions of the Security Council is felt, with near total
exclusivity, by the developing countries. Yet they have
little influence in its decision-making. We have a
global consensus that the form taken by the Security
Council in the aftermath of the Second World War is
outmoded and that it must reflect the logic of an
enlarged membership. At the Millennium Summit more
than 150 States, at the highest level, endorsed the need
for a Council reformed in its representation. An
unrepresentative Security Council will lack the range
and depth of sensitivity, perceptiveness and
understanding of the realities that it will have to deal
with or the moral authority to take decisions. I reaffirm
India's willingness to take on the responsibilities of
permanent membership.
The General Assembly is the most important
organ of the United Nations. It is here that all States,
irrespective of considerations of strength, economy or
size, sit together as equals, embodying the democratic
principle of sovereign equality. There is a growing
feeling among Member States that the functioning and
role of the General Assembly has to be made more
effective. As the revolutions of the digital age reduce
distance to the click of a mouse, bringing us together
into a new global neighbourhood as never before in
history, and as forces of globalization inexorably lead
us to increasing interdependence, our canvas of
international cooperation and collective action has
rapidly expanded. It has also become vastly more
complex. The General Assembly has therefore to be
central in accepting this new responsibility, this new
challenge.
Even as we week to strengthen democratic
principles and practices in the United Nations, and
even as the spreading sweep of democracy casts aside
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes, we have
unfortunately witnessed some instances of regression
as well. Such acts move against the currents of our
times. The international community should oppose
these assaults on the spirit of our times and
uncompromisingly support and strengthen democratic
impulses, practices and norms. It should show its
solidarity with the people of such countries. The
Organization of African Unity and the Commonwealth
deserve our commendation for the steps they have
taken in this regard.
Developments in Fiji since 19 May this year have
caused us deep concern. We appreciate the action taken
by the Commonwealth after the overthrow of the
constitutionally elected democratic Government there.
We hope that Fiji will return immediately to the
constitutional base of 1997 and restore the rule by law
at the earliest opportunity by putting an end to racial
discrimination. This is in Fiji's own long-term interest.
We hope that the international community will exercise
its collective authority and influence to bring Fiji back
to the road of democracy and the rule of law.
It appears, sadly, that the world has forgotten
Afghanistan. The fratricidal conflict in that country
continues on account of the Taliban's pursuit of the
mirage of military success. It also continues because of
outside support, military and financial, to the Taliban.
This conflict and the Taliban's mediaeval obscurantist
ideologies continue to cause untold suffering to the
Afghan people. This adversely affects the peace and
security of the entire neighbourhood, from West to
Central Asia to South Asia. The negatives that emanate
from the Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan, in
the shape of terrorism, drug trafficking and the flow of
arms, cause justifiable concern all over the world. The
Taliban and their mentor must heed the world's
demands and abandon the path of conflict. We stand for
a comprehensive settlement in Afghanistan that
19

restores peace at the earliest and ensures the interests
and aspirations of all sections of that society.
We have consistently called upon the United
Nations to increase its development orientation and
engagement, which is a core responsibility. We
welcome and support the declaration of the Secretary-
General last week to the United Nations Development
Programme's ministerial meeting that deficit in
development will put in jeopardy all other goals of the
United Nations. To address the root causes of poverty
meaningfully, we need firm international commitments
to re-order and reshape international relations, in
consequence providing for equitable opportunities to
developing countries for resource earnings. Our call is
even more relevant in today's fast integrating world.
Developing countries and their people cannot
thrive on a diet of advice and goodwill alone. We
therefore hope that the forthcoming conference on
financing for development would endorse concrete
initiatives for mobilization of the required external
resources for development, whether from trade or
concessional flows, and treat this as a shared global
goal. In this context, it would be useful to establish the
difference that would be made if there was universal
adherence to the agreed official development
assistance(ODA) target of 0.7 per cent of Gross
National Product(GNP), within a specified time frame.
Nowhere is this more important than in the
continent of Africa. Africa's efforts need to be
adequately supported by the international community.
We believe that issues relating to the development of
African countries must remain at the forefront of the
work of the General Assembly.
The process of globalization, with revolutionary
leaps in communications and the great advance in
information technology and increased mobility of
capital, trade and technology, has produced new
potential for sustained economic growth. The benefits
of globalization have, however, not percolated to the
vast sections who live mired in poverty, without
shelter, in hunger and in deprivation. Globalization has
often been accompanied by enhanced poverty,
unemployment and consequent social disintegration.
This poses a major challenge. We have to determine an
inclusive concept of growth and development. We have
to strive for the uplifting of people in the largest sense,
and not simply in terms of sectoral advances. While
GDP growth rates and selective indicators may point to
growth in an economy, the elimination of poverty and
enhancement of the quality of life and creation of real
choices must be integral to the process of assessing the
success of development efforts.
In India, we have formulated development
strategies on the premise that economic and social
policies must subserve the primacy of the human being,
and in particular the poorest. Market forces and growth
alone are not the answer. Intervention to guarantee
social justice is crucial. Development based on uneven
rewards will not be supported by those who are not its
beneficiaries. It places great stress on the social fabric.
The fullest possible participation of the people in the
development process is the best guarantee for the
success of any growth strategy.
Many challenges lie ahead of us. Impediments to
sustained economic growth for developing countries
abound. Protectionist tendencies in developed
countries, a lack of political will to implement
commitments undertaken regarding development
finance and tardy alleviation of the debt burden of
developing countries aggravate the situation. Special
and differential treatment for developing countries
guaranteed under World Trade Organization (WTO)
provisions must be translated into operational reality.
Developed countries should not seek to restrict market
access to goods and services and free movement of
natural persons, especially at a time when developing
countries are being asked to open up their economies
and compete in the international economic domain.
Another challenge relates to reconciling the needs
of economic and industrial growth with the need for
preservation and protection of the environment. A safe
and healthy environment for our peoples is an
imperative. At the same time, all development cannot
be sacrificed at the absolutist altar of environmental
preservation. Sustainability of growth strategy and
environmental conservation cannot and should not
imply maintenance of poverty.
Developing countries have done commendable
work in the implementation of Agenda 21, in the
context of an exceptionally difficult global
environment. The promised resources from developed
countries have failed to materialize. The transfer of
technologies on preferential and concessional terms has
not been forthcoming. Indeed, impediments are placed
on technology transfer even on commercial terms. The
special session of the United Nations General
20

Assembly on the review and appraisal of the
implementation of Agenda 21 in 2002 should
concentrate on finding solutions in addressing such
unfulfilled commitments and providing reality and
operational content to the declaration that “eradication
of poverty is the over-riding priority of developing
countries”.
Children and issues relating to them are a priority.
We hope that the special session of the General
Assembly next year will concentrate on the
implementation of the Declaration of the World
Summit on Children.
Advancement of the democratic spirit and
overcoming challenges to it, growth with equity,
economic development with social justice and, as the
prize that we seek, the creation of a world where
injustice and deprivation give way to fulfilment and
welfare for all are among the goals that we should set
for ourselves at the dawn of this new century. The
challenge is nothing less than collective enlightened
global ownership.
The General Assembly once again faces a heavy
and challenging agenda on this long road before us. Let
us wish ourselves success in our endeavours.








I stand here today as
Israel's messenger of peace. The establishment of the
State of Israel was the fulfilment of the dream of a
people forced into exile 2,000 years ago. The
destruction of the Second Temple and the dissolution
of Jewish statehood were the result of our failure as a
nation to assume the proper political course, to opt for
accommodation with reality instead of engaging in
messianic hallucinations. Our punishment was very
severe indeed, but maybe it can serve as a lesson to
those nations and leaders who today may be tragically
led to believe that the dangerous inertia of romantic
mythology and unrealistic dreams is preferable to the
banality of a wise and prudent political course.
Most revolts are uprisings against a system.
Zionism was a revolt against destiny. It is this
expression of our re-encounter with the world of
political realities that eventually led us to the
restoration of Jewish statehood in 1948. Tragically,
however, historical and geopolitical circumstances
have put us in a prolonged, bitter conflict with the
Palestinian people.
It was thanks to the leadership of Prime Minister
Rabin and Chairman Arafat that, seven years ago,
Palestinians and Israelis were put on a track leading to
peace and reconciliation. We have been engaged in the
past seven years, but more intensely in the last year, in
a major effort, unprecedented in both scope and depth,
to resolve this 100-year-old conflict. This negotiating
process, and it alone, should be the foundation of a
peace agreement.
At this point, I would like to address my
colleagues from the Arab and Muslim world. I hope
that my words will convince them of the Israeli
Government's sincere intentions to achieve a
comprehensive peace based on respect, dignity and
fairness, which will end the Middle East conflict and
best serve the vital interests of the entire region.
The Jewish people have no quarrel with Islam.
On the contrary, we have the deepest respect for that
great Islamic civilization under whose wings Jewish
history — from Al-Andalus to Turkey, from Egypt to
Iraq, from the Jewish quarters of Tangier to Aleppo in
Syria — has known some of its finest hours and most
glorious cultural achievements. But even at the height
of the “Golden Age”, in the midst of the delights and
wonders of Muslim Spain, our people never abandoned
their dream of and yearning for Jerusalem, as expressed
in the words of the poet Yehuda Halevi more than 800
years ago:
“My heart is in the East, and I am in the furthest
reaches of the West. To thee my soul yearns from
the depth of the West.”
We are a small nation decimated by holocaust and
dispersion, but our heritage is rich. It was from our
eternal capital, Jerusalem — which, according to a
Muslim source,
“in the days of the people of Israel, was an area
larger than Cairo and Baghdad” —
that the message of monotheism was projected to
humanity. The Jewish holy sites and shrines in
Jerusalem are the very heart of the Jewish faith,
identity and history. For the past 2,000 years, Jews
have turned towards Temple Mount in prayer three
times a day.
“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget its cunning. Let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth if I do not recall thee”,
they pledged in joy and in sorrow.
For the past 30 years, Israel has consistently
demonstrated its commitment to freedom of religion
10

and worship in Jerusalem. Heads of the various
religious denominations in Jerusalem will attest to the
fact that the city has never been so open to all
believers. During the last month of Ramadan, a record
number, unheard of in the annals of Islam in Jerusalem,
of more than 400,000 Muslim worshippers attended
Friday prayers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I note this as an example of the deep respect
which Israel has for Islam and its followers. Just as we
do not question the sincerity of the sentiments of others
towards their holy sites in Jerusalem, we expect that
others will not question the Jewish people's deep, awe-
inspired attachment to Jerusalem and its holy sites,
from which we will never again be parted.
Politicians need not distort God's intentions for
the sake of negotiations. How refreshing it is that a
great number of Muslim scholars should attest to the
fact that, as the Supreme Court Judge Mujir el-din al-
Hanbali wrote in his History of Jerusalem and Hebron,
“David reigned for 40 years and before he died he
passed the monarchy on to his son Solomon and
told him to build the beit al-miqdas —  the
Temple”.
The expression beit al-miqdas —  that is, the House of
the Temple — became in many Muslim sources a
synonym of the word “Jerusalem”.
It is a travesty of historical truth to present the
Palestinian refugee problem as the result of mass
expulsion. There is no denying, however, that once the
Jews — who for thousands of years waited with
humility for their redemption — made their re-
encounter with history as a sovereign nation, they had
to assume the inherent immorality of war. The
suffering of the civilian population will always be a
burden on the conscience of any nation at war. The
Arab-Israeli conflict has no monopoly on this maxim.
Clearly, the Palestinian refugees were victims of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel, however, can assume
neither political nor moral responsibility for this
tragedy that was the direct result of the all-out
onslaught against reborn Israel — an onslaught
launched by the Arab armies in 1948. The Palestinian
refugee problem was born as the land was bisected by
the sword — not by design, Jewish or Arab. The
problem was largely the inevitable by-product of Arab
and Jewish fears and the protracted bitter fighting.
We believe that, once established, it is the
Palestinian State that should provide for the vindication
of the Palestinian claim for the right of return. The
notion is preposterous that a nation should create a
State only in order to gather its exiles in a
neighbouring State. Israel, however, has expressed its
willingness to actively participate in any international
effort and fund aimed at providing the financial
foundations for the resolution of the refugee problem.
Out of humanitarian considerations, Israel may also
accept a small and limited number of refugees within a
scheme of family reunification.
Let there be no doubt. The peace process is not
the objective, we need not sanctify the process. Peace,
not the process, is the objective. Peace is not about
more conventions, summits and resolutions; it is about
the future of our children, and about the seemingly
unattractive banalities of building the mechanisms of
cohabitation.
To the Palestinians we say: we need to
disentangle ourselves from this seemingly insoluble
conundrum. We know that unless your and our wounds
are healed, peace — not only the political peace but
also that of the mind and the conscience — will not be
complete. Yet, at the same time we realize that the total
satisfaction of our respective dreams or presumed
rights will lead us to perdition. Hence it is incumbent
on us to devise realistic ways to heal without opening
new wounds, to dignify our existence as free peoples
without putting into jeopardy the collective existence
of each other. Peace is not about twisting each other's
arms; it is about defining a common interest. I believe
that such an ideal compromise is not impossible to
achieve, while banishing the sword from this land of
God.
Peace has not materialized in full yet, but I
believe that we are moving in the right direction. In the
past year the Government of Prime Minister Ehud
Barak has made bold, courageous and unprecedented
moves towards peace. At Camp David we have
contemplated ideas and explored concepts relating to
the most sensitive and supposedly intractable issues.
Our sense is that breakthrough is possible, just as
failure may lead to breakdown. We have turned the sea
that separated us into a river. But, do we have the
courage and the determination to cross it?
I know I may not sound too objective by
vouching for Prime Minister Barak. But, I have come


here with the power of conviction that no Prime
Minister before him — and let no illusions be
harboured, no Prime Minister after him — will touch as
he has the outer limits of his options as an Israeli and a
Jew.
I do not underestimate the dilemmas facing
Chairman Arafat. He is the great leader of the
Palestinian people, and I know that the decision is not
easy for him either. But this is the destiny of leaders: to
always be prophets without honour. They should not
expect the applause of their constituencies, what really
matters is the judgement of future generations. I call
upon our Palestinian partners to realize that history has
brought us to a moment of truth and decision from
which we are not allowed to escape empty-handed
without inflicting severe punishments on our own
peoples.
Israel aspires to achieve a comprehensive peace
in the region and help move it into the future. Twenty
one years ago we signed a cornerstone peace treaty
with Egypt, followed by a peace treaty with Jordan and
an incipient but promising process of normalization
with the Maghreb and Gulf States. Eighteen years of
Israeli military presence in Lebanon have been
terminated by the Barak Government, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, and thanks
especially to the efforts and dedication of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. We have also delved into the
possibilities of reaching peace with Syria. We hope that
talks with Syria will resume as soon as possible and
that a fair and equitable agreement can be achieved.
Israel is determined to pursue peace and take the
calculated risks attached to it. But Israel will not
compromise — not now and not ever — on those
security and national interests that we deem vital.
While building our peace with the Palestinians we
cannot ignore security concerns inherent in the fact that
peace with the Palestinians is not our last peace. We
still have a dispute pending with Syria, and we are still
exposed to the most serious regional threats emanating
from revolutionary powers in the area.
Peace requires the active involvement of the
international community. The critical role played by
the United States, and especially the relentless
dedication and unequivocal commitment of President
Bill Clinton, has been massive and constructive. Once
again the United States has proven to be the
indispensable nation. We have also seen the European
Union rising to the task, and we commend the role of
the French Presidency and that of other key European
Governments. Peace needs the advice of the
international community and it will need that support
to cement peace once it is achieved.
We expect also to work closely with the Egyptian
Government for the cause of regional peace. I believe
that it is also important that Russia and the Arab world
express their opinions that now is the time to make
historical decisions. Time is an elusive and perishable
commodity. We are all running out of it.
We are open to developing wide spaces of
cooperation with our Palestinian neighbours and indeed
with all the countries of the Middle East, with dignity
and mutuality. But, we do not intend to impose our
experience on anybody, nor is it our intention to assert
our economic or technological presence amidst those of
our neighbours who do not want it. The leaders and the
elites throughout the Middle East do not need our
advice to know what are the real challenges ahead of us
all: modernizing the economy and combating disease,
hunger, poverty and illiteracy. Indeed, small islands of
excellence notwithstanding, the Middle East is in grave
danger of being on the wrong side of the digital divide.
In his inaugural speech in 1961, the late President
Kennedy invited his generation to join him in a
struggle:
“Now the trumpet summons us again — not as a
call to bear arms, though arms we need; not as a
call to battle, though embattled we are — but a
call to bear the burden of a long twilight
struggle, ... a struggle against the common
enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease and
war itself.”
Nothing will make us happier than joining hands
with our Arab neighbours with dignity and mutuality in
this most noble of struggles.
The Middle East is not tranquil yet. It is still
replete with armed conflicts, political hostilities and
animosities. Israel believes that regional arrangements
are crucial for arms control. A step-by-step approach,
commensurate with progress towards comprehensive
peace, is the right approach.
We are concerned by the expanding stockpiles of
conventional weapons in the region, as well as by
attempts made by Iran and Iraq to acquire and develop
12

non-conventional weapons, and by an increasing
missile threat.
Israel attaches great importance to the eventual
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the region. In order to reach that goal,
direct negotiations between all States of the region
must be held.
Last year saw a turnaround in Israel's relations
with the United Nations. After years of anomaly, Israel
was temporarily admitted to the Western European and
Other Group (WEOG) in New York. We hope that
Israel's admission to the Western Group in
international organizations based outside New York
will soon be secured.
The United Nations, and indeed most of its
Member States, played a major role in demanding that
Iran treat fairly the 13 Jews falsely accused, convicted
and sentenced for ludicrous charges of espionage. It is
in such instances that the international community has
the opportunity to express its discontent and exert
pressure on countries that break the norms of
behaviour.
On the issue of the reform of the Security
Council, is our opinion that the Security Council
should faithfully reflect the present geopolitical
picture, a picture that has changed beyond recognition
since the last enlargement of the Council in 1965. We
subscribe to the view that the right of veto — a safety
net against the possible arbitrariness of the General
Assembly — should remain in the hands of a limited
number of States.
Allow me a final reflection on the Israeli-
Palestinian dilemma.
The tragedy of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
stemmed from discrepant historical rhythms. The
history of our modern national movement has been
characterized by realistic responses to objective
historical conditions. The Palestinians have
consistently fought for the solutions of yesterday —
those they had rejected a generation or two earlier. This
persistent attempt to turn back the clock of history lies
at the root of many of the misfortunes that have
befallen the peoples of the region. Now it is time for all
of us to overcome dire memories and look forward.
Neither the physical nor the rhetorical war of images
will bring us any closer to peace and reconciliation. No
one has a monopoly on the mythology of suffering and
atrocities. In this tragic dispute we have all committed
acts of violence that we ought not to be proud of. To
the Palestinians we say, we are excited by the prospects
to overcome the troubled history of our relations in
order to shape our dreams of peace. Let us then join
hands in asking the world, which has been watching,
perplexed at, and sometimes even fuelling our wars, to
mobilize its resources for the benefit of our peoples.
And, let us be full partners in this international effort to
lay down the foundations of the Middle East of the
future. The creative energies of our peoples should at
long last be put to work in the service of peace, for as
the wisest of kings, King Solomon, the builder of the
Temple in Jerusalem, wrote thousands of years ago,
there is:
“A time for slaying and a time for healing ... a
time for war and a time for peace”. (The Holy
Bible, Ecclesiastes 3:3-8)







I begin by joining
others who have congratulated you, Mr. President, on
your election. I also assure you of the New Zealand
delegation's full cooperation as you carry out your
important duties.
I also welcome the admission last week of our
neighbour and friend Tuvalu into the United Nations.
The admission of four new Pacific nations in the space
of a year contributes to the truly universal character of
the Organization.
This general debate is taking place at the start of
a new century and a new millennium. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan has called upon the Member
States of the United Nations to harness the symbolic
power of the millennium to meet the real and urgent
needs of people in every part of the world. This is an
appropriate time to recommit ourselves to the beliefs,
the values and the principles that led to the birth of the
Organization 55 years ago.
Like many other Members of the Organization,
New Zealand is a small country that tries to take a
principled and independent view of the world. In 1945,
in San Francisco, we played an active part through the
Labour Prime Minister of the day, Peter Fraser, in
framing the Charter in which heads of State and
Government reaffirmed their faith here last week.
We have always viewed the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the practical task
of peacekeeping, as key roles of the United Nations.
We are currently making our largest-ever contribution
to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in East
Timor. This commitment underlines our full support for
the central role of the United Nations in building a
stable, democratic and economically viable East Timor
in partnership with its people. So do the non-military
personnel and development assistance we have
provided to help the East Timorese create essential
services.
Just over a year ago, the East Timorese people
voted overwhelmingly for an independent future, and I
had the privilege of being part of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) group that oversaw
that electoral process. We recall the horrors which
followed as pro-integration militias laid waste to the
territory, slaughtered innocent people and forced
thousands of East Timorese into West Timor.
Relative calm and stability has been restored in
most of East Timor, and we remember here today the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers from Australia,
Bangladesh, Nepal and my own country who in recent
24

months laid down their lives to help achieve this. But
the militias continue to hold sway in the border areas
among the refugees in West Timor. Unless brought
under control, these militias will destabilize both West
and East Timor.
The murder last week of three United Nations
humanitarian workers in Atambua in West Timor
repelled us all. New Zealand was able to respond
quickly, along with Australia, to the United Nations
call for help in evacuating their colleagues and non-
governmental organization personnel from Atambua.
We committed helicopters with security and medical
elements from our forces serving on the border with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). This airborne evacuation, which had
the cooperation of Indonesian forces, was successful.
But the pain and the outrage we feel at the murder of
three United Nations humanitarian workers remains
undiminished.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1319
(2000), insisted that the Government of Indonesia
disarm and disband the militia immediately to ensure
safety and security in the refugee camps and for
humanitarian workers, and to prevent cross-border
incursions into East Timor. It also called for those who
have carried out attacks on international personnel to
be brought to justice. These are binding obligations.
The world awaits action to implement them without
further delay.
Besides East Timor, New Zealand is at present
contributing to 12 other peacekeeping operations,
including in Kosovo, on the borders of Syria, Israel and
Lebanon, in the Prevlaka peninsula and in Sierra
Leone. New Zealand personnel also serve with the
Peace Monitoring Group in Bougainville, the
Multinational Force Organization (MFO) in Sinai and
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) in Bosnia. Being
conscious of the many challenges faced by the United
Nations in meeting its peacekeeping responsibilities,
we greatly welcome the Brahimi report. We trust that
the report's important recommendations will receive
serious and expeditious consideration during this
Millennium Assembly session, with a view to their
early implementation.
As the Brahimi report points out, weak mandates
and poor resourcing underlie most of those operations
which did not succeed in their objectives. We are
concerned too at the tendency to rely overly on
“coalitions of the willing” to carry out operations that
should be undertaken by the United Nations. The
failure of some Member States to pay their assessed
contributions on time, in full and without conditions
imposes an impossible burden on the Organization and
on troop contributors. We agree that the scale of
assessments for peacekeeping needs revision to make it
more equitable and transparent. Any revision must be
established in accordance with the longstanding
principle of apportioning expenses according to
Member States' capacity to pay.
Heads of State or Government agreed at the
Millennium Summit to intensify their efforts to achieve
a comprehensive reform of the Security Council in all
its aspects. In the past seven years of debate on this
matter, it has been shown just how difficult an issue it
is, especially in regard to how the Council might be
enlarged. There is no agreement on this aspect at this
time. And yet I am sure that most Member States
would agree that the Council must be made more
representative of today's membership as well as more
transparent in its working methods and more
democratic in its decision-making. If there is to be
progress towards an overall package deal on reform,
then compromises will have to be made.
At the heart of any reform, in New Zealand's
view, must be the curtailment of the veto, if indeed it
cannot be eliminated. We have argued this case since
1945, and we believe that it is even more relevant
today. A device which 50 years ago might have had the
utility of preventing the permanent members from
using the Organization to make war on one another has
in recent times served to frustrate the will of the wider
membership. I believe there is very broad agreement in
the General Assembly on the need to deal with the veto
urgently, so that the Security Council can be more
effective in carrying out its important responsibilities.
I would not want to suggest that there has been no
progress at all on Council reform. There have, in fact,
been some major steps forward in opening up the
Council's meetings and briefings to participation by
non-members. We are grateful for that. I would also
like to reaffirm New Zealand's strong support for the
Open-ended Working Group on Security Council
reform, whose deliberations have contributed to this
progress. In our view, the Working Group continues to
be the appropriate forum in which to pursue efforts
aimed at reforming the Council, because it is essential
for the health of the Organization that any reform
25

package enjoy the widest support and buy-in. Council
reform is too important a matter for back-room deals.
The Millennium Declaration contains some
important guidance on human rights, democracy and
good governance. For example, all countries are
enjoined to strengthen their capacity to implement the
principles and practices of democracy and respect for
human rights, including minority rights. This could not
be more timely for my own region, the South Pacific,
where over the past year we have seen the collapse of
democracy and governance in some countries in the
face of disputes over land and economic disparities and
as a result of ethnic tensions.
There are no easy solutions to some of the
problems the region faces, but one thing is clear, and
that is that the answer to these problems is not to adopt
political systems that discriminate against particular
ethnic groups, as some in Fiji this year have sought to
do. To do so simply breeds a deeper sense of frustration
and exclusion, which is a recipe for further instability.
Small States, especially small developing countries like
our neighbours in the Pacific, face particular challenges
from globalization. They are uniquely vulnerable to
external impacts. We need to find fresh and more
effective means to development.
It is essential to help countries build for
themselves inclusive and democratic forms of
government that in turn take account of cultural values.
Underpinning this must be robust and accountable
institutions, respect for the rule of law, independence
of the judiciary, an effective press, strong civil society
and, above all, greater public education to foster a
more widespread understanding of democratic values
and processes.
The Millennium Summit provided heads of State
or Government the opportunity to take action on a
range of treaties which are fundamental to the
development of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. My Prime Minister
took action in respect of six, and I record here in
particular New Zealand's ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
The practices of child prostitution, child
pornography and the appalling exploitation of children
to fight wars are a disgrace and a crime against
humanity which must be expunged. We encourage
others also to sign and ratify these agreements. I should
also add that we greatly welcome the recent decision
by the Economic and Social Council to establish a
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
At the Millennium Summit, world leaders agreed
to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear weapons. The outcome
of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
May, where the five nuclear-weapon States gave an
unequivocal political undertaking to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, demonstrates
a new determination to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons. This is a matter of real urgency. We must
promote the implementation of the new commitments.
New Zealand, with its new agenda partners, will submit
a draft resolution during this session of the General
Assembly.
New Zealand will also, in partnership with Brazil,
promote a southern hemisphere free of nuclear
weapons. In addition, we will, along with Australia,
Mexico and Japan, urge all countries that have yet to
do so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. We will also support further
preparations for the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and join calls for adherence to the Ottawa
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction.
New Zealand urges caution regarding decisions
on missile developments that could impact negatively
on nuclear disarmament, lead to a new nuclear arms
race or be inconsistent with the commitment to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. This is no time
for complacency. The United Nations disarmament and
arms-control machinery must engage again in
negotiations and other work on the new programme of
action agreed at the NPT Conference.
Leaders also declared their resolve to minimize
the adverse effects of United Nations economic
sanctions on innocent populations. Sanctions are an
important tool at the Security Council's disposal to
encourage compliance with its resolutions, but they
must be appropriately targeted for maximum effect.
They should not impose blanket measures which harm
26

innocent populations and even strengthen the grip of
despotic regimes. We support efforts within the
Organization to develop proposals for smarter, more
effective sanctions which apply pressure where it we
will have maximum impact.
The Millennium Declaration also speaks of the
need to protect our common environment. My Prime
Minister announced during the Summit our intention to
become party to the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by
mid-2002. I also wish to recall a particular
achievement over the past year in the holding of the
inaugural session of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and
the law of the sea. This is a significant step forward in
providing an appropriate forum for discussion of cross-
cutting oceans issues. The success of this process
should be judged by the extent to which there is
enhanced global understanding of oceans issues and an
increased willingness to cooperate and coordinate
cross-sectorally to address them.
Finally, the Millennium Declaration sets some
key goals for development and poverty eradication and
urges meeting the special needs of Africa. This year,
New Zealand was able to increase its core funding of
the United Nations Development Programme by more
than a third and of the United Nations Children's Fund
by almost a half. We believe that the United Nations
has a key role to play in the coordination of official
development assistance delivery. The preparations for
the event on financing for development are an excellent
demonstration of leadership by the Organization and a
significant step forward in furthering cooperation with
the Bretton Woods institutions. The crushing and
seemingly never-ending debt burden, especially on the
countries of Africa, must be urgently reduced. We must
also address more effectively the scourge of
HIV/AIDS.
Leaders at last week's Summit provided this
Millennium Assembly with a clear direction and a
strong mandate. Our countries have delegated us the
responsibility to realize that vision of a better world
and we must ensure through our efforts and
determination that we do not fail them.The Millennium Summit has given all of us
the priority task of establishing a new and equitable
world order — an order which would meet the interests
of all and every member of the international
community and ensure adequate solutions to the
problems with which the twenty-first century is
confronting us.
I am convinced that in this era of globalization
and enormous scientific and technological progress,
humankind can and should have a comprehensive and
forward-looking strategy. While in the past century
human civilization's main task was that of survival,
today we are confronted with significantly more
difficult problems which are much more varied in
terms of their scope and orientation.
The strategy of survival must give way to a
strategy of sustainable development aimed at ensuring
the prosperity of humankind. It must be based on the
recognition of the indivisibility of international
security, the use of modern scientific and technological
achievements for the benefit of the entire international
6

community, and a gradual closing of the development
gap between the various States.
These ambitious goals can be achieved only
through the preservation and strengthening of strategic
stability in its very broadest sense.
Strategic stability means further progress in the
disarmament process, reliable prevention of the spread
of weapons of mass destruction. Today nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are no longer the
subject of exclusive interaction between Russia, the
United States and other nuclear Powers. What is
needed is the effective involvement of multilateral
United Nations mechanisms and the entire world
community in those processes.
The outcome of the Millennium Summit provides
additional opportunities for the achievement of a major
breakthrough in disarmament in the twenty-first
century. This will require consistent joint efforts aimed
at strict compliance with the agreements already
concluded; a step-by-step reduction and eventual
elimination of weapons of mass destruction under
effective international control, and the limitation of
other types of armaments; and prevention of the arms
race in new spheres.
The time has come to give a new impetus to the
work of the Conference on Disarmament, which has
proved in practice the effectiveness of multilateral
diplomacy under the auspices of the United Nations.
Russia advocates the resumption of substantive work at
that forum on major issues on the disarmament agenda.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) provides an indispensable international
legal basis for nuclear disarmament. This has once
again been reaffirmed in full by the 2000 Review
Conference. Russia will work to ensure that the
decisions of the Millennium Assembly promote the
practical implementation of the agreements reached
during that Conference. It is precisely for that purpose
that the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir
Putin, put forward an initiative on the development and
implementation, under the auspices of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of an international
project designed to phase out the use of enriched
uranium and pure plutonium in the civilian nuclear
energy sector.
We are satisfied to note the increasing number of
States acceding to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT). Its speedy entry into force is in the interests of
the entire international community. Having ratified the
Treaty, we call on those that have yet not done so to
follow suit.
We expect that the United States will follow
Russia in completing ratification of the Treaty on the
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II), which will help make it
operational. We are ready to actively continue the
process of nuclear disarmament and to move towards
the conclusion of a START III Treaty with an even
lower threshold of nuclear warheads — down to 1,500
units. But this will be feasible only if the 1972 Anti-
Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty remains intact. It is
universally acknowledged that this major Treaty
concerns the vital security interests of the international
community as a whole. Its preservation is a key
element of global stability and a strong barrier to the
arms race in regard to nuclear weapons, missiles and
other weapons of mass destruction.
Russia will be introducing a draft resolution in
support of the ABM Treaty. We hope that, as was the
case last year, our initiative will receive broad support
within the United Nations.
A peaceful earth needs a peaceful outer space. At
the Millennium Summit the President of Russia
proposed the convening in Moscow of an international
conference on the prevention of the weaponization of
outer space, to take place in the spring of 2001, when
the fortieth anniversary of the first manned flight to
outer space is to be commemorated. We hope that this
proposal will be actively supported.
Strategic stability means reliable safeguarding of
international information security and counteracting
the use of scientific and technological achievements for
purposes incompatible with universal progress and the
maintenance of international peace. Aware of the great
importance of resolving these most urgent issues,
Russia will introduce for consideration by the General
Assembly a draft resolution entitled “Developments in
the field of informatization and telecommunications in
the context of international information security”.
Strategic stability also means enhancing peace
and security on all continents, settling existing regional
conflicts and preventing new ones and cutting off
external support for them. Millions of people must be
spared the death and suffering caused by local crises.
7

How can this goal be achieved? It is only through
the joint efforts of all States collectively responsible
for the world's destiny. Experience has shown that
unilateral enforcement actions cannot guarantee a
lasting and fair settlement of crisis situations.
The notions of sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of States are still very much alive. Disregard
for these principles and military intervention
circumventing the Security Council, whatever
humanitarian pretexts may be used, undermine the very
foundations of the world order and pave the way for
arbitrariness in international affairs.
The prevention and settlement of crises should
become a key element of international security in the
twenty-first century. When there is collective
determination and goodwill, even the most complex
and major problems lend themselves to a political
resolution.
All of this calls for improvement of the
peacekeeping potential of our Organization. People in
“hotbeds” of the planet — from Africa and Lebanon to
East Timor — rightly associate with the United Nations
“Blue Helmets” their hopes for an end to bloody
conflicts and for the beginning of complex
reconciliation processes. They expect rapid and
effective steps from us.
We hope that the Millennium Assembly will
provide us with an opportunity to engage in a
comprehensive analysis of the work of United Nations
peacekeeping mechanisms and outline ways to increase
their efficiency. Such is the objective of the report
(A/55/305) prepared under the aegis of the Secretary-
General by the Brahimi Panel. It is important to
considerably enhance the United Nations capacity for
the prompt deployment of peacekeeping operations.
This can be done through the early completion of the
system of standby arrangements. Peacekeeping units of
the United Nations Secretariat need to be strengthened,
with provision for professional planning, control and
command of operations.
Russia consistently advocates the expansion of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
structures in the field of peacekeeping. Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter remains the basis for such
interaction. Any regional or “coalition” operation
should be conducted under conditions of transparency
and of reporting to the United Nations Security
Council, whereas operations with enforcement
elements should be carried out only with the
authorization of the Security Council.
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
is a major regional partner of the United Nations in
peacekeeping. In many respects, it was the close
cooperation between the United Nations and the CIS
that made it possible to successfully resolve the
conflict in Tajikistan. Such interaction will
undoubtedly intensify along with the development of
the CIS anti-crisis potential. At the same time, for a
stable peace to prevail in the conflict-affected regions
in the CIS area the volume of international economic
and humanitarian aid for their rehabilitation should be
increased.
Russia attaches primary importance to the
expansion of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional mechanisms in Africa to
provide for more effective crisis response on the
continent. This is evidenced by the Russian
participation in peacekeeping operations in a number of
African countries.
The entire experience of United Nations
peacekeeping activities in recent years clearly shows
the priority of political and diplomatic methods of
conflict settlement. It is precisely these methods that
make it possible to minimize the suffering of the
civilian population and to find ways to a stable peace.
Strategic stability means the security and
tranquillity of civil society and of the individual. This
task can be accomplished only through the combined
efforts of the international community to counter
contemporary threats and challenges. These include,
inter alia, aggressive separatism and religious
extremism, illicit arms trafficking and organized crime.
Such an abhorrent manifestation of extremism as
international terrorism poses a direct threat to security
and stability. Today, terrorists of every stripe
sometimes act in a more organized fashion than does
the world community confronting them. We expect that
the United Nations will step up its mobilization of
international capacities to counteract terrorism. Such
cooperation must be based on the clear principles set
forth in the Security Council resolution 1269 (1999):
no support whatsoever, no safe havens for terrorists,
the inevitability of punishment for every terrorist act.
As to those who violate these principles the Security
Council must be ready to take measures against them
provided for in the United Nations Charter.
8

Russia intends to ratify the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Financing elaborated under
United Nations auspices. There is an urgent need to
complete work on the convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, and that work on a
comprehensive anti-terrorism convention should be
stepped up.
Terrorism is often closely linked with drug
trafficking and organized crime. We welcome the
completion of the development of an international
convention against organized crime. Russia intends to
sign it in the nearest future. We also support the
proposal on drafting an international convention on the
fight against corruption.
Strategic stability means promoting human rights
and freedoms everywhere. This area is an important
component of the United Nations activities aimed at
establishing a new world order based on international
law.
Russia contributes significantly to strengthening
the universal legal regime. Our country has signed the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Speaking of pooling the efforts of States to
resolve the twofold task of maintaining international
security and ensuring human security, human rights and
freedoms, we should constantly bear in mind that in the
twentieth century the rule of the ideology of racial
hatred cost mankind scores of millions of human lives.
Unfortunately, today, 55 years after the great victory it
is still premature to speak of total eradication of the
bacillus of national superiority.
We cannot accept a situation in which people do
not have the right to use their mother tongue, are
deprived of their citizenship and jobs on ethnic
grounds, when fighters against fascism are put behind
bars while former fascists find favour with the
authorities. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
should firmly respond to all such manifestations.
Strategic stability must be based on a solid
material foundation. The twenty-first century will go
down in history as the century of mankind's
breakthrough to a qualitatively new level of
development only if we manage to preserve peace and
international security and at the same time impart
necessary dynamism and depth to the process of
economic and technological equalization between the
enormous number of developing countries and the
comparatively small group of leading countries. This
goal cannot be achieved overnight. This will require —
under the unifying and guiding hand of the United
Nations — a mechanism for collective democratic
management of the international monetary, trade and
economic systems. They must become more rational
and fair and be targeted against poverty and
underdevelopment.
It is important to make the most of those
opportunities which have been opened up by the new
technological revolution in order to initiate the process
of bridging the gap in the levels of development.
Information and communications technologies whose
potential for speeding up global development is only
comparable to the invention of written language can
serve as a driving force of that process. A chance has
emerged to skip over several traditional stages of
development through the introduction of global
computer literacy and information technologies.
Mankind, equipped with this powerful instrument, will
obtain a real opportunity to begin creating conditions
for a decent life and the all-around development of
human beings everywhere on earth.
Strategic stability means the preservation of a
clean and healthy environment for the present and
future generations. The United Nations has done a
great deal to mobilize international efforts in that
important field. The “Rio+10” Forum, to be held in
2002, will provide an opportunity not only to sum up
the results of those activities but also to outline a
future-oriented follow-up programme.
Russia supports the expansion of international
cooperation within the United Nations framework in
the areas of biodiversity, climate, combating
desertification, as well as of forest preservation.
The recent increase over the last few years in the
number of natural and man-made disasters and the
consequent growth of the scope of human and material
losses have made disaster management one of the most
formidable global challenges facing mankind. While
intensifying the United Nations efforts to promote
international cooperation in this field, special attention
must be paid to the use of state-of-the-art specialized
technologies for disaster management and to the search
for innovative mechanisms for their use in the interests
of the entire international community.
9

The United Nations — a unique universal forum
in every respect, which has demonstrated in practice its
central role in managing international affairs — should
become a guarantor of such comprehensive strategic
stability. Russia welcomes the consensus reached at the
Millennium Summit on consolidating the United
Nations as the axis of the present world order. The time
has come for concrete collective measures to transform
the Organization into a sort of operational headquarters
for coordinating activities aimed at ensuring a new
strategic stability based on the principles of
multilateralism, equality and solidarity in resolving
global problems.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again that the Russian Federation, for its part, is open
to the closest interaction with all members of the
international community in order to make strategic
stability a cornerstone of the world order in the twenty-
first century and the United Nations its reliable
guarantor.





I am
honoured to address the Assembly on behalf of the
United States and to reinforce the eloquent message
President C1inton conveyed during last week's
Millennium Summit. Because my father worked here
when I was young, I have always considered myself a
child of the United Nations. And because I had the
privilege to serve here as America's Permanent
Representative, I feel at home and so will speak
plainly.
The members of this body reflect virtually every
culture, ethnicity and geographical region. We are city
and country, inland and island, tropical and temperate,
developing and industrialized. We are as diverse as
humanity.
And yet, in responding to the daunting demands
of this new era, we are bound together by the interests
we share and the ideals to which we aspire.
We all have a stake in building peace and
relieving poverty, championing development and
curbing disease. We all want to see the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction reduced, refugees
cared for, children nourished, the environment
protected, and the status of women advanced.
We all believe the benefits of globalization must
be allocated more broadly within and among societies.
Because if the new technologies are to ease the old
problems, they must help the many who today lack
access and skills, so that every village becomes a home
to opportunity and every school a midwife to hope.
As the Millennium Summit reflected, we have no
shortage of worthy goals. We are right to aim high and
take on the mightiest tasks.
But as the Secretary-General has said, progress
depends on working together. We need all hands on
deck, pulling in the same direction. For each of us, that
responsibility begins at home because the international
community cannot help any nation that is not striving
to help itself.
Each Government has an obligation to observe
international norms on human rights, uphold the rule of
law, fight corruption and raise awareness about
HIV/AIDS. But in the twenty-first century, no nation
can protect and serve its people simply by going it
alone and that is why we  all benefit from
strengthening regional bodies such as the Organization
of American States (OAS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Because of their unique expertise and regional
legitimacy, they can be instruments for solving some of
the hardest challenges we face. But they will succeed
only if we raise our expectations of these
organizations, call upon them to act boldly and back
them when they do.
Regional bodies can contribute much to the
purposes outlined in the Charter, and the goals
established during the Millennium Summit. But here
again, they cannot do it all.
8

The role of the United Nations is also vital,
because no other institution combines a comprehensive
mandate with near universal representation and global
reach.
We all have an interest in the success of the
United Nations. That is its greatest strength, and also
its burden, because 189 nations have to work very hard
if they are to agree.
I remember when I came to New York in 1993, I
was told by cynics that the United Nations was too
bureaucratic to change, and too big ever to achieve
consensus on measures to improve its governance.
Those cynics were wrong. With support from
many countries, we have made impressive progress.
Compared to seven years ago, the United Nations
accomplishes more and wastes less. Accountability has
increased and duplication diminished.
The Internal Oversight Office, which did not exist
in 1993, has grown steadily more rigorous and is
responsible for tens of millions of dollars of savings. A
culture of transparency and results is slowly but surely
taking hold. Moreover, both United Nations
Headquarters and the entire United Nations system are
better led than they have ever been.
United Nations leaders and Members can take
pride in the gains made, but we all know there is much
more work to be done.
That is why we must back the Secretary General's
efforts to further improve United Nations management,
recognizing that every dollar wasted is a dollar lost to
the fight against poverty and to the achievement of
other urgent goals.
We must also move ahead rapidly to strengthen
peacekeeping, because it is the most visible and vital
yardstick of United Nations success and, for people in
strife-torn regions, often means the difference between
a normal life and no life at all.
There is no magic formula for curing the ills that
have plagued United Nations peace operations in the
past. But the report, just prepared by Ambassador
Brahimi's team, is a solid place to start.
As President Clinton said last week, we need to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers can be
deployed with the right training and equipment and the
right rules of engagement so they can achieve, not
merely attempt, their missions.
This will require a larger peacekeeping staff, on
permanent assignment, comprised of the best talent and
experience we can find.
It will require military planners the world over to
recognize that training for peace operations is a
legitimate part of every nation's security strategy. It
will require the ability to deploy rapidly not only
United Nations military forces, but also civilian police
and experts in law enforcement and judicial reform. It
will demand improved coordination between military
peacekeepers and civilian builders of peace, so that
missions begun are completed and recovery bred by
reconciliation can take hold.
And it will require additional resources from my
Government and from each of yours. And by
“additional”, I mean resources that should not come at
the expense of other core United Nations goals.
The United States will heed the Secretary-
General's request that we work together to consider
and implement the best recommendations of the
Brahimi report.
Whether for peacekeeping or programmes, the
United Nations also needs a sustainable and equitable
system of financing. We do not have that today.
Member States, including my own, must do a better job
of making payments on time. But we must also look
afresh at the method used to allocate responsibility for
United Nations costs.
Last week, the Security Council called for
adjustments in the scale of assessments. This plea has
been echoed by dozens of other countries and should
be acted upon by the General Assembly this fall.
A more equitable system should provide a much
stronger foundation for United Nations programmes
and missions. It should preserve the special
responsibility for peacekeeping of the Security
Council's permanent members. It should retain a
heavily discounted rate for the poorest countries. And
it should reduce the United Nations overall reliance on
payments from the United States, while at the same
time enabling my Government to write a check to the
United Nations for nearly $600 million in prior
obligations.
9

Clearly, adjustments are long overdue. The
United Nations needs a firm and reliable financial base.
In the weeks ahead, the United States will be pleased to
work with members to accomplish this landmark goal.
Further improvements in management and
peacekeeping and a sounder financial base are a vital
step towards a stronger and more effective United
Nations. But we must also stand up to the campaign
launched by Baghdad against the United Nations
authority and international law.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) provides
an effective plan for protecting world security through
resumed weapons inspections and monitoring inside
Iraq. It has expanded the oil-for-food programme that
has delivered $8 billion in humanitarian supplies to
Iraqi civilians, with $6 billion more on the way. And it
would enable Iraq, through compliance with the
resolution's terms, to achieve an early suspension of
sanctions. Thus far, Baghdad has flatly refused to
accept the resolution. The regime's strategy is to ignore
its United Nations Charter obligations and to seek to
preserve at all costs its capacity to produce the
deadliest weapons humanity has ever known.
We must continue to do all we can to ease the
hardships faced by Iraq's people. But we must also
defend the integrity of this institution, our security and
international law.
The Millennium Summit illustrated the United
Nations long-standing role as a forum for articulating
consensus goals. But achieving these objectives will
require action at all levels, from local to global. It will
also require a willingness to move well beyond the
limits and habits of the past.
Today, the United Nations is taking on a wide
array of new issues, what I call “people issues”,
because they so directly affect the lives of our citizens.
They include the challenge of protecting our planet by
limiting greenhouse gas emissions; securing safe water
supplies; halting desertification; and putting a stop to
trafficking in human beings. They especially include
the fight against HIV/AIDS, which was highlighted in
a letter to the Secretary-General signed by the women
Foreign Ministers last night. These and similar
challenges are sure to be important components of
twenty-first century diplomacy, and because they are
global in scope, require a global response.
The United Nations is also playing an increased
role in areas where cold war divisions once held it
back. Over the past decade, United Nations entities
have contributed much by prosecuting war criminals,
promoting democracy, supporting human rights and
aiding the fight against illegal drugs.
These issues require a willingness to take a stand,
as the United Nations has done in holding accountable
the perpetrators of ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and the
Balkans; striving to end rebel outrages in Sierra Leone;
and expressing opposition to the long-standing and
ongoing violation of basic human rights in Burma.
Let me say this morning that when the Burmese
Government tries to blame the victims for the crime,
and say that Aung San Suu Kyi and her party are
responsible for their own repression, I can only reply
that much the same was once said about Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Václav
Havel. The world is not fooled, and we must not be
silent.
Some argue that speaking out in defence of
human rights constitutes interference in internal affairs.
I believe it helps to fulfil the purposes of the United
Nations Charter, because when international norms are
assaulted, the United Nations must do more than
simply observe injustice, or report upon it, or
sympathize with the victims. We must do all we can,
where we can, to stop the perpetrators.
This requires the active backing and participation
of United Nations Members, so that respect for
international law becomes steadily more universal and
the incentives for observing global standards
progressively more clear.
The result, if we are united and determined
enough, will be a world of greater security, justice and
peace. Realistically, this is essential, if we are to
achieve the ambitious social goals we have set.
But there is one other essential element as well,
and that is democracy. This past summer in Poland, for
the first time, more than 100 nations came together to
reaffirm democratic principles and ensure that the
democratic tide remains a rising one around the world.
We did this not because democracy always
produces good Governments, for it does not. But we
are convinced by the evidence of the old century that
the hopes we share for the new will more readily be
10

accomplished if people are able to live and work in
freedom.
Democracy is the one road we can all walk down
together and the best system yet devised for sowing
and growing the seeds of economic opportunity.
In promoting democracy, we are not attempting to
impose our values on anyone else. In fact, this is not
possible, because democracy, by definition, enables
citizens within a country to shape their own destinies in
accordance with their own convictions and ideals.
Make no mistake. In any country, at any time,
dictatorship is an imposition. Democracy is a choice.
As we have learned during the last 55 years, the
United Nations provides no guarantees of global peace
or prosperity. But it can play a vital role as catalyst and
coordinator, and as a bridge connecting the
contributions of one to another.
To those who would judge it harshly, I would
respond not by pointing first to the deliberations of
diplomats such as myself, in surroundings such as
these. Instead, I would point to the day-to-day efforts
of United Nations workers caring for refugees, feeding
children, providing shelter and preventing disease.
I would point to the men and women on the front
lines, from Port-au-Prince to Freetown, and from
Kosovo to Kisangani, doing some of the world's
hardest work, and, as we have been reminded by the
recent slayings of employees of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
East Timor, also the most dangerous. It is their efforts
and sacrifice, in partnership with so many indigenous
and other non-governmental organizations, that truly
remind us of the United Nations purpose and of our
kinship with one another.
This is, I expect, my last official speech to a
United Nations audience. As I stand before you, I am
deeply conscious not only of our many
accomplishments, but also of the tasks not yet
completed.
I am grieved by the conflicts that still rage, and
the basic rights and freedoms still denied. I am
frustrated by the gaps that still exist between our ideals
and actions, and alarmed by the deepening material
divide that ultimately threatens every nation, rich and
poor alike.
There are those who say it is naïve to think that
the future can be made better than the past. I am
reminded that this institution was founded by men and
women who were as realistic as any human beings
could be, for they were the survivors of the worst
conflict our world has known and determined that
succeeding generations should be saved from holocaust
and war. They had faith. Surely we, as well, must have
faith that by working together within and outside this
Organization, we can move together, step by step
towards the lofty goals we have set, and thereby bring
about a world more peaceful, prosperous and free than
it has ever been. Since 1993, it has been my privilege
to work with so many of you, from every part of the
globe, in support of the interests we have in common
and the dreams our people share.
This morning, I want to thank you for your
friendship; pledge my cooperation in the months
immediately ahead; and ask respectfully, in turn, for
yours. I promise, as well, to serve the cause of
international progress and individual liberty not only
for as long as I am in office, but for as long as I am
alive.﻿Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this historic Assembly and also to
congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab,
on his sterling guidance of the Assembly's work during
the previous session.
The dawn of the new millennium offers us a
unique opportunity to reflect on the successes and
failures of the United Nations since its inception. It
also provides us with an opportunity to dream about the
future of humanity in the third millennium. The
founders of the United Nations based the Charter on
the assertion of human dignity, human rights and the
equality of women and men and the aim of promoting
better social standards. Indeed, billions of people today
enjoy human rights and live in dignity, free from
disease, ignorance and fear, enjoying the benefits of
technology and scientific advances and able to take full
advantage of the process of globalization. Equally,
there are billions who are humiliated, degraded and
stripped of their innate human dignity and worth by
poverty, disease, ignorance, homelessness, hunger and
wars.
This Assembly, following the very inspiring
Millennium Summit, provides us with an opportunity
to reflect on the wise words of the leaders of the world
and on the Declaration they adopted. Global consensus
has at last emerged and confirms that we live in one
world and belong to the same human race; therefore,
while each Government has the responsibility to take
care of its citizens, we all have to work together for the
good of humanity as a whole. This means that we have
to create a people-centred world that is more caring,
with a strong sense of solidarity, where we are all our
brothers' and sisters' keepers, if I may borrow those
words from the Bible.
There is also universal consensus now that while
billions of people are being degraded and dehumanized
by poverty, disease and hunger, there are indeed
enough resources in the world to feed, educate and
restore the dignity of all human beings and make this
world a better place for all. It is therefore clear that the
eradication of hunger and poverty should be the
priority of all priorities and should be our collective
responsibility.
There is also agreement that we have a collective
responsibility in dealing with infectious diseases, such
as malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted
diseases, especially HIV/AIDS. There is a need to
mobilize material and human resources, provide better
infrastructure, provide health education and ensure
access to affordable medicine.
There is also consensus that Africa poses the
biggest development challenge. The success or failure
of the United Nations and of humankind as a whole in
this century will be determined by their success in
dealing with the African development challenge.
We would like to urge the United Nations, in
partnership with the Organization of African Unity and
regional organizations, to accelerate the work towards
peace and stability in many of the countries of our
continent, such as Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Eritrea,
Somalia, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sudan and Burundi, so that these countries may
take their rightful place in the continent, be seized with
the needs of their people, promote development,
produce and export goods and not be areas of perpetual
suffering and war that result in their being the net
exporters of refugees. We welcome the Brahimi report
and are studying it, as it contains very serious
suggestions about the future operations of the United
Nations.
The United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, is humanity's principal agent for collective
security and it needs urgent reform so as to be able to
live up to this solemn responsibility. The world has
changed dramatically and continues to do so. It is
imperative that the composition and role of the
Security Council reflect that change and not remain
obsolete. The Bretton Woods institutions are equally in
need of urgent reform in order to discharge their
mandate and respond to the new development
12

challenge. The World Trade Organization has to adapt
its international trade rules so that they are equitable
and fair and take account of global development
challenges.
It is a source of great concern to the developing
countries that, increasingly, decisions are taken outside
the United Nations and other global structures by
developed and rich countries when these decisions
have a great impact on the poorer countries and
directly affect the lives of billions of poor people. That
is why a partnership between poor and rich countries
and dialogue between North and South are so critical.
Nuclear weapons still constitute a threat to our
planet. We have to pursue the path of universal
disarmament and the destruction of all weapons of
mass destruction.
The need to protect the environment has assumed
greater importance and we can succeed only if we work
together.
The self-determination of the people of East
Timor, Western Sahara and Palestine must be a concern
to all of us. To this end, we urge the United Nations to
do all it can to expedite the processes in East Timor
and Western Sahara. We commend the peace efforts in
the Middle East and the role of the United States. We
would like to pledge our support to the Palestinian and
Israeli leaderships as they try to find creative solutions
to their problems. They must be urged to take
advantage of this unique historic moment, as it seems
that a real possibility exists for a solution.
The equality of women and men still remains a
subject of great concern. All we need to do is look
around this Hall to realize how far we are from
realizing the vision of the founding Members of the
United Nations. Secondly, the feminization of poverty
is a big problem. The marginalization of women, both
in their countries and in the multilateral forums, means
that our countries and organizations, including the
United Nations, are functioning at half-capacity and are
deprived of the unique qualities, energies and creativity
that women would bring. In this context, I cannot
forget the plight of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma. She
deserves active support from this gathering and the
world.
The United Nations was founded in part to make
sure that the monsters of fascism and racism should not
rear their ugly heads again. Unfortunately, all over the
world racism and xenophobia are on the increase.
Some countries and regions are responding by
developing a new fortress mentality, which does not
help the situation. This should flash red warning lights
to all of us and activate our utmost vigilance against
the scourges of racism and xenophobia.
It is only when we turn our backs on racism,
xenophobia and other forms of discrimination that we
can succeed in building a caring world where we feel
diminished by the suffering and hunger of other human
beings. It was for this reason that we felt a sense of
obligation and agreed to host the world racism
Conference next year. Of course, our country and
people experienced the most systematic, most brutal
and most inhumane form of racism, which the United
Nations declared a crime against humanity. We are
happy to take our place in the fight against racism in
our country and in the world. It is our fervent hope that
the Conference will come up with a programme of
action against racism, xenophobia and other forms of
discrimination.
In conclusion, let us all put our collective will,
courage and intellectual creativity together in shaping
the dream of a better world; a world of solidarity; a
world where no child should starve or die of
preventable and curable diseases; a world where no
child will be deprived of schooling; a world where
children will not be sent to war; a world where no child
can be a slave or be used as an object for trafficking; a
world where children grow up as children and play
with toys and do not have to be breadwinners or worry
about where their next meal is going to come from; a
world where women will enjoy all rights and where the
eradication of poverty and war is our collective
responsibility.
The dream for the new millennium is indeed
realisable. If we act with courage and determination,
we can turn the hopes of billions across the world into
reality.Please allow me to extend my warm congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident
that, with your wisdom and experience, and with the
support and coordinated efforts of the member States,
the Millennium Assembly will successfully complete
all its work. At the same time, I would like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Mr. Gurirab for the
contribution he made as President of the General
Assembly at its last session.
The Millennium Summit, which attracted
worldwide attention, has just concluded. The United
Nations Millennium Declaration is a consensus reached
by world leaders on how to meet the major challenges
facing mankind today. The Declaration reviews and
sums up the course that the United Nations has
travelled over the past 55 years. More importantly, it
offers a blueprint for the United Nations in the new
century and the new millennium and important
guidance to people around the world in their pursuit of
peace, development and common progress. I would like
to add my voice to the call to action made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan at the closing ceremony
of the Summit. We should work together to turn the
consensus reached at the Summit into action and usher
in a new era of peace and development for people all
over the world.
It is the primary mission of the United Nations in
the new century to uphold the purposes and principles
of its Charter, promote democracy in international
relations, maintain world peace and stability and
facilitate the development and prosperity of all
countries. The United Nations Charter is a
manifestation of the peoples' aspiration to equality,
justice and freedom. Over the past 55 years, the United
Nations has adhered to the Charter aims of
safeguarding peace, developing friendship and
promoting cooperation, as well as the core principles
guiding international relations, such as sovereign
equality and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States. It is precisely for these reasons that the United
Nations has grown in strength and its membership
increased from 51 to 189. This Organization is still
playing an irreplaceable role in world affairs.
The history of the past 55 years has amply proved
the effectiveness of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Today, global issues have
made our interests intertwined and modern technology
has made our communication easier. In these
circumstances, we need more than ever to face our
common challenges together on the basis of equality,
mutual respect and democratic consultation. The
purposes and principles of the Charter are by no means
outdated, but are rather of greater relevance today.
Democracy in international relations requires
compliance with the principle of sovereign equality, as
5

provided for in the United Nations Charter. Countries
differ in size, strength and wealth, but they are all
equal members of the international community. None
should be discriminated against and their state
sovereignty brooks no encroachment. The internal
affairs of a country should be managed by the people of
that country and major world affairs should be decided
by all countries through consultation. The response to
global challenges calls for worldwide cooperation and
coordination. This is a necessity of our times and a
prerequisite for the establishment of a fair and just new
international political order. It is also the foundation
and source of vitality for the United Nations in the new
century.
The reform of the United Nations should give full
expression to democracy in international relations. The
reform is aimed at better safeguarding the fundamental
rights and interests of all Member States and,
especially, at truly reflecting the will of developing
countries, which make up the bulk of United Nations
membership. It should not merely satisfy the needs of a
few countries. The reform of the Security Council
should seek primarily to increase representation of
developing countries and should be based on extensive
deliberations among Member States. It is against the
will of the overwhelming majority of Member States to
set arbitrar deadlines or to force the passage of
immature plans.
There is general agreement among the United
Nations Member States on basing the scale
methodology of regular budget and peacekeeping
assessment on the principle of the capacity to pay. This
methodology is also one that has been confirmed time
and again by the General Assembly through its
resolutions and should therefore be abided by in
whatever circumstances. Any adjustment to this
methodology should take into full account the specific
economic conditions of developing countries. Such
adjustments should be made only when there is
consensus among all Member States through extensive
consultation, thus facilitating the normal and sound
operation of the United Nations.
Another important historical task facing the
United Nations is to respond to globalization and to
achieve the common development of mankind. The
twentieth century has seen both unprecedented
economic prosperity and the greatest polarization. In
the last decade of the century, economic globalization
has advanced at the fastest pace, while the gap between
the North and the South has continued to widen.
According to the World Bank, the revenue of the low-
income countries accounts for only 6 per cent of the
world's total, although they make up more than half of
the world's population, while that of the developed
countries is 80 per cent with only one sixth of the
world population.
It is especially worrisome that there is an even
wider gap between developing and developed countries
in the field of advanced technology. The new economy
is so far benefiting only the rich countries. Most
developing countries are still information have-nots.
Should this situation be allowed to continue, many
developing countries will long remain deprived of the
opportunity to participate in technological progress and
economic growth and the world will be further
polarized.
To prevent poverty from swallowing up
achievements of development and to prevent social
injustice from shaking the basis of global stability, the
United Nations must play its due role in narrowing the
gap between the rich and the poor and bringing about
common prosperity to the world. It is an unavoidable
major responsibility of the United Nations in the new
century to promote the establishment of a new
international economic order based on cooperation on
an equal footing and aimed at common development
and to ensure that economic globalization benefits
everybody in the world.
The United Nations should give top priority to the
issue of development, make efforts to change the
current situation in which global economic affairs are
dominated by only a few countries and ensure
developing countries their right to equal participation
in economic decision-making. In making or revising
global economic rules of the game, consideration
should first be given to the need of developing
countries in order to facilitate their development and
reduce the risks they may face when participating in
globalization. The United Nations should also mobilize
all the resources available and encourage the
international community to narrow the “digital divide”,
and it should help developing countries to seize, as far
as they can, the opportunities brought about by the
scientific and technological advancement driven by the
information revolution. The United Nations also has
the responsibility for introducing new rules to the
world to make science and technology truly serve all of
6

mankind and the lofty cause of peace and development
in the world.
As drastic and profound changes are taking place
in the international situation, what kind of security
concept should be embraced is a major subject before
the United Nations and all its Member States. Global
strategic stability is the foundation on which world
security rests. And the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty is an important cornerstone for global
strategic stability. Any move to undermine the totality
and effectiveness of the Treaty will have a profound
negative impact on world peace and security. The
proposal for a national missile defence system that is
prohibited by the ABM Treaty is essentially aimed at
seeking unilateral military and strategic supremacy, and
thus a typical example of the cold war mentality. Such
a plan, if implemented, will only bring serious negative
consequences to the security of the whole world. The
adoption by the General Assembly of the resolution on
preservation of and compliance with the ABM Treaty
(A/54/54 A) at its fifty-fourth session by an
overwhelming majority is an indicator of the firm will
of most countries in the world to maintain and strictly
observe the ABM Treaty. The United Nations should
continue to show serious concern over the attempt by a
certain country to develop a missile defence system to
the detriment of global strategic stability, and it should
take necessary measures to stop this dangerous
development.
Security is mutual and relative. No country
should enhance its security at the expense of that of the
others. To seek absolute unilateral security is not
feasible and will lead to greater insecurity. With
increased international contacts and exchanges,
countries of the world will find themselves sharing
more common interests and facing more common
challenges. Security can only be realized through
dialogue on an equal footing and in the spirit of mutual
understanding and mutual accommodation. It can only
be maintained on the basis of mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence, and it can only be consolidated
through mutually beneficial cooperation and common
development. The only way to protect the fundamental
interests of all countries and enhance universal security
is to replace the old security concept based on military
alliances and military build-up with a new one that is
characterized by equality, mutual trust, mutual benefit,
cooperation and settlement of disputes through
dialogue.
In recent years, China, Russia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan have reached, within the
framework of the Shanghai Five and through
consultation and cooperation based on equality, an
agreement among themselves on confidence-building
in the military field and reduction of military forces in
the border areas. This offers something useful for the
international community to draw upon in its
exploratory efforts for a new security concept.
We have noted with pleasure the positive changes
in the situation on the Korean Peninsula and the
positive outcome of the successful historic summit
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea. It has shown once again
that dialogue and consultation based on equality serve
to enhance mutual trust and improve relations between
States. We appreciate the efforts made by both the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea to promote peace, stability and
development on the peninsula and in the region.
We deeply regret that the tripartite summit at
Camp David failed to produce any agreement. We
believe that the Middle East peace process will move
forward as long as the parties concerned earnestly,
patiently and unswervingly engage themselves in
negotiating and seriously implement the agreements
that have already be reached among them on the basis
of the relevant United Nation resolutions, in
accordance with the principle of land for peace and in
the spirit of mutual trust and mutual accommodation.
In the twentieth century, mankind suffered a great
deal from the scourges of war. In the twenty-first
century, humanitarian crises of a massive scale must be
prevented, and the tragedy of innocent people being
slaughtered on a large scale must not be allowed to
repeat itself. The United Nations shoulders a primary
responsibility for the maintenance of world peace, and
therefore it should work harder to stop conflicts and
eliminate wars.
In the present-day world, hegemony and power
politics still exist. Territorial disputes, ethnic feuds and
religious rifts have all led to incessant regional
conflicts. Some countries and regions hope that the
United Nations will assist them in stopping conflicts,
which we fully understand. At the same time, we must
not fail to see the complexity of international
intervention and the danger of inappropriate
intervention. The United Nations intervention should
7

aim at eliminating the root causes of a given conflict
rather than delaying its settlement. It should aim at
facilitating reconciliation between the conflicting
parties rather than deepening their hatred and hostility.
We are of the view that major powers and groups of
countries should respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned rather than
meddling in their internal affairs or triggering new
conflicts.
In the new circumstances, peacekeeping
operations remain an important means for the United
Nations to fulfil its obligations in safeguarding world
peace and security. In this regard, it is essential to
ensure and enhance the Security Council's
responsibility and political leadership in peacekeeping
operations and to ensure the observance of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
launched with a sense of realism and within the
capacities of the United Nations. The limited resources
should be put to where they are most needed.
Human beings are the most precious among all
the creatures on earth. To promote human development
and protect all the rights and interests of mankind is the
primary responsibility of all countries. China is the
most populous country in the world. The Chinese
Government has taken upon itself to safeguard the
independence and dignity of the Chinese nation and to
ensure the almost 1.3 billion Chinese the right to a
decent life and all-round development. It has regarded
this as its sacred duty and will do all it can to achieve
this end.
Human rights improvement is an ongoing
process. The human rights conditions of a country are
up to the people of that country to assess and improve.
Since people live under different circumstances, the
form in which human rights are embodied changes with
these circumstances and with time. Therefore, how to
protect and promote human rights depends on the
actual conditions and specific needs of a country. To
arbitrarily impose a fixed set of human rights rules,
regardless of the differences in the specific
environment and reality, will not serve the interests of
the people of any country. To interfere in other
countries' internal affairs in the name of protecting
human rights in order to advance one's own political
agenda is simply to blaspheme and betray the human
rights cause.
The United Nations should vigorously encourage
dialogues and exchanges among different civilizations
and countries on human rights and discourage
confrontation and exclusion — which are the general
trend of the human rights movement. In providing
humanitarian assistance, the United Nations should
give equal priority to the prevention of conflicts and
the protection of human rights, on the one hand, and to
the reduction and elimination of poverty and the
promotion of human development, on the other hand.
In this context, the United Nations should work in
close coordination and cooperation with the countries
and Governments concerned, instead of bypassing
them, and ensure human rights for the majority of the
people. Otherwise, such operations will trigger a
humanitarian disaster of a greater scale. Only when the
above-mentioned principles are abided by can the
United Nations play a useful role in protecting human
rights.
A few days ago, from this solemn podium
Chinese President Jiang Zemin proclaimed to the
whole world the Chinese people's firm determination
to turn China into a strong, prosperous and united
country with a high degree of democracy, and to
promote world peace and development. In the past 20
years and more since the inception of reform and
opening-up, China completed the first and second
phases of its modernization strategy. With the advent of
the new century, China will begin the third phase of the
strategy and enter a new stage of accelerated
modernization. Once China becomes a member of the
World Trade Organization (WTO), there will be major
breakthroughs in its opening-up. China will honour its
commitments and seriously fulfil its obligations, while
enjoying its rights.
Although there will be difficulties, risks and
challenges on the road ahead, China is capable of
removing every obstacle and achieving its grand
objective of modernization. China will unswervingly
stick to its independent foreign policy of peace and
further develop its friendly relations with the rest of the
world on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence. A strong and developed China will not
only benefit more than a billion Chinese people but
also serve prosperity and progress worldwide.
To resolve the question of Taiwan once and for all
and complete the reunification of the motherland is a
shared aspiration of the entire Chinese people,
including our Taiwan compatriots. Adherence to the
8

principle of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems in resolving the Taiwan question will serve the
development of the two sides on either side of the
straits, contribute to amity and unity among
compatriots on both sides, and facilitate peace and
stability in the Asia-Pacific region. The Chinese
Government and people have committed themselves
more strongly than anyone else to a peaceful
reunification. They have demonstrated the utmost
sincerity and made the greatest efforts to this end. We
are convinced that — with the concerted efforts of the
entire Chinese people, including those living in
Taiwan — China will be able to realize its complete
reunification at an earlier date.
We are entrusted with the important task of
charting a course for mankind for the coming century.
Let us join hands and work together to build a more
secure, prosperous and progressive world in the new
century.First of all I
would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as President of the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly, and wish you every success with
your work. I would like to thank Foreign Minister
Gurirab for his dedication in chairing the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. I welcome Tuvalu as
the one hundred and eighty-ninth member of the United
Nations and congratulate it on its accession. I endorse
the statement of my French colleague, Hubert VÈdrine,
on behalf of the European Union.
At this session of the General Assembly, the first
in the new millennium, we are asked to determine the
future tasks of the United Nations and which reforms
are necessary in order to master them. The Millennium
Declaration, which we all adopted on 8 September,
shows us the way forward. The implementation of this
Declaration should be a main focus of the consultations
of this and future sessions of the General Assembly. I
propose that the Secretary-General make use of the
opportunity to draw up review reports at the beginning
of the next session of the General Assembly.
There was one issue in particular which
dominated this debate, namely globalization. It will
radically change the economy and finances, politics
and culture everywhere. The question is, will a new
order which guarantees peace, justice and an equal
share in our common progress be established or will a
new divide evolve in the world? Will the future of the
globalized world manifest its pluralist character in a
multilateral order? Only the future can provide the
answers to these questions.
Particularly for developing countries,
globalization offers great opportunities. If it
nevertheless provokes strong opposition, this lies in the
imbalances of this historical process. Indeed, just under
a decade after the end of the cold war, our world is
today at risk from a new divide, one between the
winners and losers of the economic globalization
process. In his impressive Millennium Report, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, rightly highlights
the growing inequalities in the distribution of income,
resources, investments and access to new technologies.
In view of this situation, the international
community must make every effort in the coming
decade to ensure that globalization benefits all peoples.
If market forces are not balanced by a political
corrective mechanism, it is to be expected that injustice
in the world will increase further. Those who have been
hitherto excluded from the advantages of globalization
must be included to a greater extent. They must be
given more say in the political decisions made about
steering global processes and they must be given an
opportunity to gain a fairer share in the development of
the world economy.
In the twenty-first century, we will, more than
ever before, need a form of global governance if we are
to solve global challenges. The United Nations will
play a key role here. It is the only organization within
which the injustice between rich and poor can be
overcome and where a reconciliation between peoples
and regions, global peace and sustainable development
can be achieved.
Greatly strengthening the United Nations capacity
to act is, therefore, a crucial question for the whole of
15

humanity in the twenty-first century. In addition to the
crucial reform of the Security Council, this will entail
the United Nations entering into creative partnerships
with industry and civil society.
Germany strongly supports the Secretary-
General's idea for a global compact with major
companies. The German initiative for a resolution in
the General Assembly on global partnerships will take
up this and other issues relating to the globalization
process.
Global poverty is the key problem in North-South
relations. It lies at the root of many global risks and
threats to peace. The Secretary-General provided
precise and stimulating analyses of this in his report.
The industrialized nations have a special
obligation to support the poorest of the poor. With the
Cologne debt initiative launched by Germany, we are
combining debt relief with a strategy to combat
poverty. The 20 poorest developing countries should be
debt-free by the end of the year.
The least developed countries should be granted
access to world markets with the greatest possible
exemption from duties and quotas. We must, also by
way of liberalization steps in the World Trade
Organization, prevent these countries from being
socially excluded even further.
This applies in particular to the new economy.
The United Nations and its Member States must
intensify their efforts to make it easier for these
countries to use the information and communication
technologies. This is contingent upon initiatives in the
field of education, as well as the availability of the
necessary resources.
However, how can poor countries ever catch up
economically if they are, at the same time, afflicted to a
much greater degree than the North by terrible
diseases? The fight against the disastrous spread of the
AIDS virus, particularly in Africa, must be priority for
us all. The focus must be on prevention. At the same
time, access to medicines must be improved and
vaccine research must be intensified. The World Bank's
promising idea of establishing a future fund for the
purchase of vaccines deserves every support.
Particularly in the fight against AIDS, new partnerships
between Governments and companies are crucial.
The second major issue of this General Assembly
is peacekeeping. The Secretary-General showed the
way ahead with the Brahimi report. The
recommendations it contains should be examined and
implemented as quickly as possible. Germany will play
its part. Peace missions need a more robust mandate, as
well as more personnel and equipment. Member States
must do considerably more to ensure the rapid
secondment of well-trained troops, police officers and
civilian experts. The further development of the police
concept is one of the most important tasks in this
connection  as the last few months and years have, in
fact been teaching us.
The German Government will offer German
training for civilian peace-mission personnel and offer
civilian capacities to the United Nations stand-by
system. In addition, we are drafting a plan for training
civilian experts for peace missions, thus creating a pool
of qualified personnel who can be deployed at short
notice.
The prevailing form of conflict today is conflict
within States. Therefore the main task of peacekeeping
must be to address the internal roots of conflicts. In
addition to focusing on an improvement in socio-
economic conditions, our efforts must focus on
promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, aptly said that the
human rights violations of today are the wars of
tomorrow.
Numerous concrete tasks are on the agenda. The
protocols relating to the involvement of children in
armed conflict and to the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography must enter into
force as early as possible. The equality of women must
be advanced in all spheres. I call upon all states to
ratify quickly the new Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and to abolish all laws
that discriminate against women by 2005. The World
Conference against racism, to be held in 2001, must
tackle all aspects of this issue. Out of a sense of
responsibility for our history, our State and our society
will stand up firmly against all forms of right-wing
radicalism, racism and anti-Semitism, both in our own
country and in the world.
I call upon all States to respect the integrity of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, to sign and
to ratify it, so that the Court can commence work soon.
There can be no exceptions to the Rome Statute.
16

One of the greatest dangers facing humanity
remains the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The risk of regional arms races,
particularly in South Asia, has increased. Further
developing the international arms-control regime
therefore continues to be one of the United Nations key
tasks. This will require resolute implementation of the
results of the sixth Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Against this background, President Clinton's
decision not to commit now to the development of a
national missile defence system is very welcome. The
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty must remain as a
cornerstone of strategic stability and the basis for
further nuclear-disarmament measures.
In poor countries the excessive stockpiling of
small arms must be stopped. We must therefore do
everything we can to achieve tangible progress at the
United Nations small arms conference to be held in
2001. This presupposes the inclusion of all aspects,
including the legal transfer of production and
stockpiles.
Regional cooperation has proved to be an
extremely effective means of preventing conflicts. The
United Nations can do much to help here. Allow me to
mention two regions where progress is particularly
urgent. The triangle between Central Asia, the
Caucasus and the Middle East is full of destabilizing
factors  oil, religious fundamentalism, terrorism,
drugs and the nuclear arms race  and this area is
threatening to become the crisis region of the century
ahead. A new comprehensive regional process, along
the lines of the Helsinki model, which fosters
cooperation instead of confrontation, could play an
important stabilizing role. Germany is prepared to take
part in such a process.
In Africa, regional approaches have gained in
significance. In the main, however, it is, unfortunately,
too early to talk of effective peacekeeping structures.
Unfortunately, the efforts on the part of the United
Nations and of the Organization of African Unity to
resolve the conflicts in the Congo and Sierra Leone
have not achieved a breakthrough so far. In the conflict
between Ethiopia and Eritrea it is to be hoped that the
ceasefire that has finally been concluded will be
consolidated and that the United Nations peace mission
will be lent the full support of the parties to the
conflict.
The third issue, protection of our natural
environment, will probably become the crucial issue
affecting our planet. In the course of the twentieth
century the world's population quadrupled, while
consumption of energy and raw materials increased
tenfold. We must end the squandering of natural
resources and switch to renewable energy sources as
quickly as possible. This cannot only be a matter for
industrialized nations. We are witnessing at this very
moment what a burden high oil prices places on poor
countries in particular. It must be in the interest of all
States to bring about the transition from the oil to the
hydrogen age as quickly as possible. The most
important thing now is to finally overcome the
deadlock in the climate-protection negotiations and to
ensure that the Kyoto Protocol can be implemented by
2002, 10 years after the Rio Summit.
Another key issue for humanity, the future of
genetic engineering, can only be mastered within the
framework of a global consensus. Genetic engineering
has the potential to revolutionalize medicine and
agriculture. At the same time, it raises more ethical and
human rights questions than any other technology. Do
we not need clear, binding rules for dealing with such a
powerful new technology? Why do we not seriously
consider within the United Nations creating under
international law a convention that meaningfully
promotes genetic engineering and safeguards the
freedom to research and the findings of this research,
while, at the same time, defining an ethical basis and
guaranteeing protection against abuse?
The Millennium Declaration points the way
ahead. But what help will that be if an increasing
number of Members allow the world's real problems to
be dealt with and decided somewhere else? If we do
not succeed in adapting the United Nations to deal with
the challenges of the twenty-first century and in
modernizing it fully, it will be sidelined, with fatal
consequences for peace and development, human
rights, the environment and social progress.
We will all, rich and poor, lose out.
We must therefore muster the strength to
resolutely implement the Millennium Declaration. We
need a world Organization that is strong and we must
use its scarce resources more effectively. An important
prerequisite for this is that the United Nations be
placed finally on a solid financial footing. Together
with its European Union partners, Germany has put
17

forward proposals for a fairer, more balanced scale of
assessments, which must continue to be based on
Member States' ability to pay..
The Security Council no longer reflects the
political reality of our world at the dawn of the new
millennium. We share the Secretary-General's view
that this central steering organ of the international
community must become more representative,
legitimate and effective, also involving the developing
countries. Last week Chancellor Schroeder reaffirmed
Germany's willingness to take on more responsibility
in this connection. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank my friend and colleague Robin Cook for the
clear language that he used before the General
Assembly just a few minutes ago.
The General Assembly must structure its work,
debate global problems in a more focused fashion than
hitherto and identify courses of action. The synergetic
potential between United Nations organizations, for
example in the environmental field, must be better used
and resources pooled to a greater extent by merging
organizations.
Reform of the United Nations will play a decisive
role in ensuring that the twenty-first century is safer
and more just than the twentieth century. Allow me to
conclude with a quote from the Secretary-General's
Millennium Report:
No shift in the way we think or act can be
more critical than this: we must put people at the
centre of everything we do ... Only when that
begins to happen will we know that globalization
is indeed becoming inclusive, allowing everyone
to share its opportunities.'I have
the honour of speaking this year on behalf of the
European Union, which France is presiding over until
the end of December.
In this capacity, it is a great pleasure for me to
congratulate the President on his election. It
symbolizes the respect the international community has
both for his country and for himself.
I would also like to thank your predecessor, Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, for his skill in guiding the
proceedings of the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, Mr. Sam Nujoma and Ms. Tarja Halonen for
their work with you, Mr. President, as Co-Chairpersons
of the Millennium Summit.
19

I would like to commend the Secretary-General
of the Organization, Mr. Kofi Annan. His international
action, his independence and his vision have made a
decisive contribution to asserting the key role the
United Nations plays and must continue to play. The
European Union wishes to assure him of its support for
his work and for the Organization and its
representatives.
The Millennium Summit, an unprecedented
gathering of 155 heads of State and Government,
allowed us to address the main challenges facing the
world community and the role of the United Nations in
the twenty-first century, which will begin on 1 January
2001.
The Union notes with great satisfaction that the
Summit produced a political document setting forth a
road-map for the Organization for the years to come.
These guidelines are based on ideas outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. It is now up to the General
Assembly to implement them. The Union will
contribute actively to this.
Peacekeeping, strengthening international
security and defending human rights are the central
principles underpinning the European Union's foreign
policy. Recent crises on Europe's very doorstep have
convinced us that we cannot remain idle when these
fundamental principles are violated. In this regard, the
European Union approves of the priority given to
peacekeeping during last week's meetings. Mr.
Brahimi's report offers an in-depth analysis on this
subject. It presents useful recommendations for the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, operational
planning in New York and deployment. It presents a
unique opportunity to strengthen the United Nations
capacity for peace operations. The European Union
will actively participate in considering these
recommendations.
The Union has decided to equip itself to be a
major political actor and to play its full role on the
international stage. To this end, and within a very short
time-frame, it has undertaken decisive measures. New
decision-making, action-oriented political and military
bodies have been set up: a political and security
committee, a military committee, a European Union
military staff, a situation centre and a committee for
civilian crisis management. These bodies will enable
the European Union to intervene quickly and credibly
in the management of international crises.
The European Union has also announced its
intention to establish by 2003 a force of 60,000 troops
for international missions involving the whole range of
conflict-prevention and crisis-management operations,
with the requisite air and naval support for deployment
within 60 days for a period of at least one year. This
autumn there will be a conference for the commitment
of capability at which each Member State shall pledge
its contribution to this joint endeavour.
The Union has also set ambitious and realistic
targets for developing collective capabilities. In
addition to its military resources, it will develop
civilian intervention capabilities, including a corps of
civilian police, whose contribution to peacekeeping is
invaluable. In this connection, Member States have set
themselves the goal of being able, by 2003, to provide
up to 5,000 police officers, 1,000 of whom will be
deployment-ready within 30 days.
These decisions now enable the European Union
to complement its already sizeable economic and
humanitarian programmes with the full range of
resources required for crisis management. Of course,
these activities are designed in full respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter. Now more
than ever, it is vital to establish working ties with the
United Nations. To initiate this cooperation, the
European Union troika will discuss this issue for the
first time with the Secretary-General. On behalf of the
European Union, I hereby invite Mr. Kofi Annan to go
to Brussels for a working meeting with the organs of
the Union.
The European Union hails the considerable
efforts and determination shown by the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Prime Minister
during recent negotiations to reach a final agreement
between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We
welcome in particular the renewed vigour with which
very sensitive issues have been addressed at this time.
We commend President Clinton and the Secretary
of State for their unflagging efforts to facilitate
negotiations. Circumstances favourable to reconciling
positions continue to exist. We urge the parties to seize
this historic opportunity, show courage in decisive
choices, take fully into account human realities and the
recognized rights of all, and thereby achieve a final
agreement.
The European Union welcomes Israel's
withdrawal from the zone it occupied in southern
20

Lebanon. It welcomes the redeployment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the presence of a
joint security force, sent to the area by the Lebanese
Government. It urges all parties to fulfil their
responsibilities in order to defuse tensions. The
European Union believes that only a comprehensive
settlement encompassing every track of the peace
process, including the Israeli-Syrian track, is likely to
guarantee lasting stability in the region. It will continue
to support the efforts of the parties to this end and
contribute to the implementation of any agreements
that may be reached.
Turning to Europe, the situation in the western
Balkans is a matter of serious concern to the entire
international community. Ten years of conflict have
ravaged the region, leading to severe human suffering
and to politically unstable and therefore dangerous
situations. But beyond accumulated hardships and the
lagging economic and social development of many of
those countries, all of the peoples and nearly all of the
leaders of the region have realized that it does have a
future, and that future is Europe. Today, all Europeans
now share the belief that these countries are bound one
day to join the European Union.
This is why the European Council has reiterated
that its goal is to firmly attach the countries of the
region to Europe. This means the greatest possible
integration into the political, economic and social
currents of Europe through the stabilization and
association process, political dialogue, trade
liberalization, the harmonization of their laws with
those of the European Union, and cooperation in justice
and domestic affairs.
The assistance provided by the European Union
to countries of the region over the last 10 years —
nearly 8 billion euros — is considerable. The European
Union will continue to sustain this stabilization and
association process by providing the western Balkan
countries with massive technical, economic and
financial assistance and by granting them asymmetrical
trade advantages in farming and industry very soon,
which will pave the way for the creation of a free trade
zone with the European Union. In the context of
elections concerning almost the entire region, we will
encourage them to develop regional cooperation and to
continue to make determined efforts for political,
economic and social reform in order to consolidate
democracy and human rights, to build the rule of law
and lay the groundwork for sustainable development.
In this context, the European Union has reaffirmed its
determination to continue to be the driving force in the
Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe, which
represents a new vision of cooperation between the
countries of the region and the international
community.
The summit to be held shortly in Croatia of the
European Union and the Western Balkan countries —
on the basis of a French proposal — will signal our
common resolve to overcome the divisions of the past.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will not be
able to participate in the conference, as the nature of its
present regime does not allow it to do so. But the Serbs
know that they have their place in the European family
and that the European Union is looking forward to the
day when the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is in a
position to participate fully in the stabilization and
association process and to recover its rightful place in
Europe. The elections to be held on 24 September
could be decisive in this respect.
In Kosovo the international community, acting on
the basis of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
has achieved praiseworthy results. Thanks must be
given to all those who have made this possible in spite
of enormous difficulties, especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations staff and the Kosovo Force soldiers, the many
international organizations there on the ground and the
non-governmental organizations. The first democratic
municipal elections in Kosovo, to be held in a few
weeks' time, will constitute a major step in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). I would
forcefully reiterate that the international community
will not allow unacceptable acts of violence, whatever
their motivation, to cause the democratic electoral
process under way to fail. We will not let extremists
from whatever faction sabotage the work accomplished
over the past year under the auspices of the United
Nations.
The European Union considers the status quo in
Cyprus unacceptable, and it supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General to reach a negotiated,
comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement consistent
with relevant Security Council resolutions. It reiterates
its commitment to stability and prosperity throughout
the Mediterranean region. With talks beginning right
here under the auspices of the Secretary-General, it
21

invites the parties concerned to enter into substantive
talks.
The European Union is equally determined in its
support for efforts to prevent and settle conflicts in
Africa, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and other
subregional organizations and in accordance with the
objectives agreed at the Africa-Europe Summit, held
last April in Cairo under the Portuguese presidency of
the European Union. It will lend its backing to the
measures taken jointly by the OAU and the United
Nations to implement the peace settlement between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. In supporting the deployment of
international observers, the European Union is also
willing to lend its support to the establishment and
demarcation of borders, to demining and to assistance
to refugees and displaced persons. It is endeavouring to
provide assistance to the war-stricken populations of
both countries, whose immense suffering has been
compounded by drought.
The European Union is deeply concerned by the
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It calls on all parties to the Lusaka Agreement
to implement their commitments, including those made
at Kampala. This will allow for progress with respect
to the military and political provisions, all of which are
under threat due to the continued fighting and the
deadlock in preparing for a national dialogue. It also
urges them to abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1304 (2000), which
calls for an orderly withdrawal of foreign forces from
Congolese territory and for the cooperation of all
parties in the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) through the lifting of restrictions
on the freedom of movement of MONUC personnel
and by ensuring their security.
The illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a violation of
the country's sovereignty, is also unacceptable. The
European Union therefore commends the establishment
by the Secretary-General on 15 August last of a group
of experts in charge of analysing ties between the
illegal exploitation of those riches and the continuation
of the conflict.
We are pleased to note greater awareness about
the illicit trade in diamonds and other minerals, which
directly fuels conflicts. This is the case in particular
with the illicit trade in diamonds in Angola, whereby
UNITA has been funding its war effort. We underscore
the importance of complying with Security Council
resolutions on this matter. We welcome the decision to
place this important question on the General
Assembly's agenda. The discussion should be based on
the Kimberley process. It should reflect the work of the
preparatory conference co-chaired by the United
Kingdom and Russia. Lastly, it should examine the
proposal made at Miyazaki to establish a standing
group of independent experts to formulate ways of
preventing illicit trade.
The European Union reiterates its support for
resolution 1306 (2000) on Sierra Leone, which
tightened existing arms sanctions and established an
embargo on raw diamonds illegally exported from
Sierra Leone. The European Union calls on all the
parties to the conflict to comply with the principles and
objectives of the Lomé Agreement and to be fully
involved in the re-establishment of peace and stability
and compliance with human rights in Sierra Leone.
The European Union and its member States will
continue to contribute to African capacity and means of
action in conflict prevention and resolution, in
particular through support for the OAU and
subregional organizations and initiatives.
The European Union is deeply concerned at the
situation in Myanmar. It asks the Myanmar authorities
to immediately restore Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi's
freedom of speech, movement and communication with
the outside. It is urgent for dialogue to begin between
the Myanmar authorities and the democratic
opposition, including the National League for
Democracy and national minorities. The Union
supports the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Burma, Mr. Razali, in his efforts to find a solution.
The European Union expresses its solidarity with
the people of East Timor and commends the work done
by the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) in close cooperation with the
political authorities of East Timor. It is in favour of
accelerating reconstruction assistance in order to
guarantee a successful transition and avoid any delay in
the timetable leading to independence.
We are extremely concerned by the instability
caused by the militias in both East and West Timor.
The new outbreaks of violence by them have taken the
lives of two “blue beret” peacekeepers and, more
22

recently, of three personnel of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The European Union calls on the Indonesian authorities
to adopt effective measures to control the militias
without delay.
The European Union also calls for the termination
of terrorist activity in Kashmir, the implementation of
confidence- and security-building measures and strict
respect for the line of control in order to restore a
peaceful local climate and enable the dialogue between
Pakistan and India to resume in the spirit of the Lahore
Declaration. The European Union will be looking
closely for such signs from the parties involved and
will encourage initiatives likely to resolve all the
disputes between the two countries.
It is important for the specific measures laid
down in Security Council resolution 1172 (1998) to be
implemented and for Pakistan and India to subscribe to
the international non-proliferation regime and sign the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
Having advocated direct dialogue between the
two Koreas for many years, the European Union
welcomes the historic inter-Korean Summit that took
place in Pyongyang from 13-15 June this year. This is
an important step on the road to reconciliation between
the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, opening bright prospects for
strengthening the stability of the region. We invite the
two countries, who have been members of the United
Nations since 1991, to continue this process in order to
help the Korean people heal the wounds of the past.
On the subject of Haiti, the European Union
recalls that full respect for the constitutional provisions
concerning the elections and electoral legislation
currently in force is the basis of democracy and the rule
of law.
The threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems is a crucial issue
that the European Union — which shares the concern
for international peace and security that ought to
inspire the nations represented here — is resolved to
combat relentlessly. To this end, international
cooperation must be stressed, along with the
development of multilateral standards for non-
proliferation, arms control and disarmament.
This is particularly true of chemical and
biological weapons, which have now been banned. The
Union is working towards the early conclusion of a
protocol containing reliable and effective verification
measures to strengthen the 1972 Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction. We are equally
determined to ensure nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, where so much progress has been made
since the signing of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to which 187 States are
now parties.
Since the end of the cold war, effective
instruments for ending the arms race and achieving
disarmament have begun to see the light of day, with
the halt to testing, the treaty enshrining it, the first two
START agreements to reduce the largest nuclear
arsenals and a host of unilateral decisions following the
same trend. Our priority must be to consolidate this
mechanism. A start was made with the Review
Conferences of 1995 and 2000; the results, which we
welcome, must be fully implemented.
We must give full weight to strengthening the
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) through the widespread implementation of the
measures contained in the 1997 Model Protocol and to
remain alert to the issue of NPT compliance. We must
also revive the momentum of the multilateral
negotiations.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty, the completion of the operational readiness
of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO) and the negotiation at the Disarmament
Conference of a fissile material cut-off treaty are all
necessary steps that are of concern and ought to
mobilize all States, be they parties to the NPT or not.
The start of this negotiation implies urgent negotiations
on a working programme in the Conference on
Disarmament. International standards in this field can
only be effective if they are universal. Arsenal
reductions, which are the prime responsibility of the
nuclear-weapon States, must also be continued. This
will enable us to move closer to our common
objectives — namely, the elimination of nuclear
weapons and general, comprehensive disarmament
under strict and effective international control.
The issue of small arms and light weapons is just
as sensitive in many regions of the world. It deserves
special attention. The 15 European Union members
23

will contribute to the preparation of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will take place
during the summer of 2001, with the objective of
obtaining a positive and enforceable plan of action to
combat the destabilizing accumulation and spread of
small arms and light weapons. At the same time, the
Union shall continue its drive for the implementation
of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on their Destruction. It will join in the
efforts to achieve the total elimination of anti-
personnel mines.
On the very important subject of human rights,
the European Union will continue to support the efforts
of the United Nations to reach the goal set by the
Secretary-General to put human rights at the heart of
every aspect of its work. The best guarantee of solid
progress in this area is each person's awareness of the
importance of human rights and democracy and the
emergence of groups who actively promote them in
every country. In this connection, the European Union
welcomes the designation, thanks to the support of
many countries, of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders, Ms.
Jilani; we welcome her appointment and assure her of
our full backing as she undertakes her duties.
This year the United Nations has once again
demonstrated that it is the main forum of progress in
setting standards for human rights, as witnessed by the
adoption of two optional protocols to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the sexual exploitation of
children and on children in armed conflicts. This
represents a major step forward in favour of the
protection of children. The European Union intends to
contribute actively to the special session of the United
Nations General Assembly for the follow-up to the
World Children's Summit, to be held next year, which
will give the international community yet another
opportunity to help this cause move forward.
Another important task, the World Conference
Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance, lies ahead. At the European
Preparatory Conference, to be held in October under
the auspices of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
the European Union will demonstrate its commitment
to combat all expressions of racism, whatever form
they take. The Union, all of whose members have
abolished the death penalty, calls on States that have
not yet done so to adopt a moratorium as a first step
towards the eventual abolition of this punishment,
which is contrary to human dignity.
The European Union will endeavour to strengthen
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
and will play an active role in the negotiations to be
held to that end. It earnestly hopes that this General
Assembly will adopt the Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols at the
Palermo Conference next December. Given that such
crime, that one of its most odious manifestations is the
trafficking in human beings, and that it poses an ever-
growing threat to our societies, it is vital for the
international community to develop the means to
cooperate and fight against it effectively.
Lastly, the European Union looks forward to the
early establishment of the International Criminal Court.
I would like to recall that ratification by 42 States is
still needed for this.
By way of conclusion, I would like to stress one
last point, and that is sustainable development. The
European Union's contribution to international
cooperation is substantial. With 30 per cent of the
global gross domestic product, the Union contributes
36 per cent of the United Nations regular budget and
39 per cent of the peacekeeping budget. As you know,
it also contributes the rather large amount of around 55
per cent of the world total of official development
assistance. We are pleased with everything that was
said last week on this extremely important matter, and
we will continue our exemplary work on sustainable
development. Indeed, we believe that development is
one of the key ways of resolving all of the problems
facing us throughout the world, as outlined in my
statement, and the European Union wishes to express
its strong, continuing commitment to that end.I am conscious that
the central problem for all of us when we rise to speak
to the General Assembly is that there are too many
issues of concern to hope to address them all in one
speech. There is no shortage of challenges to the
United Nations as we meet for the first time in a new
century to debate the issues of a modern world.
It is a world united by the new technologies of
communication. We have never had so much
opportunity to share the know-how for economic
growth. Yet our world has never before been so divided
between rich and poor. In the year ahead, we must
make sure that all the United Nations agencies and its
international financial institutions work together in a
coordinated way to promote development and to reduce
debt.
It is also a world bound together by growth in
trade between our countries. But we failed at Seattle to
make further progress on removing the obstacles to that
trade. In the year ahead, we must launch a world trade
development round which is fair to those countries
whose main exports are agricultural rather than
industrial.
It is a world which faces a common threat to its
global climate. We are each learning the alarming rate
at which that climate is changing as the result of our
own actions. Before the end of the year, we must try to
reach agreement at the sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change to bring into effect the Kyoto
measures to stabilize climate change.
Each of these is an important challenge. Each of
them is a strategic priority for our work programme for
the coming year. This morning, though, I wish to focus
my remarks on the central theme of the Millennium
Summit and of this fifty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
How do we equip the United Nations with the
capacity in peacekeeping that matches the real
demands for it around our world?
In his opening address, the Secretary-General
invited us to give a swift response to the Brahimi
report on peacekeeping (A/55/305). The United
Kingdom is happy to respond to that invitation by
offering our support for the report's conclusions and
pledging our commitment to its implementation. The
report begins by reminding us that the United Nations
was founded, in the words of its Charter, to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war'. Too
often, though, we have failed to save those who needed
our protection from the suffering, the pain and the
terror of brutal conflict. We must be frank in facing up
to those failures if we are to learn their lessons. And
we must be determined to improve the capacity of this
Organization to keep the peace if we are to succeed in
the future.
I want to set out six tasks which we must address
if we are not to repeat past failures. First, we must
equip the United Nations with a more effective and
more rapid capacity for peacekeeping. In the space of
about one year, the number of troops on United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the globe has trebled.
The United Kingdom has forces operating in eight
different theatres where peacekeeping has been
authorized by the United Nations.
8

But it is not the new size of our peacekeeping
effort that demands changes. It is the different
character of the peacekeeping challenge. It used to be
the case that United Nations forces were typically
deployed to observe a ceasefire between two States
both of which wanted to end the fighting. Today, our
peacekeepers are typically deployed within States, not
between them, and often where one or more parties to
the conflict is not seriously committed to peace. In
those circumstances, United Nations peacekeepers need
a robust mandate. As the Brahimi report puts it, where
one side is violating a peace agreement, treating both
sides equally can amount to complicity with evil.
United Nations peacekeepers who witness violence
against civilians should be presumed to be mandated to
halt it.
But if those peacekeepers are to act with
determination, then we must equip them with the
capacity to do so. The United Nations needs a
Headquarters unit capable of rapid deployment within a
few weeks, not a few months, of a Security Council
resolution. And each of us must develop the number of
troops who are trained in the principles and practice of
peacekeeping whom we can commit to the United
Nations. That is why the United Kingdom has proposed
a permanent staff college for United Nations
peacekeeping. The United Kingdom has offered to host
such a resource for United Nations peacekeeping, if
that is welcome to other members of the General
Assembly.
The second task is to be more rapid and more
imaginative in tackling tension before it results in
conflict. By definition, any mission to restore peace is
an admission of failure to prevent conflict. As well as
coping with the consequences of conflict, we need to
address the root causes of conflict: poverty, bad
governance and the denial of freedom or of minority
rights. I welcome the Secretary-General's intention to
submit a report on conflict prevention early next year.
It will be a natural companion to the Brahimi report. I
hope it can enable us to develop an early warning
system which will alert us to potential conflict and give
our agencies the chance to offer help before it becomes
a real conflict.
Too often, internal conflict is fuelled by the
external demand for the illicit trade in diamonds or the
evil trade in drugs. Measures to ban conflict diamonds
from international sale or to defeat the drugs barons
must be key elements of any comprehensive strategy of
conflict prevention.
The third task is to take tighter control of the
flows of arms which supply conflict. As an
international community, we have put much effort into
controlling weapons of mass destruction. The good
progress we all made at the Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Treaty on the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) underlines the
importance which each of us attaches to this strategic
issue. The United Kingdom has ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, has reduced
by half its planned strategic nuclear warheads, and has
supplied greater transparency on our nuclear arsenal.
Yet, over the past decade, the true weapons of
mass destruction have been small arms, which have
killed 5 million people in conflicts around the globe.
Overwhelmingly, those killed were civilians rather than
soldiers. And, overwhelmingly, they were killed in
countries which do not manufacture firearms. We must
make a success next year of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects. We need to reach
agreement to mark firearms at the point of production
so that they can be traced. The United Kingdom would
support at that conference the presumption that military
firearms should not be licensed for sale other than to
legitimate Government bodies. And we must seek the
help of the international economic agencies, including
the World Bank, to fund and to reward with
development aid the surrender of firearms.
The fourth task is to provide the United Nations
with the civilian resources to promote reconciliation
and reconstruction. In Kosovo, and again now in East
Timor, we have learned that the end of conflict is only
the starting point. When the troops have brought peace,
we need judges and administrators to bring justice and
development. The peacekeepers must be followed by
peace-builders. In particular, we need to muster the
civilian police who can establish law and order in place
of violence and conflict. I was astonished to read in the
Brahimi report that this mighty international
organization has only nine civilian police on its
Headquarters staff, administering 8,600 civilian police
in the field around the world. I am confident that every
one of them is the very best, in keeping with the
tradition of United Nations staff. But if we are serious
about succeeding on the ground, we need a more
serious back-up at the centre. Four times in the past
9

decade, the United Nations has been called upon to
undertake a transitional civilian administration. We
need a better, permanent, capacity here at the centre to
support our operations in the field.
The fifth task is to enforce the international law
on crimes against humanity. If we are to have
international justice, we must have an international
court. The United Kingdom has given strong support to
the International Criminal Court, and we have just
published our draft legislation to ratify the treaty
setting up such a Court. The International Criminal
Court will send a strong warning to any future tyrants
that they will be called to account for their crimes
before the bar of international justice. It will be one of
the most powerful advances for human rights since we
agreed 50 years ago to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
And finally, we must strengthen the authority of
the United Nations. In 50 years, there has been no new
permanent member of the Security Council. The
Security Council needs to represent the world as it is in
this century, not the world as it was in the middle of the
last century. It needs to be made representative of the
100 or more countries that have joined as Members
since the Security Council was set up. The United
Kingdom supports a doubling of the permanent
membership to include Germany, Japan and three
countries from each of the continents of Asia, Africa
and Latin America. We also want more members
among those who are elected, in order that the Security
Council can be more representative of the General
Assembly.
For seven years, we have been debating this
question. It is becoming an issue of credibility for the
United Nations. How can we pretend to end conflict if
we cannot end this disagreement among ourselves? A
more representative, modern Security Council would
speak with more authority when it challenges those
who breach the peace.
I have been frank about where we must improve
our capacity for peacekeeping and strengthen our will
to halt conflict. But we should not underrate the
immense achievement of the United Nations. Our
Charter begins by recalling the untold sorrow to
mankind inflicted by two world wars. It was a Charter
written by ministers and officials determined to end
war between States. And in this they were remarkably
successful. External aggression between States is now
unusual.
But the benefits have been unevenly shared. The
industrialized nations have enjoyed half a century of
peace. That has provided the security and good order in
which their prosperity has advanced at a rate without
precedent in history. Yet, in the same half century,
people elsewhere in the globe have lived through
violence and conflict which have broken their human
rights and impoverished their standards of living. It is
largely poor countries that now experience the scourge
of war which our Charter sought to banish.
The challenge for the United Nations is to ensure
that the peace and security which have been enjoyed by
many Member States are shared by all. None of us can
prevent humanitarian catastrophe by acting alone. But
this United Nations can, if we act together.
The Brahimi report tells us what we need to do.
As an organization, we publish many reports. Nobody
could fault the capacity of the United Nations to
produce reports. But we are not always as good at
implementing them. Let us make sure that the Brahimi
report does not gather dust on library shelves but is put
into practice before we meet again next year. Let us
show the determination and the conviction that the
right in our Charter to be preserved from war is an
equal right for the people of all our nations, large and
small, rich and poor.India congratulates Mr. Harri
Holkeri on his election as President of the first General
Assembly of this millennium. We are encouraged that
he intends to take the Millennium Declaration as the
mandate for the work of the Organization during his
presidency.
I take this opportunity to sincerely compliment
and to place on record our high appreciation of Foreign
Minister Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab of Namibia for his
guidance of the General Assembly in the past year,
which included three special sessions and, of course,
meticulous preparations for and a successful
conclusion to the Millennium Summit.
I join India's voice to those of other delegations
in noting with appreciation the dedication with which
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has served the United
Nations at a critical point.
I am delighted on this occasion to warmly
welcome Tuvalu as the newest Member of the United
Nations.
Just 10 days ago, almost 150 heads of State and
Government assembled here for the Millennium
Summit. Their assembly in such large numbers was as
unique as was the occasion itself. The Millennium
Declaration that was then adopted encapsulates a
shared vision that the international community work
together in constructive cooperation to meet collective
challenges, within the framework of the United
Nations. It was in this spirit that my Prime Minister
spoke, as did many others, of the need for the United
Nations to truly reflect the world of the twenty-first
century, to make it an effective instrument to translate
17

our vision into reality. The United Nations is the house
that we all share. We must strengthen it and ensure that
it is equal to our collective expectations and our joint
aspirations.
Peace, collective security and development
inspire the spirit of the United Nations. We enter the
twenty-first century with extraordinary collective
intellectual and technical capabilities. These are our
global tools for overcoming the challenges before us.
Peace and security for all is not just possible but is well
within our grasp. Stability and development are the
essential building blocks for the maintenance of peace
and security. Threats to peace can and do arise from
different sources. It is not just weapons of mass
destruction or an arms race that endanger peace, but
also dehumanizing poverty and lack of development.
We must act as confident nation States committed
to collective action and international cooperation, for
these are our means to provide wider effects of peace
and progress. We must reaffirm the principle of respect
for State sovereignty and non-interference in internal
affairs of countries. Thus, self-evidently, we must
abjure unilateral action. Whenever circumstances
warrant action by the Security Council, that action
must be firmly rooted in Charter provisions.
The Brahimi Panel's report contains a number of
proposals. We recommend that the General Assembly
examine this important report carefully and take
appropriate decisions to strengthen this vital United
Nations function of peacekeeping.
We support the Middle East peace process and
find the trend encouraging.
The historic summit between the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
too, augurs well for peace in the Korean peninsula.
Disarmament — global nuclear disarmament in
particular — is essential to engender a greater sense of
security among Member States. India has been and will
continue to be in the forefront of efforts towards global
nuclear disarmament and genuine non-proliferation.
We welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General in his report to the Millennium Summit to
convene an international conference on eliminating
nuclear danger. We urge commencement of
negotiations on a nuclear-weapons convention to bring
about a nuclear-weapon-free world. India remains
ready to participate in agreed and irreversible steps,
such as de-alerting of nuclear forces, thus lowering
nuclear danger, through accidental use or otherwise, as
well as a global agreement on no-first-use and on non-
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States.
The situation with regard to the entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) and the lack of progress on a programme of
work at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva
show the importance of building a consensus, both
within and amongst nations, on issues that affect
national and international security. We are conscious
that 155 countries are at present signatories of the
CTBT. We reiterate to them our continuing
commitment that India does not wish to stand in the
way of entry into force of the CTBT. India volunteered
to observe, and continues to observe, a moratorium on
further explosive nuclear testing. This meets the basic
obligations of the CTBT. India also remains ready to
engage in meaningful negotiations in the Conference
on Disarmament, including on a global treaty to ban
the future production of fissile material for weapons
purposes.
The illicit transfer, manufacture and circulation of
small arms, particularly by States to non-State actors
and to terrorist groups, and their intrinsic linkage with
terrorism and narco-trafficking are matters of very deep
concern to the world community. When they are
combined with religious fanaticism and military
adventurism, a threat is posed to the global civilized
norms to which we strive to adhere. The international
community can no longer afford to permit these
purveyors of death, outrage and destruction to continue
to inflict untold suffering upon innocents. We look
forward to a successful outcome of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to be held next year.
Terrorism is the global menace of our age. For
some, it tends to replace ideology and policy. India has
been the object of State-sponsored, cross-border
terrorism in its most inhuman manifestations for more
than a decade. Even as the international community
works together to curb, control and stamp out the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, we need to
continually focus our attention on the users of such
weapons — the terrorists. Terrorism is an assault on
human decency, a violation of the basic precepts of
democracy and the very antithesis of what the United
Nations represents and stands for. Because its principal
18

targets are the innocent, it is indeed the most flagrant
violation of basic human rights. It constitutes a crime
against humanity. It is also a threat to international
peace and security, especially when terrorists are
armed, financed and backed by Governments or their
agencies.
I urge all Members to work to strengthen the
international consensus and legal regimes against
terrorism. We have proposed the draft of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. I
urge all Members of the United Nations to give their
total support to this initiative.
Let me now dwell briefly on the instrument of our
choice to accomplish our global agenda: the United
Nations. There is but one United Nations; none
replicate it, nor can any replace it.
The membership of the United Nations has
increased manifold in the last half century, and today
stands at 189. Yet the Security Council continues to
have the same basic structure as in the colonized world
of 1945. The need for expansion of the membership of
the Security Council in both permanent and non-
permanent categories is self-evident. The impact of
actions of the Security Council is felt, with near total
exclusivity, by the developing countries. Yet they have
little influence in its decision-making. We have a
global consensus that the form taken by the Security
Council in the aftermath of the Second World War is
outmoded and that it must reflect the logic of an
enlarged membership. At the Millennium Summit more
than 150 States, at the highest level, endorsed the need
for a Council reformed in its representation. An
unrepresentative Security Council will lack the range
and depth of sensitivity, perceptiveness and
understanding of the realities that it will have to deal
with or the moral authority to take decisions. I reaffirm
India's willingness to take on the responsibilities of
permanent membership.
The General Assembly is the most important
organ of the United Nations. It is here that all States,
irrespective of considerations of strength, economy or
size, sit together as equals, embodying the democratic
principle of sovereign equality. There is a growing
feeling among Member States that the functioning and
role of the General Assembly has to be made more
effective. As the revolutions of the digital age reduce
distance to the click of a mouse, bringing us together
into a new global neighbourhood as never before in
history, and as forces of globalization inexorably lead
us to increasing interdependence, our canvas of
international cooperation and collective action has
rapidly expanded. It has also become vastly more
complex. The General Assembly has therefore to be
central in accepting this new responsibility, this new
challenge.
Even as we week to strengthen democratic
principles and practices in the United Nations, and
even as the spreading sweep of democracy casts aside
dictatorships and authoritarian regimes, we have
unfortunately witnessed some instances of regression
as well. Such acts move against the currents of our
times. The international community should oppose
these assaults on the spirit of our times and
uncompromisingly support and strengthen democratic
impulses, practices and norms. It should show its
solidarity with the people of such countries. The
Organization of African Unity and the Commonwealth
deserve our commendation for the steps they have
taken in this regard.
Developments in Fiji since 19 May this year have
caused us deep concern. We appreciate the action taken
by the Commonwealth after the overthrow of the
constitutionally elected democratic Government there.
We hope that Fiji will return immediately to the
constitutional base of 1997 and restore the rule by law
at the earliest opportunity by putting an end to racial
discrimination. This is in Fiji's own long-term interest.
We hope that the international community will exercise
its collective authority and influence to bring Fiji back
to the road of democracy and the rule of law.
It appears, sadly, that the world has forgotten
Afghanistan. The fratricidal conflict in that country
continues on account of the Taliban's pursuit of the
mirage of military success. It also continues because of
outside support, military and financial, to the Taliban.
This conflict and the Taliban's mediaeval obscurantist
ideologies continue to cause untold suffering to the
Afghan people. This adversely affects the peace and
security of the entire neighbourhood, from West to
Central Asia to South Asia. The negatives that emanate
from the Taliban-controlled areas of Afghanistan, in
the shape of terrorism, drug trafficking and the flow of
arms, cause justifiable concern all over the world. The
Taliban and their mentor must heed the world's
demands and abandon the path of conflict. We stand for
a comprehensive settlement in Afghanistan that
19

restores peace at the earliest and ensures the interests
and aspirations of all sections of that society.
We have consistently called upon the United
Nations to increase its development orientation and
engagement, which is a core responsibility. We
welcome and support the declaration of the Secretary-
General last week to the United Nations Development
Programme's ministerial meeting that deficit in
development will put in jeopardy all other goals of the
United Nations. To address the root causes of poverty
meaningfully, we need firm international commitments
to re-order and reshape international relations, in
consequence providing for equitable opportunities to
developing countries for resource earnings. Our call is
even more relevant in today's fast integrating world.
Developing countries and their people cannot
thrive on a diet of advice and goodwill alone. We
therefore hope that the forthcoming conference on
financing for development would endorse concrete
initiatives for mobilization of the required external
resources for development, whether from trade or
concessional flows, and treat this as a shared global
goal. In this context, it would be useful to establish the
difference that would be made if there was universal
adherence to the agreed official development
assistance(ODA) target of 0.7 per cent of Gross
National Product(GNP), within a specified time frame.
Nowhere is this more important than in the
continent of Africa. Africa's efforts need to be
adequately supported by the international community.
We believe that issues relating to the development of
African countries must remain at the forefront of the
work of the General Assembly.
The process of globalization, with revolutionary
leaps in communications and the great advance in
information technology and increased mobility of
capital, trade and technology, has produced new
potential for sustained economic growth. The benefits
of globalization have, however, not percolated to the
vast sections who live mired in poverty, without
shelter, in hunger and in deprivation. Globalization has
often been accompanied by enhanced poverty,
unemployment and consequent social disintegration.
This poses a major challenge. We have to determine an
inclusive concept of growth and development. We have
to strive for the uplifting of people in the largest sense,
and not simply in terms of sectoral advances. While
GDP growth rates and selective indicators may point to
growth in an economy, the elimination of poverty and
enhancement of the quality of life and creation of real
choices must be integral to the process of assessing the
success of development efforts.
In India, we have formulated development
strategies on the premise that economic and social
policies must subserve the primacy of the human being,
and in particular the poorest. Market forces and growth
alone are not the answer. Intervention to guarantee
social justice is crucial. Development based on uneven
rewards will not be supported by those who are not its
beneficiaries. It places great stress on the social fabric.
The fullest possible participation of the people in the
development process is the best guarantee for the
success of any growth strategy.
Many challenges lie ahead of us. Impediments to
sustained economic growth for developing countries
abound. Protectionist tendencies in developed
countries, a lack of political will to implement
commitments undertaken regarding development
finance and tardy alleviation of the debt burden of
developing countries aggravate the situation. Special
and differential treatment for developing countries
guaranteed under World Trade Organization (WTO)
provisions must be translated into operational reality.
Developed countries should not seek to restrict market
access to goods and services and free movement of
natural persons, especially at a time when developing
countries are being asked to open up their economies
and compete in the international economic domain.
Another challenge relates to reconciling the needs
of economic and industrial growth with the need for
preservation and protection of the environment. A safe
and healthy environment for our peoples is an
imperative. At the same time, all development cannot
be sacrificed at the absolutist altar of environmental
preservation. Sustainability of growth strategy and
environmental conservation cannot and should not
imply maintenance of poverty.
Developing countries have done commendable
work in the implementation of Agenda 21, in the
context of an exceptionally difficult global
environment. The promised resources from developed
countries have failed to materialize. The transfer of
technologies on preferential and concessional terms has
not been forthcoming. Indeed, impediments are placed
on technology transfer even on commercial terms. The
special session of the United Nations General
20

Assembly on the review and appraisal of the
implementation of Agenda 21 in 2002 should
concentrate on finding solutions in addressing such
unfulfilled commitments and providing reality and
operational content to the declaration that “eradication
of poverty is the over-riding priority of developing
countries”.
Children and issues relating to them are a priority.
We hope that the special session of the General
Assembly next year will concentrate on the
implementation of the Declaration of the World
Summit on Children.
Advancement of the democratic spirit and
overcoming challenges to it, growth with equity,
economic development with social justice and, as the
prize that we seek, the creation of a world where
injustice and deprivation give way to fulfilment and
welfare for all are among the goals that we should set
for ourselves at the dawn of this new century. The
challenge is nothing less than collective enlightened
global ownership.
The General Assembly once again faces a heavy
and challenging agenda on this long road before us. Let
us wish ourselves success in our endeavours.








I stand here today as
Israel's messenger of peace. The establishment of the
State of Israel was the fulfilment of the dream of a
people forced into exile 2,000 years ago. The
destruction of the Second Temple and the dissolution
of Jewish statehood were the result of our failure as a
nation to assume the proper political course, to opt for
accommodation with reality instead of engaging in
messianic hallucinations. Our punishment was very
severe indeed, but maybe it can serve as a lesson to
those nations and leaders who today may be tragically
led to believe that the dangerous inertia of romantic
mythology and unrealistic dreams is preferable to the
banality of a wise and prudent political course.
Most revolts are uprisings against a system.
Zionism was a revolt against destiny. It is this
expression of our re-encounter with the world of
political realities that eventually led us to the
restoration of Jewish statehood in 1948. Tragically,
however, historical and geopolitical circumstances
have put us in a prolonged, bitter conflict with the
Palestinian people.
It was thanks to the leadership of Prime Minister
Rabin and Chairman Arafat that, seven years ago,
Palestinians and Israelis were put on a track leading to
peace and reconciliation. We have been engaged in the
past seven years, but more intensely in the last year, in
a major effort, unprecedented in both scope and depth,
to resolve this 100-year-old conflict. This negotiating
process, and it alone, should be the foundation of a
peace agreement.
At this point, I would like to address my
colleagues from the Arab and Muslim world. I hope
that my words will convince them of the Israeli
Government's sincere intentions to achieve a
comprehensive peace based on respect, dignity and
fairness, which will end the Middle East conflict and
best serve the vital interests of the entire region.
The Jewish people have no quarrel with Islam.
On the contrary, we have the deepest respect for that
great Islamic civilization under whose wings Jewish
history — from Al-Andalus to Turkey, from Egypt to
Iraq, from the Jewish quarters of Tangier to Aleppo in
Syria — has known some of its finest hours and most
glorious cultural achievements. But even at the height
of the “Golden Age”, in the midst of the delights and
wonders of Muslim Spain, our people never abandoned
their dream of and yearning for Jerusalem, as expressed
in the words of the poet Yehuda Halevi more than 800
years ago:
“My heart is in the East, and I am in the furthest
reaches of the West. To thee my soul yearns from
the depth of the West.”
We are a small nation decimated by holocaust and
dispersion, but our heritage is rich. It was from our
eternal capital, Jerusalem — which, according to a
Muslim source,
“in the days of the people of Israel, was an area
larger than Cairo and Baghdad” —
that the message of monotheism was projected to
humanity. The Jewish holy sites and shrines in
Jerusalem are the very heart of the Jewish faith,
identity and history. For the past 2,000 years, Jews
have turned towards Temple Mount in prayer three
times a day.
“If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget its cunning. Let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth if I do not recall thee”,
they pledged in joy and in sorrow.
For the past 30 years, Israel has consistently
demonstrated its commitment to freedom of religion
10

and worship in Jerusalem. Heads of the various
religious denominations in Jerusalem will attest to the
fact that the city has never been so open to all
believers. During the last month of Ramadan, a record
number, unheard of in the annals of Islam in Jerusalem,
of more than 400,000 Muslim worshippers attended
Friday prayers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I note this as an example of the deep respect
which Israel has for Islam and its followers. Just as we
do not question the sincerity of the sentiments of others
towards their holy sites in Jerusalem, we expect that
others will not question the Jewish people's deep, awe-
inspired attachment to Jerusalem and its holy sites,
from which we will never again be parted.
Politicians need not distort God's intentions for
the sake of negotiations. How refreshing it is that a
great number of Muslim scholars should attest to the
fact that, as the Supreme Court Judge Mujir el-din al-
Hanbali wrote in his History of Jerusalem and Hebron,
“David reigned for 40 years and before he died he
passed the monarchy on to his son Solomon and
told him to build the beit al-miqdas —  the
Temple”.
The expression beit al-miqdas —  that is, the House of
the Temple — became in many Muslim sources a
synonym of the word “Jerusalem”.
It is a travesty of historical truth to present the
Palestinian refugee problem as the result of mass
expulsion. There is no denying, however, that once the
Jews — who for thousands of years waited with
humility for their redemption — made their re-
encounter with history as a sovereign nation, they had
to assume the inherent immorality of war. The
suffering of the civilian population will always be a
burden on the conscience of any nation at war. The
Arab-Israeli conflict has no monopoly on this maxim.
Clearly, the Palestinian refugees were victims of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel, however, can assume
neither political nor moral responsibility for this
tragedy that was the direct result of the all-out
onslaught against reborn Israel — an onslaught
launched by the Arab armies in 1948. The Palestinian
refugee problem was born as the land was bisected by
the sword — not by design, Jewish or Arab. The
problem was largely the inevitable by-product of Arab
and Jewish fears and the protracted bitter fighting.
We believe that, once established, it is the
Palestinian State that should provide for the vindication
of the Palestinian claim for the right of return. The
notion is preposterous that a nation should create a
State only in order to gather its exiles in a
neighbouring State. Israel, however, has expressed its
willingness to actively participate in any international
effort and fund aimed at providing the financial
foundations for the resolution of the refugee problem.
Out of humanitarian considerations, Israel may also
accept a small and limited number of refugees within a
scheme of family reunification.
Let there be no doubt. The peace process is not
the objective, we need not sanctify the process. Peace,
not the process, is the objective. Peace is not about
more conventions, summits and resolutions; it is about
the future of our children, and about the seemingly
unattractive banalities of building the mechanisms of
cohabitation.
To the Palestinians we say: we need to
disentangle ourselves from this seemingly insoluble
conundrum. We know that unless your and our wounds
are healed, peace — not only the political peace but
also that of the mind and the conscience — will not be
complete. Yet, at the same time we realize that the total
satisfaction of our respective dreams or presumed
rights will lead us to perdition. Hence it is incumbent
on us to devise realistic ways to heal without opening
new wounds, to dignify our existence as free peoples
without putting into jeopardy the collective existence
of each other. Peace is not about twisting each other's
arms; it is about defining a common interest. I believe
that such an ideal compromise is not impossible to
achieve, while banishing the sword from this land of
God.
Peace has not materialized in full yet, but I
believe that we are moving in the right direction. In the
past year the Government of Prime Minister Ehud
Barak has made bold, courageous and unprecedented
moves towards peace. At Camp David we have
contemplated ideas and explored concepts relating to
the most sensitive and supposedly intractable issues.
Our sense is that breakthrough is possible, just as
failure may lead to breakdown. We have turned the sea
that separated us into a river. But, do we have the
courage and the determination to cross it?
I know I may not sound too objective by
vouching for Prime Minister Barak. But, I have come


here with the power of conviction that no Prime
Minister before him — and let no illusions be
harboured, no Prime Minister after him — will touch as
he has the outer limits of his options as an Israeli and a
Jew.
I do not underestimate the dilemmas facing
Chairman Arafat. He is the great leader of the
Palestinian people, and I know that the decision is not
easy for him either. But this is the destiny of leaders: to
always be prophets without honour. They should not
expect the applause of their constituencies, what really
matters is the judgement of future generations. I call
upon our Palestinian partners to realize that history has
brought us to a moment of truth and decision from
which we are not allowed to escape empty-handed
without inflicting severe punishments on our own
peoples.
Israel aspires to achieve a comprehensive peace
in the region and help move it into the future. Twenty
one years ago we signed a cornerstone peace treaty
with Egypt, followed by a peace treaty with Jordan and
an incipient but promising process of normalization
with the Maghreb and Gulf States. Eighteen years of
Israeli military presence in Lebanon have been
terminated by the Barak Government, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, and thanks
especially to the efforts and dedication of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. We have also delved into the
possibilities of reaching peace with Syria. We hope that
talks with Syria will resume as soon as possible and
that a fair and equitable agreement can be achieved.
Israel is determined to pursue peace and take the
calculated risks attached to it. But Israel will not
compromise — not now and not ever — on those
security and national interests that we deem vital.
While building our peace with the Palestinians we
cannot ignore security concerns inherent in the fact that
peace with the Palestinians is not our last peace. We
still have a dispute pending with Syria, and we are still
exposed to the most serious regional threats emanating
from revolutionary powers in the area.
Peace requires the active involvement of the
international community. The critical role played by
the United States, and especially the relentless
dedication and unequivocal commitment of President
Bill Clinton, has been massive and constructive. Once
again the United States has proven to be the
indispensable nation. We have also seen the European
Union rising to the task, and we commend the role of
the French Presidency and that of other key European
Governments. Peace needs the advice of the
international community and it will need that support
to cement peace once it is achieved.
We expect also to work closely with the Egyptian
Government for the cause of regional peace. I believe
that it is also important that Russia and the Arab world
express their opinions that now is the time to make
historical decisions. Time is an elusive and perishable
commodity. We are all running out of it.
We are open to developing wide spaces of
cooperation with our Palestinian neighbours and indeed
with all the countries of the Middle East, with dignity
and mutuality. But, we do not intend to impose our
experience on anybody, nor is it our intention to assert
our economic or technological presence amidst those of
our neighbours who do not want it. The leaders and the
elites throughout the Middle East do not need our
advice to know what are the real challenges ahead of us
all: modernizing the economy and combating disease,
hunger, poverty and illiteracy. Indeed, small islands of
excellence notwithstanding, the Middle East is in grave
danger of being on the wrong side of the digital divide.
In his inaugural speech in 1961, the late President
Kennedy invited his generation to join him in a
struggle:
“Now the trumpet summons us again — not as a
call to bear arms, though arms we need; not as a
call to battle, though embattled we are — but a
call to bear the burden of a long twilight
struggle, ... a struggle against the common
enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease and
war itself.”
Nothing will make us happier than joining hands
with our Arab neighbours with dignity and mutuality in
this most noble of struggles.
The Middle East is not tranquil yet. It is still
replete with armed conflicts, political hostilities and
animosities. Israel believes that regional arrangements
are crucial for arms control. A step-by-step approach,
commensurate with progress towards comprehensive
peace, is the right approach.
We are concerned by the expanding stockpiles of
conventional weapons in the region, as well as by
attempts made by Iran and Iraq to acquire and develop
12

non-conventional weapons, and by an increasing
missile threat.
Israel attaches great importance to the eventual
establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the region. In order to reach that goal,
direct negotiations between all States of the region
must be held.
Last year saw a turnaround in Israel's relations
with the United Nations. After years of anomaly, Israel
was temporarily admitted to the Western European and
Other Group (WEOG) in New York. We hope that
Israel's admission to the Western Group in
international organizations based outside New York
will soon be secured.
The United Nations, and indeed most of its
Member States, played a major role in demanding that
Iran treat fairly the 13 Jews falsely accused, convicted
and sentenced for ludicrous charges of espionage. It is
in such instances that the international community has
the opportunity to express its discontent and exert
pressure on countries that break the norms of
behaviour.
On the issue of the reform of the Security
Council, is our opinion that the Security Council
should faithfully reflect the present geopolitical
picture, a picture that has changed beyond recognition
since the last enlargement of the Council in 1965. We
subscribe to the view that the right of veto — a safety
net against the possible arbitrariness of the General
Assembly — should remain in the hands of a limited
number of States.
Allow me a final reflection on the Israeli-
Palestinian dilemma.
The tragedy of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
stemmed from discrepant historical rhythms. The
history of our modern national movement has been
characterized by realistic responses to objective
historical conditions. The Palestinians have
consistently fought for the solutions of yesterday —
those they had rejected a generation or two earlier. This
persistent attempt to turn back the clock of history lies
at the root of many of the misfortunes that have
befallen the peoples of the region. Now it is time for all
of us to overcome dire memories and look forward.
Neither the physical nor the rhetorical war of images
will bring us any closer to peace and reconciliation. No
one has a monopoly on the mythology of suffering and
atrocities. In this tragic dispute we have all committed
acts of violence that we ought not to be proud of. To
the Palestinians we say, we are excited by the prospects
to overcome the troubled history of our relations in
order to shape our dreams of peace. Let us then join
hands in asking the world, which has been watching,
perplexed at, and sometimes even fuelling our wars, to
mobilize its resources for the benefit of our peoples.
And, let us be full partners in this international effort to
lay down the foundations of the Middle East of the
future. The creative energies of our peoples should at
long last be put to work in the service of peace, for as
the wisest of kings, King Solomon, the builder of the
Temple in Jerusalem, wrote thousands of years ago,
there is:
“A time for slaying and a time for healing ... a
time for war and a time for peace”. (The Holy
Bible, Ecclesiastes 3:3-8)







I begin by joining
others who have congratulated you, Mr. President, on
your election. I also assure you of the New Zealand
delegation's full cooperation as you carry out your
important duties.
I also welcome the admission last week of our
neighbour and friend Tuvalu into the United Nations.
The admission of four new Pacific nations in the space
of a year contributes to the truly universal character of
the Organization.
This general debate is taking place at the start of
a new century and a new millennium. Secretary-
General Kofi Annan has called upon the Member
States of the United Nations to harness the symbolic
power of the millennium to meet the real and urgent
needs of people in every part of the world. This is an
appropriate time to recommit ourselves to the beliefs,
the values and the principles that led to the birth of the
Organization 55 years ago.
Like many other Members of the Organization,
New Zealand is a small country that tries to take a
principled and independent view of the world. In 1945,
in San Francisco, we played an active part through the
Labour Prime Minister of the day, Peter Fraser, in
framing the Charter in which heads of State and
Government reaffirmed their faith here last week.
We have always viewed the maintenance of
international peace and security, and the practical task
of peacekeeping, as key roles of the United Nations.
We are currently making our largest-ever contribution
to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in East
Timor. This commitment underlines our full support for
the central role of the United Nations in building a
stable, democratic and economically viable East Timor
in partnership with its people. So do the non-military
personnel and development assistance we have
provided to help the East Timorese create essential
services.
Just over a year ago, the East Timorese people
voted overwhelmingly for an independent future, and I
had the privilege of being part of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) group that oversaw
that electoral process. We recall the horrors which
followed as pro-integration militias laid waste to the
territory, slaughtered innocent people and forced
thousands of East Timorese into West Timor.
Relative calm and stability has been restored in
most of East Timor, and we remember here today the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers from Australia,
Bangladesh, Nepal and my own country who in recent
24

months laid down their lives to help achieve this. But
the militias continue to hold sway in the border areas
among the refugees in West Timor. Unless brought
under control, these militias will destabilize both West
and East Timor.
The murder last week of three United Nations
humanitarian workers in Atambua in West Timor
repelled us all. New Zealand was able to respond
quickly, along with Australia, to the United Nations
call for help in evacuating their colleagues and non-
governmental organization personnel from Atambua.
We committed helicopters with security and medical
elements from our forces serving on the border with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). This airborne evacuation, which had
the cooperation of Indonesian forces, was successful.
But the pain and the outrage we feel at the murder of
three United Nations humanitarian workers remains
undiminished.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1319
(2000), insisted that the Government of Indonesia
disarm and disband the militia immediately to ensure
safety and security in the refugee camps and for
humanitarian workers, and to prevent cross-border
incursions into East Timor. It also called for those who
have carried out attacks on international personnel to
be brought to justice. These are binding obligations.
The world awaits action to implement them without
further delay.
Besides East Timor, New Zealand is at present
contributing to 12 other peacekeeping operations,
including in Kosovo, on the borders of Syria, Israel and
Lebanon, in the Prevlaka peninsula and in Sierra
Leone. New Zealand personnel also serve with the
Peace Monitoring Group in Bougainville, the
Multinational Force Organization (MFO) in Sinai and
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) in Bosnia. Being
conscious of the many challenges faced by the United
Nations in meeting its peacekeeping responsibilities,
we greatly welcome the Brahimi report. We trust that
the report's important recommendations will receive
serious and expeditious consideration during this
Millennium Assembly session, with a view to their
early implementation.
As the Brahimi report points out, weak mandates
and poor resourcing underlie most of those operations
which did not succeed in their objectives. We are
concerned too at the tendency to rely overly on
“coalitions of the willing” to carry out operations that
should be undertaken by the United Nations. The
failure of some Member States to pay their assessed
contributions on time, in full and without conditions
imposes an impossible burden on the Organization and
on troop contributors. We agree that the scale of
assessments for peacekeeping needs revision to make it
more equitable and transparent. Any revision must be
established in accordance with the longstanding
principle of apportioning expenses according to
Member States' capacity to pay.
Heads of State or Government agreed at the
Millennium Summit to intensify their efforts to achieve
a comprehensive reform of the Security Council in all
its aspects. In the past seven years of debate on this
matter, it has been shown just how difficult an issue it
is, especially in regard to how the Council might be
enlarged. There is no agreement on this aspect at this
time. And yet I am sure that most Member States
would agree that the Council must be made more
representative of today's membership as well as more
transparent in its working methods and more
democratic in its decision-making. If there is to be
progress towards an overall package deal on reform,
then compromises will have to be made.
At the heart of any reform, in New Zealand's
view, must be the curtailment of the veto, if indeed it
cannot be eliminated. We have argued this case since
1945, and we believe that it is even more relevant
today. A device which 50 years ago might have had the
utility of preventing the permanent members from
using the Organization to make war on one another has
in recent times served to frustrate the will of the wider
membership. I believe there is very broad agreement in
the General Assembly on the need to deal with the veto
urgently, so that the Security Council can be more
effective in carrying out its important responsibilities.
I would not want to suggest that there has been no
progress at all on Council reform. There have, in fact,
been some major steps forward in opening up the
Council's meetings and briefings to participation by
non-members. We are grateful for that. I would also
like to reaffirm New Zealand's strong support for the
Open-ended Working Group on Security Council
reform, whose deliberations have contributed to this
progress. In our view, the Working Group continues to
be the appropriate forum in which to pursue efforts
aimed at reforming the Council, because it is essential
for the health of the Organization that any reform
25

package enjoy the widest support and buy-in. Council
reform is too important a matter for back-room deals.
The Millennium Declaration contains some
important guidance on human rights, democracy and
good governance. For example, all countries are
enjoined to strengthen their capacity to implement the
principles and practices of democracy and respect for
human rights, including minority rights. This could not
be more timely for my own region, the South Pacific,
where over the past year we have seen the collapse of
democracy and governance in some countries in the
face of disputes over land and economic disparities and
as a result of ethnic tensions.
There are no easy solutions to some of the
problems the region faces, but one thing is clear, and
that is that the answer to these problems is not to adopt
political systems that discriminate against particular
ethnic groups, as some in Fiji this year have sought to
do. To do so simply breeds a deeper sense of frustration
and exclusion, which is a recipe for further instability.
Small States, especially small developing countries like
our neighbours in the Pacific, face particular challenges
from globalization. They are uniquely vulnerable to
external impacts. We need to find fresh and more
effective means to development.
It is essential to help countries build for
themselves inclusive and democratic forms of
government that in turn take account of cultural values.
Underpinning this must be robust and accountable
institutions, respect for the rule of law, independence
of the judiciary, an effective press, strong civil society
and, above all, greater public education to foster a
more widespread understanding of democratic values
and processes.
The Millennium Summit provided heads of State
or Government the opportunity to take action on a
range of treaties which are fundamental to the
development of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. My Prime Minister
took action in respect of six, and I record here in
particular New Zealand's ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, and the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
The practices of child prostitution, child
pornography and the appalling exploitation of children
to fight wars are a disgrace and a crime against
humanity which must be expunged. We encourage
others also to sign and ratify these agreements. I should
also add that we greatly welcome the recent decision
by the Economic and Social Council to establish a
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues.
At the Millennium Summit, world leaders agreed
to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear weapons. The outcome
of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in
May, where the five nuclear-weapon States gave an
unequivocal political undertaking to accomplish the
total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, demonstrates
a new determination to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons. This is a matter of real urgency. We must
promote the implementation of the new commitments.
New Zealand, with its new agenda partners, will submit
a draft resolution during this session of the General
Assembly.
New Zealand will also, in partnership with Brazil,
promote a southern hemisphere free of nuclear
weapons. In addition, we will, along with Australia,
Mexico and Japan, urge all countries that have yet to
do so to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. We will also support further
preparations for the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects and join calls for adherence to the Ottawa
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction.
New Zealand urges caution regarding decisions
on missile developments that could impact negatively
on nuclear disarmament, lead to a new nuclear arms
race or be inconsistent with the commitment to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. This is no time
for complacency. The United Nations disarmament and
arms-control machinery must engage again in
negotiations and other work on the new programme of
action agreed at the NPT Conference.
Leaders also declared their resolve to minimize
the adverse effects of United Nations economic
sanctions on innocent populations. Sanctions are an
important tool at the Security Council's disposal to
encourage compliance with its resolutions, but they
must be appropriately targeted for maximum effect.
They should not impose blanket measures which harm
26

innocent populations and even strengthen the grip of
despotic regimes. We support efforts within the
Organization to develop proposals for smarter, more
effective sanctions which apply pressure where it we
will have maximum impact.
The Millennium Declaration also speaks of the
need to protect our common environment. My Prime
Minister announced during the Summit our intention to
become party to the Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by
mid-2002. I also wish to recall a particular
achievement over the past year in the holding of the
inaugural session of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and
the law of the sea. This is a significant step forward in
providing an appropriate forum for discussion of cross-
cutting oceans issues. The success of this process
should be judged by the extent to which there is
enhanced global understanding of oceans issues and an
increased willingness to cooperate and coordinate
cross-sectorally to address them.
Finally, the Millennium Declaration sets some
key goals for development and poverty eradication and
urges meeting the special needs of Africa. This year,
New Zealand was able to increase its core funding of
the United Nations Development Programme by more
than a third and of the United Nations Children's Fund
by almost a half. We believe that the United Nations
has a key role to play in the coordination of official
development assistance delivery. The preparations for
the event on financing for development are an excellent
demonstration of leadership by the Organization and a
significant step forward in furthering cooperation with
the Bretton Woods institutions. The crushing and
seemingly never-ending debt burden, especially on the
countries of Africa, must be urgently reduced. We must
also address more effectively the scourge of
HIV/AIDS.
Leaders at last week's Summit provided this
Millennium Assembly with a clear direction and a
strong mandate. Our countries have delegated us the
responsibility to realize that vision of a better world
and we must ensure through our efforts and
determination that we do not fail them.The Millennium Summit has given all of us
the priority task of establishing a new and equitable
world order — an order which would meet the interests
of all and every member of the international
community and ensure adequate solutions to the
problems with which the twenty-first century is
confronting us.
I am convinced that in this era of globalization
and enormous scientific and technological progress,
humankind can and should have a comprehensive and
forward-looking strategy. While in the past century
human civilization's main task was that of survival,
today we are confronted with significantly more
difficult problems which are much more varied in
terms of their scope and orientation.
The strategy of survival must give way to a
strategy of sustainable development aimed at ensuring
the prosperity of humankind. It must be based on the
recognition of the indivisibility of international
security, the use of modern scientific and technological
achievements for the benefit of the entire international
6

community, and a gradual closing of the development
gap between the various States.
These ambitious goals can be achieved only
through the preservation and strengthening of strategic
stability in its very broadest sense.
Strategic stability means further progress in the
disarmament process, reliable prevention of the spread
of weapons of mass destruction. Today nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation are no longer the
subject of exclusive interaction between Russia, the
United States and other nuclear Powers. What is
needed is the effective involvement of multilateral
United Nations mechanisms and the entire world
community in those processes.
The outcome of the Millennium Summit provides
additional opportunities for the achievement of a major
breakthrough in disarmament in the twenty-first
century. This will require consistent joint efforts aimed
at strict compliance with the agreements already
concluded; a step-by-step reduction and eventual
elimination of weapons of mass destruction under
effective international control, and the limitation of
other types of armaments; and prevention of the arms
race in new spheres.
The time has come to give a new impetus to the
work of the Conference on Disarmament, which has
proved in practice the effectiveness of multilateral
diplomacy under the auspices of the United Nations.
Russia advocates the resumption of substantive work at
that forum on major issues on the disarmament agenda.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) provides an indispensable international
legal basis for nuclear disarmament. This has once
again been reaffirmed in full by the 2000 Review
Conference. Russia will work to ensure that the
decisions of the Millennium Assembly promote the
practical implementation of the agreements reached
during that Conference. It is precisely for that purpose
that the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir
Putin, put forward an initiative on the development and
implementation, under the auspices of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), of an international
project designed to phase out the use of enriched
uranium and pure plutonium in the civilian nuclear
energy sector.
We are satisfied to note the increasing number of
States acceding to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
(CTBT). Its speedy entry into force is in the interests of
the entire international community. Having ratified the
Treaty, we call on those that have yet not done so to
follow suit.
We expect that the United States will follow
Russia in completing ratification of the Treaty on the
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms (START II), which will help make it
operational. We are ready to actively continue the
process of nuclear disarmament and to move towards
the conclusion of a START III Treaty with an even
lower threshold of nuclear warheads — down to 1,500
units. But this will be feasible only if the 1972 Anti-
Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty remains intact. It is
universally acknowledged that this major Treaty
concerns the vital security interests of the international
community as a whole. Its preservation is a key
element of global stability and a strong barrier to the
arms race in regard to nuclear weapons, missiles and
other weapons of mass destruction.
Russia will be introducing a draft resolution in
support of the ABM Treaty. We hope that, as was the
case last year, our initiative will receive broad support
within the United Nations.
A peaceful earth needs a peaceful outer space. At
the Millennium Summit the President of Russia
proposed the convening in Moscow of an international
conference on the prevention of the weaponization of
outer space, to take place in the spring of 2001, when
the fortieth anniversary of the first manned flight to
outer space is to be commemorated. We hope that this
proposal will be actively supported.
Strategic stability means reliable safeguarding of
international information security and counteracting
the use of scientific and technological achievements for
purposes incompatible with universal progress and the
maintenance of international peace. Aware of the great
importance of resolving these most urgent issues,
Russia will introduce for consideration by the General
Assembly a draft resolution entitled “Developments in
the field of informatization and telecommunications in
the context of international information security”.
Strategic stability also means enhancing peace
and security on all continents, settling existing regional
conflicts and preventing new ones and cutting off
external support for them. Millions of people must be
spared the death and suffering caused by local crises.
7

How can this goal be achieved? It is only through
the joint efforts of all States collectively responsible
for the world's destiny. Experience has shown that
unilateral enforcement actions cannot guarantee a
lasting and fair settlement of crisis situations.
The notions of sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of States are still very much alive. Disregard
for these principles and military intervention
circumventing the Security Council, whatever
humanitarian pretexts may be used, undermine the very
foundations of the world order and pave the way for
arbitrariness in international affairs.
The prevention and settlement of crises should
become a key element of international security in the
twenty-first century. When there is collective
determination and goodwill, even the most complex
and major problems lend themselves to a political
resolution.
All of this calls for improvement of the
peacekeeping potential of our Organization. People in
“hotbeds” of the planet — from Africa and Lebanon to
East Timor — rightly associate with the United Nations
“Blue Helmets” their hopes for an end to bloody
conflicts and for the beginning of complex
reconciliation processes. They expect rapid and
effective steps from us.
We hope that the Millennium Assembly will
provide us with an opportunity to engage in a
comprehensive analysis of the work of United Nations
peacekeeping mechanisms and outline ways to increase
their efficiency. Such is the objective of the report
(A/55/305) prepared under the aegis of the Secretary-
General by the Brahimi Panel. It is important to
considerably enhance the United Nations capacity for
the prompt deployment of peacekeeping operations.
This can be done through the early completion of the
system of standby arrangements. Peacekeeping units of
the United Nations Secretariat need to be strengthened,
with provision for professional planning, control and
command of operations.
Russia consistently advocates the expansion of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
structures in the field of peacekeeping. Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter remains the basis for such
interaction. Any regional or “coalition” operation
should be conducted under conditions of transparency
and of reporting to the United Nations Security
Council, whereas operations with enforcement
elements should be carried out only with the
authorization of the Security Council.
The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
is a major regional partner of the United Nations in
peacekeeping. In many respects, it was the close
cooperation between the United Nations and the CIS
that made it possible to successfully resolve the
conflict in Tajikistan. Such interaction will
undoubtedly intensify along with the development of
the CIS anti-crisis potential. At the same time, for a
stable peace to prevail in the conflict-affected regions
in the CIS area the volume of international economic
and humanitarian aid for their rehabilitation should be
increased.
Russia attaches primary importance to the
expansion of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional mechanisms in Africa to
provide for more effective crisis response on the
continent. This is evidenced by the Russian
participation in peacekeeping operations in a number of
African countries.
The entire experience of United Nations
peacekeeping activities in recent years clearly shows
the priority of political and diplomatic methods of
conflict settlement. It is precisely these methods that
make it possible to minimize the suffering of the
civilian population and to find ways to a stable peace.
Strategic stability means the security and
tranquillity of civil society and of the individual. This
task can be accomplished only through the combined
efforts of the international community to counter
contemporary threats and challenges. These include,
inter alia, aggressive separatism and religious
extremism, illicit arms trafficking and organized crime.
Such an abhorrent manifestation of extremism as
international terrorism poses a direct threat to security
and stability. Today, terrorists of every stripe
sometimes act in a more organized fashion than does
the world community confronting them. We expect that
the United Nations will step up its mobilization of
international capacities to counteract terrorism. Such
cooperation must be based on the clear principles set
forth in the Security Council resolution 1269 (1999):
no support whatsoever, no safe havens for terrorists,
the inevitability of punishment for every terrorist act.
As to those who violate these principles the Security
Council must be ready to take measures against them
provided for in the United Nations Charter.
8

Russia intends to ratify the Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Financing elaborated under
United Nations auspices. There is an urgent need to
complete work on the convention for the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, and that work on a
comprehensive anti-terrorism convention should be
stepped up.
Terrorism is often closely linked with drug
trafficking and organized crime. We welcome the
completion of the development of an international
convention against organized crime. Russia intends to
sign it in the nearest future. We also support the
proposal on drafting an international convention on the
fight against corruption.
Strategic stability means promoting human rights
and freedoms everywhere. This area is an important
component of the United Nations activities aimed at
establishing a new world order based on international
law.
Russia contributes significantly to strengthening
the universal legal regime. Our country has signed the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Speaking of pooling the efforts of States to
resolve the twofold task of maintaining international
security and ensuring human security, human rights and
freedoms, we should constantly bear in mind that in the
twentieth century the rule of the ideology of racial
hatred cost mankind scores of millions of human lives.
Unfortunately, today, 55 years after the great victory it
is still premature to speak of total eradication of the
bacillus of national superiority.
We cannot accept a situation in which people do
not have the right to use their mother tongue, are
deprived of their citizenship and jobs on ethnic
grounds, when fighters against fascism are put behind
bars while former fascists find favour with the
authorities. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
should firmly respond to all such manifestations.
Strategic stability must be based on a solid
material foundation. The twenty-first century will go
down in history as the century of mankind's
breakthrough to a qualitatively new level of
development only if we manage to preserve peace and
international security and at the same time impart
necessary dynamism and depth to the process of
economic and technological equalization between the
enormous number of developing countries and the
comparatively small group of leading countries. This
goal cannot be achieved overnight. This will require —
under the unifying and guiding hand of the United
Nations — a mechanism for collective democratic
management of the international monetary, trade and
economic systems. They must become more rational
and fair and be targeted against poverty and
underdevelopment.
It is important to make the most of those
opportunities which have been opened up by the new
technological revolution in order to initiate the process
of bridging the gap in the levels of development.
Information and communications technologies whose
potential for speeding up global development is only
comparable to the invention of written language can
serve as a driving force of that process. A chance has
emerged to skip over several traditional stages of
development through the introduction of global
computer literacy and information technologies.
Mankind, equipped with this powerful instrument, will
obtain a real opportunity to begin creating conditions
for a decent life and the all-around development of
human beings everywhere on earth.
Strategic stability means the preservation of a
clean and healthy environment for the present and
future generations. The United Nations has done a
great deal to mobilize international efforts in that
important field. The “Rio+10” Forum, to be held in
2002, will provide an opportunity not only to sum up
the results of those activities but also to outline a
future-oriented follow-up programme.
Russia supports the expansion of international
cooperation within the United Nations framework in
the areas of biodiversity, climate, combating
desertification, as well as of forest preservation.
The recent increase over the last few years in the
number of natural and man-made disasters and the
consequent growth of the scope of human and material
losses have made disaster management one of the most
formidable global challenges facing mankind. While
intensifying the United Nations efforts to promote
international cooperation in this field, special attention
must be paid to the use of state-of-the-art specialized
technologies for disaster management and to the search
for innovative mechanisms for their use in the interests
of the entire international community.
9

The United Nations — a unique universal forum
in every respect, which has demonstrated in practice its
central role in managing international affairs — should
become a guarantor of such comprehensive strategic
stability. Russia welcomes the consensus reached at the
Millennium Summit on consolidating the United
Nations as the axis of the present world order. The time
has come for concrete collective measures to transform
the Organization into a sort of operational headquarters
for coordinating activities aimed at ensuring a new
strategic stability based on the principles of
multilateralism, equality and solidarity in resolving
global problems.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again that the Russian Federation, for its part, is open
to the closest interaction with all members of the
international community in order to make strategic
stability a cornerstone of the world order in the twenty-
first century and the United Nations its reliable
guarantor.





I am
honoured to address the Assembly on behalf of the
United States and to reinforce the eloquent message
President C1inton conveyed during last week's
Millennium Summit. Because my father worked here
when I was young, I have always considered myself a
child of the United Nations. And because I had the
privilege to serve here as America's Permanent
Representative, I feel at home and so will speak
plainly.
The members of this body reflect virtually every
culture, ethnicity and geographical region. We are city
and country, inland and island, tropical and temperate,
developing and industrialized. We are as diverse as
humanity.
And yet, in responding to the daunting demands
of this new era, we are bound together by the interests
we share and the ideals to which we aspire.
We all have a stake in building peace and
relieving poverty, championing development and
curbing disease. We all want to see the dangers posed
by weapons of mass destruction reduced, refugees
cared for, children nourished, the environment
protected, and the status of women advanced.
We all believe the benefits of globalization must
be allocated more broadly within and among societies.
Because if the new technologies are to ease the old
problems, they must help the many who today lack
access and skills, so that every village becomes a home
to opportunity and every school a midwife to hope.
As the Millennium Summit reflected, we have no
shortage of worthy goals. We are right to aim high and
take on the mightiest tasks.
But as the Secretary-General has said, progress
depends on working together. We need all hands on
deck, pulling in the same direction. For each of us, that
responsibility begins at home because the international
community cannot help any nation that is not striving
to help itself.
Each Government has an obligation to observe
international norms on human rights, uphold the rule of
law, fight corruption and raise awareness about
HIV/AIDS. But in the twenty-first century, no nation
can protect and serve its people simply by going it
alone and that is why we  all benefit from
strengthening regional bodies such as the Organization
of American States (OAS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Because of their unique expertise and regional
legitimacy, they can be instruments for solving some of
the hardest challenges we face. But they will succeed
only if we raise our expectations of these
organizations, call upon them to act boldly and back
them when they do.
Regional bodies can contribute much to the
purposes outlined in the Charter, and the goals
established during the Millennium Summit. But here
again, they cannot do it all.
8

The role of the United Nations is also vital,
because no other institution combines a comprehensive
mandate with near universal representation and global
reach.
We all have an interest in the success of the
United Nations. That is its greatest strength, and also
its burden, because 189 nations have to work very hard
if they are to agree.
I remember when I came to New York in 1993, I
was told by cynics that the United Nations was too
bureaucratic to change, and too big ever to achieve
consensus on measures to improve its governance.
Those cynics were wrong. With support from
many countries, we have made impressive progress.
Compared to seven years ago, the United Nations
accomplishes more and wastes less. Accountability has
increased and duplication diminished.
The Internal Oversight Office, which did not exist
in 1993, has grown steadily more rigorous and is
responsible for tens of millions of dollars of savings. A
culture of transparency and results is slowly but surely
taking hold. Moreover, both United Nations
Headquarters and the entire United Nations system are
better led than they have ever been.
United Nations leaders and Members can take
pride in the gains made, but we all know there is much
more work to be done.
That is why we must back the Secretary General's
efforts to further improve United Nations management,
recognizing that every dollar wasted is a dollar lost to
the fight against poverty and to the achievement of
other urgent goals.
We must also move ahead rapidly to strengthen
peacekeeping, because it is the most visible and vital
yardstick of United Nations success and, for people in
strife-torn regions, often means the difference between
a normal life and no life at all.
There is no magic formula for curing the ills that
have plagued United Nations peace operations in the
past. But the report, just prepared by Ambassador
Brahimi's team, is a solid place to start.
As President Clinton said last week, we need to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers can be
deployed with the right training and equipment and the
right rules of engagement so they can achieve, not
merely attempt, their missions.
This will require a larger peacekeeping staff, on
permanent assignment, comprised of the best talent and
experience we can find.
It will require military planners the world over to
recognize that training for peace operations is a
legitimate part of every nation's security strategy. It
will require the ability to deploy rapidly not only
United Nations military forces, but also civilian police
and experts in law enforcement and judicial reform. It
will demand improved coordination between military
peacekeepers and civilian builders of peace, so that
missions begun are completed and recovery bred by
reconciliation can take hold.
And it will require additional resources from my
Government and from each of yours. And by
“additional”, I mean resources that should not come at
the expense of other core United Nations goals.
The United States will heed the Secretary-
General's request that we work together to consider
and implement the best recommendations of the
Brahimi report.
Whether for peacekeeping or programmes, the
United Nations also needs a sustainable and equitable
system of financing. We do not have that today.
Member States, including my own, must do a better job
of making payments on time. But we must also look
afresh at the method used to allocate responsibility for
United Nations costs.
Last week, the Security Council called for
adjustments in the scale of assessments. This plea has
been echoed by dozens of other countries and should
be acted upon by the General Assembly this fall.
A more equitable system should provide a much
stronger foundation for United Nations programmes
and missions. It should preserve the special
responsibility for peacekeeping of the Security
Council's permanent members. It should retain a
heavily discounted rate for the poorest countries. And
it should reduce the United Nations overall reliance on
payments from the United States, while at the same
time enabling my Government to write a check to the
United Nations for nearly $600 million in prior
obligations.
9

Clearly, adjustments are long overdue. The
United Nations needs a firm and reliable financial base.
In the weeks ahead, the United States will be pleased to
work with members to accomplish this landmark goal.
Further improvements in management and
peacekeeping and a sounder financial base are a vital
step towards a stronger and more effective United
Nations. But we must also stand up to the campaign
launched by Baghdad against the United Nations
authority and international law.
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999) provides
an effective plan for protecting world security through
resumed weapons inspections and monitoring inside
Iraq. It has expanded the oil-for-food programme that
has delivered $8 billion in humanitarian supplies to
Iraqi civilians, with $6 billion more on the way. And it
would enable Iraq, through compliance with the
resolution's terms, to achieve an early suspension of
sanctions. Thus far, Baghdad has flatly refused to
accept the resolution. The regime's strategy is to ignore
its United Nations Charter obligations and to seek to
preserve at all costs its capacity to produce the
deadliest weapons humanity has ever known.
We must continue to do all we can to ease the
hardships faced by Iraq's people. But we must also
defend the integrity of this institution, our security and
international law.
The Millennium Summit illustrated the United
Nations long-standing role as a forum for articulating
consensus goals. But achieving these objectives will
require action at all levels, from local to global. It will
also require a willingness to move well beyond the
limits and habits of the past.
Today, the United Nations is taking on a wide
array of new issues, what I call “people issues”,
because they so directly affect the lives of our citizens.
They include the challenge of protecting our planet by
limiting greenhouse gas emissions; securing safe water
supplies; halting desertification; and putting a stop to
trafficking in human beings. They especially include
the fight against HIV/AIDS, which was highlighted in
a letter to the Secretary-General signed by the women
Foreign Ministers last night. These and similar
challenges are sure to be important components of
twenty-first century diplomacy, and because they are
global in scope, require a global response.
The United Nations is also playing an increased
role in areas where cold war divisions once held it
back. Over the past decade, United Nations entities
have contributed much by prosecuting war criminals,
promoting democracy, supporting human rights and
aiding the fight against illegal drugs.
These issues require a willingness to take a stand,
as the United Nations has done in holding accountable
the perpetrators of ethnic cleansing in Rwanda and the
Balkans; striving to end rebel outrages in Sierra Leone;
and expressing opposition to the long-standing and
ongoing violation of basic human rights in Burma.
Let me say this morning that when the Burmese
Government tries to blame the victims for the crime,
and say that Aung San Suu Kyi and her party are
responsible for their own repression, I can only reply
that much the same was once said about Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Václav
Havel. The world is not fooled, and we must not be
silent.
Some argue that speaking out in defence of
human rights constitutes interference in internal affairs.
I believe it helps to fulfil the purposes of the United
Nations Charter, because when international norms are
assaulted, the United Nations must do more than
simply observe injustice, or report upon it, or
sympathize with the victims. We must do all we can,
where we can, to stop the perpetrators.
This requires the active backing and participation
of United Nations Members, so that respect for
international law becomes steadily more universal and
the incentives for observing global standards
progressively more clear.
The result, if we are united and determined
enough, will be a world of greater security, justice and
peace. Realistically, this is essential, if we are to
achieve the ambitious social goals we have set.
But there is one other essential element as well,
and that is democracy. This past summer in Poland, for
the first time, more than 100 nations came together to
reaffirm democratic principles and ensure that the
democratic tide remains a rising one around the world.
We did this not because democracy always
produces good Governments, for it does not. But we
are convinced by the evidence of the old century that
the hopes we share for the new will more readily be
10

accomplished if people are able to live and work in
freedom.
Democracy is the one road we can all walk down
together and the best system yet devised for sowing
and growing the seeds of economic opportunity.
In promoting democracy, we are not attempting to
impose our values on anyone else. In fact, this is not
possible, because democracy, by definition, enables
citizens within a country to shape their own destinies in
accordance with their own convictions and ideals.
Make no mistake. In any country, at any time,
dictatorship is an imposition. Democracy is a choice.
As we have learned during the last 55 years, the
United Nations provides no guarantees of global peace
or prosperity. But it can play a vital role as catalyst and
coordinator, and as a bridge connecting the
contributions of one to another.
To those who would judge it harshly, I would
respond not by pointing first to the deliberations of
diplomats such as myself, in surroundings such as
these. Instead, I would point to the day-to-day efforts
of United Nations workers caring for refugees, feeding
children, providing shelter and preventing disease.
I would point to the men and women on the front
lines, from Port-au-Prince to Freetown, and from
Kosovo to Kisangani, doing some of the world's
hardest work, and, as we have been reminded by the
recent slayings of employees of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
East Timor, also the most dangerous. It is their efforts
and sacrifice, in partnership with so many indigenous
and other non-governmental organizations, that truly
remind us of the United Nations purpose and of our
kinship with one another.
This is, I expect, my last official speech to a
United Nations audience. As I stand before you, I am
deeply conscious not only of our many
accomplishments, but also of the tasks not yet
completed.
I am grieved by the conflicts that still rage, and
the basic rights and freedoms still denied. I am
frustrated by the gaps that still exist between our ideals
and actions, and alarmed by the deepening material
divide that ultimately threatens every nation, rich and
poor alike.
There are those who say it is naïve to think that
the future can be made better than the past. I am
reminded that this institution was founded by men and
women who were as realistic as any human beings
could be, for they were the survivors of the worst
conflict our world has known and determined that
succeeding generations should be saved from holocaust
and war. They had faith. Surely we, as well, must have
faith that by working together within and outside this
Organization, we can move together, step by step
towards the lofty goals we have set, and thereby bring
about a world more peaceful, prosperous and free than
it has ever been. Since 1993, it has been my privilege
to work with so many of you, from every part of the
globe, in support of the interests we have in common
and the dreams our people share.
This morning, I want to thank you for your
friendship; pledge my cooperation in the months
immediately ahead; and ask respectfully, in turn, for
yours. I promise, as well, to serve the cause of
international progress and individual liberty not only
for as long as I am in office, but for as long as I am
alive.﻿Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this historic Assembly and also to
congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Theo-Ben Gurirab,
on his sterling guidance of the Assembly's work during
the previous session.
The dawn of the new millennium offers us a
unique opportunity to reflect on the successes and
failures of the United Nations since its inception. It
also provides us with an opportunity to dream about the
future of humanity in the third millennium. The
founders of the United Nations based the Charter on
the assertion of human dignity, human rights and the
equality of women and men and the aim of promoting
better social standards. Indeed, billions of people today
enjoy human rights and live in dignity, free from
disease, ignorance and fear, enjoying the benefits of
technology and scientific advances and able to take full
advantage of the process of globalization. Equally,
there are billions who are humiliated, degraded and
stripped of their innate human dignity and worth by
poverty, disease, ignorance, homelessness, hunger and
wars.
This Assembly, following the very inspiring
Millennium Summit, provides us with an opportunity
to reflect on the wise words of the leaders of the world
and on the Declaration they adopted. Global consensus
has at last emerged and confirms that we live in one
world and belong to the same human race; therefore,
while each Government has the responsibility to take
care of its citizens, we all have to work together for the
good of humanity as a whole. This means that we have
to create a people-centred world that is more caring,
with a strong sense of solidarity, where we are all our
brothers' and sisters' keepers, if I may borrow those
words from the Bible.
There is also universal consensus now that while
billions of people are being degraded and dehumanized
by poverty, disease and hunger, there are indeed
enough resources in the world to feed, educate and
restore the dignity of all human beings and make this
world a better place for all. It is therefore clear that the
eradication of hunger and poverty should be the
priority of all priorities and should be our collective
responsibility.
There is also agreement that we have a collective
responsibility in dealing with infectious diseases, such
as malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted
diseases, especially HIV/AIDS. There is a need to
mobilize material and human resources, provide better
infrastructure, provide health education and ensure
access to affordable medicine.
There is also consensus that Africa poses the
biggest development challenge. The success or failure
of the United Nations and of humankind as a whole in
this century will be determined by their success in
dealing with the African development challenge.
We would like to urge the United Nations, in
partnership with the Organization of African Unity and
regional organizations, to accelerate the work towards
peace and stability in many of the countries of our
continent, such as Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Eritrea,
Somalia, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sudan and Burundi, so that these countries may
take their rightful place in the continent, be seized with
the needs of their people, promote development,
produce and export goods and not be areas of perpetual
suffering and war that result in their being the net
exporters of refugees. We welcome the Brahimi report
and are studying it, as it contains very serious
suggestions about the future operations of the United
Nations.
The United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, is humanity's principal agent for collective
security and it needs urgent reform so as to be able to
live up to this solemn responsibility. The world has
changed dramatically and continues to do so. It is
imperative that the composition and role of the
Security Council reflect that change and not remain
obsolete. The Bretton Woods institutions are equally in
need of urgent reform in order to discharge their
mandate and respond to the new development
12

challenge. The World Trade Organization has to adapt
its international trade rules so that they are equitable
and fair and take account of global development
challenges.
It is a source of great concern to the developing
countries that, increasingly, decisions are taken outside
the United Nations and other global structures by
developed and rich countries when these decisions
have a great impact on the poorer countries and
directly affect the lives of billions of poor people. That
is why a partnership between poor and rich countries
and dialogue between North and South are so critical.
Nuclear weapons still constitute a threat to our
planet. We have to pursue the path of universal
disarmament and the destruction of all weapons of
mass destruction.
The need to protect the environment has assumed
greater importance and we can succeed only if we work
together.
The self-determination of the people of East
Timor, Western Sahara and Palestine must be a concern
to all of us. To this end, we urge the United Nations to
do all it can to expedite the processes in East Timor
and Western Sahara. We commend the peace efforts in
the Middle East and the role of the United States. We
would like to pledge our support to the Palestinian and
Israeli leaderships as they try to find creative solutions
to their problems. They must be urged to take
advantage of this unique historic moment, as it seems
that a real possibility exists for a solution.
The equality of women and men still remains a
subject of great concern. All we need to do is look
around this Hall to realize how far we are from
realizing the vision of the founding Members of the
United Nations. Secondly, the feminization of poverty
is a big problem. The marginalization of women, both
in their countries and in the multilateral forums, means
that our countries and organizations, including the
United Nations, are functioning at half-capacity and are
deprived of the unique qualities, energies and creativity
that women would bring. In this context, I cannot
forget the plight of Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma. She
deserves active support from this gathering and the
world.
The United Nations was founded in part to make
sure that the monsters of fascism and racism should not
rear their ugly heads again. Unfortunately, all over the
world racism and xenophobia are on the increase.
Some countries and regions are responding by
developing a new fortress mentality, which does not
help the situation. This should flash red warning lights
to all of us and activate our utmost vigilance against
the scourges of racism and xenophobia.
It is only when we turn our backs on racism,
xenophobia and other forms of discrimination that we
can succeed in building a caring world where we feel
diminished by the suffering and hunger of other human
beings. It was for this reason that we felt a sense of
obligation and agreed to host the world racism
Conference next year. Of course, our country and
people experienced the most systematic, most brutal
and most inhumane form of racism, which the United
Nations declared a crime against humanity. We are
happy to take our place in the fight against racism in
our country and in the world. It is our fervent hope that
the Conference will come up with a programme of
action against racism, xenophobia and other forms of
discrimination.
In conclusion, let us all put our collective will,
courage and intellectual creativity together in shaping
the dream of a better world; a world of solidarity; a
world where no child should starve or die of
preventable and curable diseases; a world where no
child will be deprived of schooling; a world where
children will not be sent to war; a world where no child
can be a slave or be used as an object for trafficking; a
world where children grow up as children and play
with toys and do not have to be breadwinners or worry
about where their next meal is going to come from; a
world where women will enjoy all rights and where the
eradication of poverty and war is our collective
responsibility.
The dream for the new millennium is indeed
realisable. If we act with courage and determination,
we can turn the hopes of billions across the world into
reality.