Mr. President, first of all, please allow me to warmly
congratulate you on your election as President of the
fifty-sixth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. I am confident that under your able
guidance and with the close cooperation of all
delegates, this session will be crowned with success. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere thanks to Mr. Holkeri for what he did as
President of the last session of the General Assembly.
A year ago, the United Nations convened the
historic Millennium Summit. The United Nations
Millennium Declaration issued by the Summit
identifies the objectives for promoting world peace and
development in the new century.
International developments over the past year
demonstrate that more and more countries have opted
for increasing dialogue and cooperation, preserving
world peace and seeking common development. To be
sure, the cause of human progress still involves a long
and arduous effort. Factors of uncertainty in the
international situation are on the rise. More efforts
should be made to democratize international relations,
and there has been no marked change in the irrational
international economic order.
Terrorism is a widespread scourge that threatens
world peace and stability. We strongly condemn the
terrorist attacks on the United States on 11 September,
and extend our deepest sympathy and condolences to
the families of the innocent victims, as well as to the
Government and the people of the United States. China
has always opposed all forms of terrorism. No matter
when, where or in what form terrorism strikes, and no
matter whom it is directed against, it should be met
with condemnation and responded to with counter-
strikes by the international community, which should
adopt a unified position on the matter.
China has taken an active part in international
cooperation against terrorism. In addition to joining
most of the international conventions against terrorism,
China has ratified the Shanghai Convention on
Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism,
concluded by the member States of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
China is in favour of a primary role for the United
Nations and the Security Council in the international
effort against terrorism. China supports the relevant
resolutions that have been adopted and is in favour of
closer cooperation and coordination among the various
countries concerned to this end.
China strongly believes that any military action
against terrorism should have a clearly defined target
and avoid harming innocent people. All such actions
should be consistent with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and other
universally recognized norms of international law, and
should serve the long-term interests of peace in the
region and the world at large.
China believes that terrorism is a tiny fringe of
extreme evil, representing neither one particular ethnic
group nor one particular religion. They must not,
therefore, be lumped together. China, too, is threatened
by terrorism. The “Eastern Turkestan” terrorist forces
are trained, equipped and financed by international
terrorist organizations. The fight against the “Eastern
Turkestan” group is an important aspect of the
international fight against terrorism.
19

In today’s world, the question of security is
becoming increasingly multifaceted and globalized.
Only enhanced international cooperation can help us
effectively cope with global security challenges and
bring about universal and lasting security. Countries
should endeavour to foster a new security concept,
based on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
collaboration. They should seek security through
mutual trust and pursue cooperation to their mutual
benefit so as to effectively reduce factors of insecurity.
The issue of arms control has always been closely
interrelated with that of security. In the face of the new
situation, we should go on working for the preservation
of the existing legal regime for international arms
control and disarmament and for the maintenance of
global strategic stability, without jeopardizing the
security of any country.
Tackling regional hot spots is vital to regional
and global security. We are following with deep
concern the current developments in the Middle East.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict that broke out in
September last year is continuing unabated. It poses a
grave threat to the Middle East peace process and to
regional stability. China supports the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace.
It also supports the Palestinian people in their just
struggle to regain their legitimate national rights and
interests. We hope that the Israeli and Palestinian sides
will take constructive measures and closely coordinate
with the international community in its mediating
efforts so as to create conditions for easing the tension
and reactivating the peace process. China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in this respect.
We are concerned about the situation in South
Asia. Given the current complex situation, we hope
that the countries in the region will strengthen mutual
understanding and mutual trust and coexist in peace
and amity. As a neighbour of Afghanistan, we have
been following the changing Afghan situation closely.
We believe that, in order to find a solution to the
Afghan issue, the following principles should be
observed. First, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan should be ensured.
Secondly, the Afghan people should be allowed to
decide on a solution independently. Thirdly, the future
government in Afghanistan should be broad-based and
embody the interests of all ethnic groups in the
country; Afghanistan should live in amity with all
countries, particularly its neighbours. Fourthly, the
solution should serve peace and stability in the region.
Fifthly, the United Nations should play a more active
role.
Since the beginning of this year, the world
economy has clearly slowed down, and the situation
has been further aggravated by the incidents of 11
September. Developing countries are finding
themselves in increasingly dire straits. The
international community must act with a greater sense
of urgency and accord higher priority to development.
Developed countries should act more vigorously
to promote development. They should adopt effective
measures and make greater efforts to revitalize the
global economy. We hope that the developed countries
will demonstrate a broader vision and a cooperative
spirit in providing assistance to developing countries.
In recent years, anti-globalization activities in
many parts of the world have increased. In fact,
globalization is neither a panacea for development nor
a monster causing disaster. The appropriate response to
globalization should maximize its advantages and
minimize its disadvantages so that all countries can
come out winners and prosper side by side.
Globalization should benefit all people from all social
strata in all countries.
The United Nations has an irreplaceable role to
play in international cooperation in response to
globalization. It should increase its input in
development and work more effectively to fulfil the
development objectives set forth in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration.
China is supportive of the World Trade
Organization’s plans to launch a new round of
multilateral trade talks. It is our hope that the new
round will give full consideration to the concerns and
interests of the developing countries.
The Ninth Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) Economic Leaders Meeting was held
successfully in October in Shanghai, China. The
meeting was convened at a critical moment, soon after
the incidents of 11 September, when prospects for the
global economy seemed grim. Focusing on the theme
“Meeting new challenges in the new century:
promoting common prosperity through participation
and cooperation”, the leaders conducted an in-depth
exchange of views and reached broad consensus.
Having boosted intra-APEC cooperation among the
20

members and reinforced their resolve to restore
economic growth, the meeting sent out a clear, positive
signal to markets throughout the world and took a
resolute step forward in advancing cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. The meeting will have a positive
and far-reaching impact on Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation.
President Jiang Zemin made clear to the world
China’s future objectives, guiding principles and
domestic and foreign policies in the important speech
that he delivered on 1 July this year. The principal task
for the Chinese people in the new century is to press
ahead with the modernization programme, work
towards the grand cause of national reunification,
safeguard world peace and promote common
development.
Indeed, the purpose of China’s foreign policy is
to safeguard world peace and promote common
development. China needs an environment of
friendship and good-neighbourliness and external
conditions of stability and prosperity. To achieve, and
safeguard, such an international environment serves
China’s national interests. It is also China’s duty as a
member of the international community.
We believe that all civilizations and social
systems in the world can, and should, exist side by side
on a long-term basis, complementing one another and
making progress together, in a spirit of seeking
common ground while putting aside differences.
We stand ready to engage in mutually beneficial
cooperation with all countries in the world on an equal
footing towards world peace and development, with the
aim of achieving common development. Our entry into
the World Trade Organization will usher in a
completely new phase of our opening-up process.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
restoration of China’s lawful seat in the United
Nations. Tremendous changes have since taken place in
the world, in China and in the United Nations. China’s
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
however, remains unchanged. In the new century,
China will, as always, vigorously support the work of
the United Nations and continue to work together with
other Member States for a better world.




﻿Only a few moments ago, we were informed of the
crash of a commercial airliner not far from here, in
Queens. At the moment, we do not know the cause of
this disaster, but we are shocked and horrified. I would
express to the bereaved families and to the American
people our sincere condolences and sympathy.
It has been only two months since thousands of
innocent persons lost their lives in the World Trade
Center here in New York. Today, we are seeing the
extent to which the people here have been affected. In
the entire history of the United Nations, there has never
been a situation like this one.
Throughout the world, people have expressed
their sincere solidarity with and commiseration for the
victims and their families. These horrific terrorist
attacks struck not just Americans, but also innocent
people from over 80 countries, members of all the
major world religions and cultures. They targeted us
all. It must therefore be a common concern of humanity
to prevent a recurrence of this tragedy or indeed
something even worse.
The events of 11 September thrust a dangerous
future upon the world. We now live in the terrible
knowledge that no country in the globalized world is
invulnerable and that enemies within, who are
determined to kill and to die, can perpetrate mass
murder at any time. This eerie, awful danger has at a
stroke dramatically altered the foundations of security
policy as we know it. The fight against internationally
operative terrorist networks will require new responses
from the community of States. International terrorism
is a challenge above all for politics, the military, the
police and the judiciary, as well as for the economy
and — very importantly — for culture. At the dawn of
the twenty-first century, the issue of peace and security
has thus taken on an entirely new perspective.
Humanity has rarely been as united as it was on
that terrible day two months ago. This unity was born
not only of horror and compassion, but also of the
realization that we can successfully counter this new
deadly threat only if we combine our full force and
energy. The day of 11 September was a defining
moment that altered the direction of world politics. A
new alliance was created. It must now be strengthened
and developed into a genuine partnership. If this is
achieved, 11 September could go down in history not
only as a horrific day for humanity, but also as the
beginning of a new era of cooperation and
multilateralism.
What drives people to commit these
inconceivable crimes and to blow up themselves and
thousands of innocents? From where does such
uncontrollable hatred come? How can it be curbed?
How can it be conquered? It is certain that in any
attempt to develop an effective counter-strategy we
must, while waging the war on terrorism, analyse the
full range of causes and circumstances that permit such
hatred and violence to grow.
The United Nations is uniquely suited to the task
ahead. It provides the forum required for the creation
12

of a universal coalition. Only it can give international
legitimacy to the response to terrorism. It has at its
disposal the instruments to manage political conflicts
and the underlying development problems that nurture
hatred and despair.
A comprehensive strategy against terrorism must
concentrate primarily on prevention. Developing such a
strategy means nothing less than drafting a policy for a
cooperative world order for the twenty-first century, a
policy that no longer tolerates areas characterized by a
breakdown of order, a policy that has as its goal a
world order under which all peoples can claim their
full and equitable share. This includes making
economic globalization more socially just for more
people and supplementing it with the political
globalization so urgently needed.
The Security Council responded to 11 September
with rare solidarity and, with resolutions 1368 (2001)
and 1373 (2001), took decisions on concrete,
internationally binding anti-terrorism measures that
point the way ahead. The General Assembly, too,
severely condemned the terrorist attacks and called for
joint action against international terrorism.
This path must now be rigorously pursued with
the rapid and universal ratification and implementation
of the 12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions
and the adoption of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. We must endeavour anew to
bring this project, on which we all place so much hope,
to a successful conclusion. I therefore call upon all
States that have not yet approved the present
compromise to reconsider their position.
The International Criminal Court can also become
a valuable instrument in the fight against terrorism.
Under article 7, paragraph 1, of its statute, it will have
jurisdiction to try cases of murder “when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack directed
against any civilian population”. There can be no doubt
that the attacks on New York, Washington and
Pennsylvania fulfil this requirement. For this reason, I
would like to ask you all once again to ratify the Rome
Statute as quickly as possible.
The attack on the World Trade Center was a
wake-up call to the profound threat to world peace that
can be posed by failing States. Areas where political
and social order has collapsed offer terrorists a safe
haven from which they can organize their murderous
networks worldwide. The community of States urgently
needs to take a closer and preventive look at the
problem of failing States — but not just in
Afghanistan, and not only after a catastrophe has
occurred.
No conflict prevention measures have ever been
undertaken in Afghanistan. Far from it. This has
proved to be a fatal error. For more than 20 years, a
humanitarian catastrophe has been playing itself out
before the eyes of the world, in which women and
children, in particular, have suffered. Civil war, human
rights violations and abject misery have also been the
nourishing ground for the unprecedented symbiosis
between the terrorists of the Al Qaeda group and the
Taliban regime.
From there the trail leads directly to the horrific
attacks in the United States. As hard as this decision
may be, without the use of military means, this threat
cannot be averted. We must not forget that the suffering
of the people in Afghanistan is above all the work of
the Taliban. It was the Taliban that, long before 11
September, increasingly impeded effective
humanitarian relief, robbed women and girls of all their
rights and actively supported terrorism, also with the
goal of destabilizing Arab and Muslim States.
Not to react would indeed be to invite further
terror and oppression and would be extremely
dangerous for world peace. The dramatic nature of this
threat is illustrated by Osama bin Laden’s statement
that he will not shrink from using even nuclear
weapons. Civilian means alone are unfortunately not
always enough to put an end to violence and terror.
This was the case in the Balkans.
In Afghanistan, too, the root of the tragic conflict
is profoundly political, and so the solution, too, can
ultimately only be a political one. It must come from
within, must reflect the diversity of peoples in Afghan
society and must be accepted by the Afghan people.
But a peaceful solution also requires assistance from
the international community. Afghanistan must not be
left alone with its problems yet again.
A clear political and humanitarian perspective for
Afghanistan is now crucial. The United Nations should
be the coordinating agency for all peace efforts. It is
indispensable as the framework for the political
process and as the guarantor of internal agreements
within Afghanistan. Only a peace process under the
auspices of the United Nations will succeed in
excluding external involvement in the future and
13

ensuring a peaceful future for the country in harmony
with its neighbours. Germany and the European Union
are willing to play their part towards a political
solution for Afghanistan and to participate in the long
term in the economic and social reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
More than anything, the refugees and the civilian
population must be helped. We cannot tolerate the fact
that the Taliban is hindering humanitarian access and is
using the civilian population as a shield. Especially
because of the approaching winter, we must do
everything in our power to provide the people with at
least the most basic necessities and to alleviate their
despair and hardship. Is it possible to establish
humanitarian protected areas, to use the expulsion of
the Taliban from Mazar-e-Sharif and other towns to
improve the humanitarian situation, and to make a
town like Kabul an open city? Of course this will be
very difficult, but let us nevertheless think without
taboos about absolutely all ways in which we could
help the people. As chair of the Afghanistan Support
Group, Germany has issued an invitation to a meeting
in Berlin at the beginning of December. I appeal to all
States to make a great humanitarian effort now and to
come to the aid of the downtrodden Afghan people.
Solving regional conflicts will be of critical
importance in the fight against terrorism. The Middle
East conflict is a top priority. Our hearts go out to the
many innocent victims on all sides. Both the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples have a right to live free of fear, in
dignity and in peace. This is indivisible not only from
Israel’s right of statehood, as recognized in Madrid —
which is, in our view, inviolable — but also from its
security. Germany bears a special responsibility
towards Israel stemming from its past. Any policy that
aims at destroying Israel by means of terrorism or
otherwise will face determined opposition from
Germany. However, we equally advocate the
Palestinians’ right to self-determination and their right
to their own State, Palestine. In the European Union
Berlin Declaration of March 1999 we stated that “the
creation of a democratic, viable and peaceful sovereign
Palestinian State on the basis of existing agreements
and through negotiations would be the best guarantee
of Israel’s security”. This is truer today than ever
before.
Never before has there been broader international
backing for a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Mitchell recommendations still form the
basis for the timetable accepted by all sides, and in
their spirit we call on Israelis and Palestinians alike to
put an immediate and lasting end to violence and
confrontation, to resume the agreed direct talks without
delay and to seriously implement the negotiated
ceasefires. These talks must lead to genuine
negotiations on a viable political solution.
The real aim of the terrorists is to trigger a clash
of civilizations and to inflame the situation in the Near
and Middle East. Under no circumstances can we allow
ourselves to be drawn into such a conflict. We are
fighting international terrorism, not Islam.
We must counter the terrorist strategy designed to
bring about the clash of civilizations with a dialogue of
cultures and religions. We need a spiritual debate based
on mutual understanding that attempts to reach genuine
agreement on the fundamental values that unite us.
Such a dialogue presupposes the existence of shared
values, but also respect for other traditions and
differences between peoples. However, one thing must
be clear: human rights are universal, not Western
values. Consensus was reached on them by the
international community of States in the Charter of the
United Nations and the human rights conventions.
Any dialogue must build on the universality of
human rights. It must be conducted with respect for the
dignity of all involved, in tolerance and openness. It
must start at home, within cultures themselves. It can
bear fruit only if it is pursued free of all constraint.
And it has a purpose only if all participants are also
ready to offer self-criticism.
The insidious anthrax attacks since 11 September
show that the threat from weapons of mass destruction
in terrorist hands, which yesterday seemed abstract, is
today a real and deadly danger. The community of
States must do everything in its power to counter it
with a new push for non-proliferation and global
disarmament.
The dangers of the dissemination of weapons to
non-State groups and of regional arms races require
new answers and effective, internationally enforceable
criminal sanctions. In the nuclear field, the
commitment contained in the Non-Proliferation Treaty
to complete nuclear disarmament remains crucial. As
regards biological weapons, in view of the acute threat,
effective global control mechanisms must finally be
created. The Chemical Weapons Convention must be
more rigorously implemented. All States are called
14

upon to participate in the negotiation of an
international code of conduct on ballistic missile
proliferation.
The fight now beginning against terrorism must
build on the awareness that the first world cannot in the
long term live secure and safe from the tensions and
conflicts of the third world. Almost one quarter of the
world population is starving. Ninety-five per cent of
those infected with AIDS live in developing countries.
Africa is particularly hard hit. At present only a
minority of the world’s citizens profit from the
opportunities for growth offered by globalization and
from the use of the new information technologies. This
state of affairs cannot be accepted, even by the rich
countries — for moral reasons, but also because
tensions and conflicts today spread much more quickly
and widely than ever before.
The battle against poverty cannot be won unless
we take equally determined steps to preserve the
natural resources on which life depends. At the coming
World Summit in Johannesburg we must make a
quantum leap forward towards sustainable
development, improved poverty eradication and better
management of our natural resources. The Kyoto
Protocol must enter into force next year. And we must
strengthen the sole advocate of the global environment,
the United Nations Environment Programme,
institutionally, operationally and financially.
11 September made it horrifyingly clear that the
human race will not be able to live in peace and
security in the absence of political order at the global
and regional levels.
Germany will continue to do its utmost to bring
about the strengthening of the United Nations and its
capacity to act, so that the world will be a more
peaceful, just and humane place in the twenty-first
century than it was in the twentieth century. The future
belongs to responsible governance for one world,
governance based not on hegemonic claims, but on
cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. If together
we succeed in implementing such a policy, we will not
just ultimately win the war against terrorism but will
also be able to eradicate its roots forever.




﻿At the
outset, it is a great pleasure for me to congratulate the
President on his election, which is a sign of the esteem
in which he and his country are held.
Coming after his re-election to a second term ─
which is a sign of the general confidence he has
earned ─ the Nobel Peace Prize that has been awarded
to the Secretary-General is a well-deserved tribute to
his work and, through him, to the United Nations
Organization as a whole, thereby inspiring greater hope
than ever before.
On this my third visit to New York since the
tragedy of 11 September, I also want to express once
again my profound emotion and pay homage to the
people of New York, who are being so severely tested,
and to their courageous mayor, who is now finishing
his term.
The unprecedented magnitude and gravity of the
terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11
September warrant our unfailing solidarity and an
exceptional response. In its resolution 1368 (2001),
which was adopted unanimously, the Security Council
rightly qualified those acts as attacks and, hence, as
legitimately meriting a defensive response under
Article 51 of the Charter. The United States is thus
entirely within its legal and political rights in carrying
out its targeted military response against the terrorist
organizations responsible for those acts. The military
action under way was therefore inevitable, and must be
pursued until all its objectives have been achieved.
Given the preliminary results achieved yesterday, I
hope that those objectives will be met as soon as
possible. The leaders of these terrorist networks and
those who support them must be decisively prevented
from committing further harm.
But that military action should, as a matter of
course, form part of an overarching strategy that
includes immediate, broad-scale humanitarian action
that is better adapted to the needs of people in distress.
France has put forward several proposals in this regard
and supports the current initiatives for better
coordination. That overarching strategy should also
include a political solution — something that has now
become urgent — and strive to ensure that the demise
of the Taliban regime does not lead to factional
infighting and chaos; and it must once again make the
Afghan people masters of their own future. That is the
aim of the action plan for Afghanistan that France
proposed back on 1 October, and of the other
contributions it has made with the same goals in mind.
We await Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi’s proposals with
interest; they should set forth broad outlines of action
for the United Nations. On these bases, the Security
Council should be able to adopt a framework resolution
within a few days, endorsing Mr. Brahimi’s proposals
and spelling out the modalities of United Nations
support for the establishment of an Afghan
26

Government representative of the various constituents
of the population. There is no question of imposing on
Afghanistan some ready-made solution concocted by
outsiders. I call on all the constituents of the Afghan
nation and all neighbouring countries to heed the
general interest of Afghanistan and its people. This is
compatible with respect for the legitimate interests of
the various parties concerned and it is the only way to
turn our backs on the past.
Beyond immediate military, diplomatic and
humanitarian action, our common fight against
terrorism needs to be pursued in all its forms, including
police, judicial and others. The United Nations will
have a crucial role to play in this difficult struggle,
laying down universal obligations for each State and
the framework for our action. A series of conventions
has already been concluded, particularly the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, which I proposed in this very
place in 1999. We must speed up the signature and
ratification of those conventions. The General
Assembly must quickly conclude the negotiations on
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. For its part, the Security Council should
oversee the coordinated implementation by States of its
resolution 1373 (2001).
Action against terrorism also needs to be carried
out through other organizations, in conjunction with
the United Nations and consistent with its policies. For
its part, the European Union (EU) has just taken
unprecedented steps to strengthen police and judicial
cooperation among its member States, including the
creation of a European arrest warrant. An ambitious
action plan has been agreed. The 29 members of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have decided to
extend the fight against money-laundering to the fight
against the financing of terrorism. Beyond that, I
propose the creation of a dialogue forum to move us in
this direction. Several other organizations, too, will
have a role to play, so that at the end of the day every
country will be making a contribution.
Leaving aside the hoped-for short-term results,
the obstacles notwithstanding, we will not achieve
lasting victory against all forms of terrorism unless we
succeed in depriving terrorists of their breeding ground
and eliminating the pretexts from which they
fallaciously draw their justification, and unless we
eradicate them in the true sense of the term. That
implies nothing short of changing our world. And let
no one claim that this would be tantamount to
justifying the terrorists. For neither my country, nor
Europe, nor the United Nations — in other words, none
of us — waited for 11 September to discover, condemn
and seek to remedy the ills of the world. Yet how many
good intentions have come to naught? How many
resolutions have gone unimplemented? How many
announcements have failed to materialize, which now
feed a sense of bitterness and incomprehension? It is
pointless to condemn or deny the theory of a clash of
civilizations. Rather, we must fight against such a risk,
which is by no means wholly imaginary, and against
those who would make it a reality.
This should be one more pressing reason for us
all to find a solution to regional crises, particularly in
the Middle East. Since 1982, France has called for the
creation of a Palestinian State. Naturally, it would have
to be viable, democratic and peaceful, and it should
give credible undertakings as regards Israel’s security.
Guarantees will be needed, yet the Palestinian State is
not the problem; it is the solution for reasons based on
rights, humanity and security. Such is the EU’s
common stance today. This morning, before the
Assembly, President Bush himself has made this his
objective. It is the path of reason — the only path that
can halt the murderous spiral of conflict between the
two peoples.
Admittedly, responsibility for a lasting peace
agreement lies first and foremost with the protagonists.
Unless they make the move, no one else will be able to
overcome their fears and resentment and put an end to
the suffering of these two peoples. Yet, the increasing
threat that this conflict poses to international peace and
security requires that those who have the will and the
means join forces in a push for peace, given that the
main players are evidently unable to do so unaided.
The urgency of the situation in the Near East
obviously should not make us forget Iraq. Regional
security still needs to be secured by restoring an
international monitoring capability and by alleviating
the suffering of the Iraqi people through the lifting of
the embargo on civilian goods. I hope the discussions
now in progress in the Security Council will finally
bring this about.
Nor should we forget the Caucasus, where ancient
quarrels live on and where new ones are rising to the
fore. Yet, here again there is no other way than to seek
negotiated political solutions.
27

In the Balkans, we realized that international
involvement must be sustainable. Thanks to it, and
thanks to new leaders, noteworthy progress has been
achieved towards democracy, reconciliation and
regional cooperation over the last two years. We must
make sure these positive changes are not challenged by
outmoded patterns of behaviour. We must maintain and
pursue the Europeanization of the Balkans.
Turning to the Great Lakes region, we know that
the lasting resolution of the conflict, which involves
more than eight countries, will be a negotiated solution
that will ensure the restoration of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and include as well
safeguard clauses to protect the security of each of the
States. The Lusaka Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions provide the framework for
ending this crisis, but they should be applied as quickly
as possible. To halt the illegal use of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which often
occurs in association with forced child labour, should
be an immediate priority.
In all the cases I have just referred to briefly —
and there are others — the problem we have to resolve
is the coexistence of peoples who are at once close and
antagonistic, deeply affected and divided by history
and separated by fear and the spirit of revenge. We will
achieve this only through perseverance and a clear
understanding of each particular situation, guided by
the principles of the United Nations.
Even if we managed to resolve all these regional
crises and others as well, our task would still not be
over because, at the global level, the gulf between
intentions for the world as stated at international
meetings and actual realities is becoming intolerable
for many peoples. We must redouble our efforts to
create humane globalization. We saw this in Seattle, we
saw it in Genoa, and even more so in Durban. We can
see it in the reactions to the Afghan crisis and to many
other issues. Despite the United Nations and our good
resolutions, there is still no real universal consensus.
What we call “the international community” has yet to
be built. Is this a reason to throw in the towel? To the
contrary – absolutely not. France has long been
determined to add its stone to this edifice. We have
already put forward numerous proposals to that end and
will continue to do so, with increased conviction.
Need I recall our well-known major objectives for
the world?
First, we must achieve a fairer distribution of
wealth; 3 billion people currently live on less than 2
dollars per day, and the global income gap between the
richest and the poorest has doubled over the last 40
years.
Second, we must end impunity.
Third, we must guarantee sustainable
development everywhere — “sustainable”, that little
word that makes all the difference, or which should
make all the difference. The World Summit in
Johannesburg in September 2002 will provide an
opportunity to affirm a vision and a benchmark of
development based on three intimately linked pillars:
economic, social and environmental.
Fourth, we must help refugees and fully respect
the right of asylum.
Fifth, we must manage population movements in
a humanitarian manner.
Sixth, we must draft international standards in a
democratic way to ensure that they are entirely
legitimate and that everyone will consequently be
bound to comply with them.
Seventh, we must no longer tolerate situations of
human distress. State sovereignty, which remains an
essential feature of the international system, cannot, in
extreme emergencies, be regarded as an absolute
principle serving as a pretext for inaction. The Security
Council must be able to fully assume its
responsibilities in cases of gross human rights
violations, for these also pose threats to international
peace and security.
Eighth, we must aim at promoting balanced and
negotiated disarmament, which strengthens security
and strategic stability.
Ninth, we must strive to allow all languages,
cultures and civilizations to exist while maintaining a
dialogue with one another.
Tenth, we must seek to improve the state of
health worldwide, which for one thing means devoting
more resources to combating HIV/AIDS. I would hope
that the new Global AIDS and Health Fund will be
made operational by the beginning of 2002.
But we are undoubtedly now more aware than in
recent years that the attainment of these objectives,
which are both indispensable, and very ambitious, calls
28

different rules and different mechanisms, starting with
the reform and enlargement of the Security Council,
which we have waited for all too long; with respect for
the role of the General Assembly; with the ratification
of the major multilateral instruments — I am thinking
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court and
the Kyoto Protocol, among others; with a more
appropriate and less indiscriminate use of sanctions
when they are needed; with a clarification of the
respective and legitimate roles of Governments and
civil society; with an agreement on the modalities of
interference to deal with large-scale and extreme
emergency situations; with a regulation and
development round at the World Trade Organization
(WTO), which is starting today in Doha; with closer
cooperation and greater consistency between the WTO
and the International Labour Organization; with the
creation of a world environmental organization; and
with reform of the international financial institutions. I
shall stop this list here. I could go on, for there is so
much that remains to be done.
All of us, as Members of the United Nations, are
faced with this challenge. But I do not hesitate to say
here that the rich countries — in other words, the West
and a handful of other countries from the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, where
some 1.135 billion men and women live, have even
more responsibility than others. Now that the illusions
of the last 10 years have been dispelled, the choice
before us is harsh, but clear: either a world so unjust
that we have conflict with no foreseeable end, or, on
the contrary, an international community of the United
Nations, at last worthy of the name, to solve together
humanity’s common problems and ensure its future.
But building this community, instead of just talking
about it or yearning for it, will mean for some of us
giving up privileges, sharing wealth and power in new
ways, and rewriting certain rules hitherto held to be
inviolable. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist
Joseph Stiglitz has written, free trade was designed by
Western countries for the Western countries. This is
debatable, of course, but none of this will happen
without sacrifices, above all on the part of the rich and
powerful countries.
At this very moment, a reshuffling of diplomatic
cards on a grand scale is under way between the United
States, Russia, China, Europe, the Arab or Muslim
world, the other coalition partners, the rest of the world
and the United Nations. I hope — I truly hope — that
this will help to bring about a vital awakening and that
my country, Europe and the United Nations will follow
new avenues, in deeds and not just words, and that all
of us, together, will successfully extend the needed
coalition against terrorism to turn it into a coalition for
an equitable world, and that this will lay the
groundwork for a renewal of the international system.






﻿Please allow me
warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
This day, 11 November, is the anniversary of the
Armistice which ended the slaughter of the First World
War and is a day of remembrance here in the United
States, in the United Kingdom and across much of the
world. It is a day when all of us remember the sacrifice
of those who, over the last century, gave their lives that
others might live in freedom.
For our parents and grandparents, the end of the
Second World War stood as a turning point, a moment
to establish a new world order. Their vision was
inscribed at the very beginning of the Charter of the
United Nations:
“We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”.
With these words, they founded the international
community.
For some of us, the subsequent half-century has
been the most peaceful era of our history. Yet we know
that no one’s freedom can be secure while others suffer.
On this Remembrance Day, we remember
something else — the thousands who died just two
months ago, on 11 September. A third of the nations
represented here in the General Assembly lost citizens
at the World Trade Center. But just as our predecessors
saw hope in the midst of despair, so we now face the
task of building a new and better world.
It is fitting that it was here at the United Nations,
on 12 September, that the world began to fight back
against the terrorist threat. We showed our joint
resolve, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, when we adopted resolutions demanding
that terrorists and those who harbour them be held to
account for their evil actions.
I applaud Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), which established the Counter-terrorism
Committee and which requires all Member States to
respond to the global terrorist threat.
21

We do surely have to take every effective
measure against international terrorist networks, whose
malign influence is felt in every part of the globe, not
least by adopting a comprehensive convention on
terrorism and the draft Nuclear Terrorism Convention.
We also have to confront an unpalatable truth:
that we still face a real and immediate danger. The
murderous groups who plotted the terrible events of 11
September could strike again at any time. Thus our first
duty, to our citizens and to each other, is to defend
ourselves against that threat.
When the nations of the world agreed the United
Nations Charter, they recognized the right of self-
defence in Article 51. It is in exercise of this right that
the military coalition is now engaged in action against
Al Qaeda and the Taliban regime which harbours them.
Taking military action is always a tough decision.
But here it truly was unavoidable, and we all owe a
debt of gratitude to President Bush for the steadfast and
careful manner in which the United States proceeded.
But in defending the world from terror, we have
to do our utmost to spare innocent Afghan people
further suffering. For decades, the Afghans have seen
their country exploited by outside powers and riven by
conflict. In five years, their society has been
systematically destroyed by one of the most brutal
regimes the world has ever known.
But at last today, the international community is
united in its efforts to feed and shelter the millions of
refugees through this harsh winter, and it is determined
to help build a new Afghanistan.
For the first time in decades, there is consensus in
the Security Council as a whole, and among
Afghanistan’s neighbours, that there should be a broad-
based government in Kabul, reflecting Afghanistan’s
rich ethnic diversity, and that the future of Afghanistan
must be put into the hands of the Afghan people. There
must be no more Great Games with Afghan people as
the pawns, and no more regional rivalries, with Afghan
people as the victims.
We know that the one institution in the world
which can deliver this better future is here now: the
United Nations. We should all give Ambassador
Brahimi every support in planning a future that leads to
Afghanistan retaking its place as a fully fledged
member of the international community, able to protect
and promote the interests of all of its people.
That nations have come so closely together to
fight terrorism shows how the world is changing.
However, we have to build a deeper and wider
consensus to tackle the other great issues which we
face. It is not just the Afghan people who have been
excluded from the values on which the United Nations
was founded.
Conflict, poverty, discrimination and injustice
still blight the lives of millions in every part of the
globe. Individuals’ rights, especially women’s rights,
are ignored with impunity, and then the very structure
of communities collapses. Where this happens, where
societies disintegrate or States fail, we put at risk the
basis of global society itself.
If 11 September teaches us anything, it is surely
this: that if we ignore our moral responsibilities to each
other, we will be forced later to face painful
consequences.
Nowhere is the need for action now more obvious
than in Africa. Yes, there has been some progress there.
International work on the ground to resolve conflict has
brought hope to Sierra Leone and to the Great Lakes
region. Responsible Governments working across the
continent in partnership with effective international
donors have succeeded in reducing poverty. But we
should not delude ourselves about the scale of the task
that remains in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa average
income today is much lower than it was 30 years ago.
The New Partnership for African Development
therefore requires the support of the whole community
of nations. Africa deserves the same opportunities that
we in the West take for granted. We in the West must
acknowledge that while removing barriers to global
trade and to finance, we have not always dismantled
barriers to dignity and equality. In theory, global free
trade should have created the conditions for every
economy to exploit its comparative advantage in the
world marketplace. In practice, protectionist barriers
still survive, especially against trade in agriculture,
damaging Africa’s interests today, and all our interests
tomorrow.
As we meet here in New York, our colleagues at
the World Trade Organization meeting in Doha have
the opportunity to begin to put these injustices right.
Launching a new trade round would be the clearest
possible signal of the world’s determination to spread
the benefits of wealth and of prosperity more fairly.
22

Our predecessors gave us the United Nations. In
the succeeding years, it developed expertise in
peacekeeping, in conflict prevention, in human rights
and in reconstruction, to consolidate the gains of 1945.
My message today is that our generation faces as
daunting a task, but a different one. That task is to
defeat international terrorism. But to do that we have to
combine the agenda of 10 September with the agenda
of 11 September, as the Secretary-General emphasized
in his powerful speech yesterday. And we must take not
only military action, but also diplomatic action to
reduce tensions that terrorists exploit.
Nowhere are those tensions greater than in the
Middle East. The path to a settlement there is plain. It
has to be based on a political process that implements
United Nations resolutions. It must deliver security for
Israel within recognized borders while at the same time
creating a viable Palestinian State. We should give the
parties every help to reach a settlement. But our efforts
will be wasted unless the parties themselves show the
political will to bring violence to a halt, and the
political courage to make a deal.
We have seen, in the most graphic and brutal way
possible, that chaos in one part of the world can
undermine security in all parts of the world. Against
that chaos we must set our vision of peaceful
cooperation among stable nations. Achieving that
vision has now taken on a new urgency. Indeed, we are
at a moment of strategic opportunity, which comes no
more than once to any generation. We owe it to those
who founded the international community to seize this
moment. Most of all, we owe it to those who will come
after us.
Today we remember with sorrow the sacrifices
that earlier generations made. We remember with pride
the brave decisions that they took to build a better
world for us, and we salute the reconciliation and
recovery that followed. My hope is that our children
and our grandchildren will look back on this period
with no less pride, and that future generations will be
able to say that we here faced up to a great evil; we did
not duck the decisions we had to take; we established
peace in Afghanistan, constructive coexistence in the
Middle East and sustained development in Africa. We
made the necessary endeavour in the finest tradition of
the United Nations.
The United Nations stands for everything the
terrorist seeks to destroy. My hope is that our
successors will look back on this era and say that we
saved succeeding generations from the scourge of
terrorism as well as from the scourge of war.





﻿I congratulate the President on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session. I also take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and the United Nations on being honoured with the
Nobel Peace Prize.
This session of the General Assembly is being
held in the shadow of the barbaric terrorist acts of 11
September, which dramatically reminded us that
neither distance nor power insulates a State from
terrorism. Such acts represent an arrogant rejection of
the values of freedom and tolerance, which democratic
and pluralistic societies cherish.
Even while uniting the nations of the world in
their grief, this terrible tragedy has created the
opportunity to fashion a determined global response to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
it exists and under whatever name.
We in India know from our own bitter experience
that terrorists develop global networks driven by
religious extremism. Their operations are supported by
drug trafficking, money laundering and arms
smuggling. Some States follow a policy of sponsoring
and sheltering them. Terrorists can only be countered
through closely coordinated efforts of the international
community.
Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and
1373 (2001) are steps in the right direction, but it
requires the firm political will of the freedom-loving
world to implement them rigorously. The two crucial
elements in this would be strict curbs on sources of
financing for terrorists and denying them safe havens
for training, arming and operation.
We must firmly rebuff any ideological, political
or religious justification for terrorism. We should reject
self-serving arguments seeking to classify terrorism
according to its root causes, and therefore justifying
32

terrorist action somewhere while condemning it
elsewhere. Those that advance these arguments should
explain what the root causes of the brutal acts of 11
September were.
India supports the current campaign against the
terrorist networks in Afghanistan. We hope that it
reaches an early and successful conclusion. That
country’s current travails can only end with the
establishment of a broad-based, representative and
neutral Government, which would stop the export of
terrorism and extremism. The international community
should work towards this goal, even while the military
campaign continues, so that we avoid a political
vacuum at the end of the campaign.
We must recognize that current structures to
facilitate a post-Taliban political settlement are
unrepresentative and therefore ineffective. Located as
it is in Afghanistan’s neighbourhood, India’s vital
national interests are affected by developments in it.
We also have traditionally close links with
Afghanistan. This is the basis for our belief that India
can play a useful role in this process.
The task of reconstruction in post-conflict
Afghanistan also merits the urgent attention of the
international community. It would require massive
external assistance to create an economic situation
conducive to the speedy return and rehabilitation of the
millions of Afghans who have taken refuge in other
countries of this region. Again India stands ready to
join international efforts for this.
We have already announced relief assistance of a
million tons of wheat, medicines and medical
assistance for needy Afghans within, and outside, the
country. We have also pledged $100 million to post-
conflict Afghanistan for reconstruction. We are
prepared to do more.
Nearly 6,000 lives were lost on 11 September, but
the global economic downturn in its aftermath will take
a far larger human toll, mainly in the developing world.
The World Bank has estimated that tens of thousands
more children will die worldwide and some 10 million
more people are likely to go below the poverty line of
$1 a day. It is pertinent to reflect on these chilling
statistics even as the Ministerial Conference gets under
way in Doha to consider World Trade Organization
(WTO) issues. Before we embark on any new
initiatives for globalization and sustainable
development, we should recognize that political
support for them will be determined primarily by the
impact of these regimes on poverty.
For most developing countries, the Uruguay
Round has done little for economic growth, while
poverty levels and income gaps have worsened.
Globalization has constrained developing countries in
mobilizing public resources for poverty alleviation.
That is why public support for the globalization regime
has vanished in developing countries. This is also why
we have argued strongly that implementation issues
should first be resolved before we try to widen the
WTO agenda further. Our public is unwilling to accept
another post-dated cheque, when an earlier one has
bounced.
Similarly, the movement towards sustainable
development has proved a disappointment. Developing
countries are unable to realize fair payments for their
sovereign biodiversity resources and traditional
knowledge. The treaties on climate change and
biodiversity have also failed to activate the anticipated
investment and technology transfers to developing
countries. Industrialized countries have not shown the
political will to enhance their overseas development
budgets. Multilateral development agencies are also
constrained in their resources, of which, in any case,
very little is available on concessional terms.
The inevitable conclusion is that for current
regimes of globalization and sustainable development
to be strengthened, or even to survive, they must be re-
engineered to generate large-scale finances for poverty
alleviation. The passion for globalization has to be
tempered by compassion for its victims. Sadly, this
thought has not penetrated into the thinking of the
developed economies. Their actions also do not reflect
the realization that there cannot be a sustainable revival
of their own sluggish economies unless the
globalization and sustainable development priorities
are re-oriented and anchored in the developmental
needs of two-thirds of the global population.
A year ago, I suggested in my speech to the
United States Congress a comprehensive global
dialogue on development. The aim of such a dialogue
would be to address the highly unstable situation in
which one-third of the world’s population lives in
luxury and condemns the remaining two-thirds to
poverty and want. It is a fertile breeding ground for
political unrest, economic chaos and social fractures.
33

India would be happy to coordinate this dialogue,
with the immediate objective of mobilizing resources
for poverty alleviation programmes in developing
countries. A preliminary agenda for the dialogue could
include the accelerated liquidation of external debts of
low-income and highly indebted countries; poverty
alleviation programmes specifically aimed at
developing countries facing financial crises;
stabilization of international prices of primary
commodity exports; and, most importantly, welfare and
development programmes for all the world’s needy
children — for their nutrition, health, education and
protection from degrading and hazardous employment.
The struggle for equitable development and the
war against poverty are as important as our campaign
against terrorism and our collective search for security.
At a time when an external stimulus has motivated us
to unite against terrorism and for security, let us
summon an equally strong inner resolve for
development and poverty alleviation. They are just as
crucial for a global order at peace with itself.
This fundamental and seamless linkage between
peace, security and development can be recalled in the
sage words of the great Indian poet Rabindranath
Tagore:
“From now onward, any nation that takes an
isolated view of its own interests will run
contrary to the spirit of the New Age, and will
know no peace. From now onward, the anxiety
that each country has for its own safety must
embrace the welfare of the whole world.”


﻿First of all, I would really like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President
of the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I
know that you bring with you a wealth of experience, a
breadth of understanding and hope for many people. I
would also like to express my highest regard for
9

Secretary-General Kofi Annan on his well-deserved
recognition as Nobel Prize Laureate for his fresh ideas
and great vision on how to meet a new world with an
open mind, a sense of unity and hope.
There is hidden light and needed hope in this
gathering to overturn the darkness that has descended
upon us. There is enough strength and resolve in the
midst of civilized nations to deflect evil.
Humanity woke up happy to welcome the twenty-
first century. We turned around and looked, and there
was brightness and freshness in the air. We had
departed from a traditional history that was written
with red ink — wars, skirmishes, conflicts and
murders — many of which arose because human
existence was dependent upon land and natural
resources. We have had to protect our own lands.
Modern science emerged to supersede land,
opening new horizons of limitless opportunities.
Science rendered borders marginal, and old prejudices
and distances began to dissipate from our minds.
Technology created a new interdependence. No longer
were our connections dependent upon land or sea —
upon distance. Air became the new means of
communication for nations, peoples, businesses and
development. High technology introduced new
promises and recalled the importance of old values.
The perception was that every person,
irrespective of location, race, religion or sex, could
reach new heights. And then we learned that high
technology is not just a technical matter. We cannot
separate technology from values; it is impossible.
For example, you cannot combine lies and
science. You cannot lie scientifically. To have a
science-based economy, you have to pursue peace
uncompromisingly and openness uninterruptedly.
Science requires an open society; it demands constant
dialogue. You cannot have new innovations without
unrestricted research. You cannot have unrestricted
research without being a free society. You cannot
develop a scientific economy without making
education a top priority, available and accessible to all
people. You cannot attract investment unless you have
transparency.
In a competitive world, to keep young scientists
your land and water should be free from pollution, your
financial system free from corruption, your government
without arbitrariness. Truth, freedom and openness
became conditions for science and high technology
and, consequently, for the advancement of any society.
It is true that the world is still divided between
the haves and the have nots. But for the have nots, a
new option is that of becoming connected to the new
age and the more developed aspects of our times.
There had been a new beginning, but like many
beginnings, one mixed with shadows and revolt. The
shadows were not yet heavy; at the beginning they
looked pale and distant. So we felt like one promised
world, like one assembly. The economy was no longer
national; it became global — open to every nation. And
since we could not form a global government, the
national Governments agreed that the global economy
would be managed by private enterprises — hence,
privatization. Globalization decreased the importance
of traditional States and increased the importance of
non-governmental organizations and worldwide
connections. It looked as if borderless progress was
evolving. And then ambushing clouds, global in nature,
moved in as a new horror.
The horrific events of 11 September — the
savage attack on innocent American people —
signalled a new warning to world history. On 11
September, we learned that the very same technology I
mentioned earlier — openness and a frontier-less,
connected world — could also spread viciousness. This
attack was brutal, because it was directed at everything
we stand for, against everything for which nations, and
the United Nations, have toiled.
The emerging terror, like the emerging economy,
is no longer national or delineated by boundaries.
Rather, it is borderless, and it contains unlimited,
awesome potential. It can begin with knives, and it may
wind up with germs. Terror does not have a visible
address, a merciful lord in heaven, a court or an elected
government. Nor does it need the approval of the many.
It is built on the fanaticism of a small group of
murderers, lacking the checks and balances of an
accountable society. It may arrive unexpectedly,
uninvited, spreading fear in every corner of the globe,
paralysing us at work and home, grounding flights,
impeding movement, disrupting commerce and
production. Eventually, it can endanger the freshness of
air, the purity of water.
Global economy arrived as an historic surprise;
global terrorism also arrived without prior warning.
But, whereas a solution was found to regulate the
10

global economy, through privatization, there is no
private answer to meet global terrorism. Many nations
have armies, without necessarily having enemies. Yet,
for the time being, global dangers remain without
global answers or global armies.
The United States played the pivotal role in
introducing the new economy. Now again, it falls upon
the United States, as the first target of global terrorism,
to offer a strategy, to take the lead and to bring back
the promise of freedom and security to many of us.
We pay tribute to the United States, a nation that
had the capacity to welcome new modes of creativity,
planning, production and innovation at home and
abroad. And while becoming mighty, it did not stop
caring for the rest of the world. The United States has
helped nations in Europe and Asia and elsewhere
regain freedom and security in times of danger.
American boys fought, and many of them lost
their lives, in European and Asian wars. They won
wars and gained land, but they did not keep those
assets for themselves. They returned to Japan an
improved Japan. They returned to Germany an
improved Germany. The Marshall Plan helped to
rebuild Europe. Needy countries were offered food and
assistance, industries were restored, economies were
rehabilitated. There was generosity in their victory.
Indeed, America has emerged as the “indispensable
nation”.
Now America has become a target for reasons
which are not necessarily its own. Terrorism was
directed at America to frustrate its democracy, weaken
its respect for human rights, reduce its enterprise and
threaten its individualism so that it would not be able
to help others. This was an assault on the very
existence of humanity.
The bin Laden group are afraid of progress. They
are proponents of backwardness. They want us to
return to living in caves. They represent the darkest
ages in the annals of human history. They are self-
appointed killers of any persons who think differently
from them. They are not just evil — they are an agency
of death.
America is not just a new world or continent — it
is a great constitution, a shining city on the hill of
freedom. It is not just a concrete structure — it is a
solid idea. You can attack America, hurt it, but
America cannot be destroyed.
America’s war on terrorism is the war of all of us.
By “us”, I mean every country in this Assembly and
every human being on this planet. Bin Laden claims
that he fights crusaders, who no longer exist. Bin
Laden claims that he wants to help the Palestinians, but
in the eyes of the Palestinians, he is an obstacle, not an
aid.
Israel made peace with Egypt and returned all the
land and water without bin Ladens, without terror. We
did likewise with the Jordanians — not because of
terror, but because terror came to an end. At Camp
David in July 2000, we offered the Palestinians
practically all the land without bin Ladens, without
terror. And if there remained a difference of 1 or 2 per
cent, that does not justify the killing of thousands of
men and women in America. Political differences do
not justify murdering even a single child, no matter of
which nation.
Bin Laden and his abhorrent ideas can never
contribute to peace. They offer no solution and no hope
to any nation, religion or person. They spread hatred,
disseminate fear and plant mines. They are a
catastrophe at large.
The new world economy enabled two of the most
populous countries — China and India — to move
forward and offer new life and opportunity to hundreds
of millions of people. It has changed the face of
Europe. It has reversed the fortunes of Latin America.
It has extended an open invitation to every country to
acquire computers, widen education, open its gates and
join a new age without giving up its old values and
traditions. The new world economy called for an
assembly of responsible nations to build a dam against
terror, knowing perfectly well that the fight against
terror cannot be postponed, cannot be forgiven, cannot
be compromised. It is a matter of life and death for
humanity in the new chapter of our existence.
All of us, nations and individuals, will either
contribute to safety and freedom or become targets of
death and backwardness. Every country must choose its
place in the new world, either in the realm of science
and technology or in the wastebasket of the old land
economy, dependent on the whims of nature,
condemned to the poverty of hopelessness. It is the
responsibility of affluent nations to share the wealth of
knowledge so that others can join them. Rich countries
should become a locomotive for the deprived, not a
luxury liner for the privileged.
11

We pray wholeheartedly from the great and united
city of Jerusalem, as we did in the early days of our
existence, that we shall know again how to distinguish
between good and evil, between tohu va’vo-hu —
chaos — and a new tomorrow. Our region gave birth to
the greatest prophets, their moral dictums setting the
moral fabric of our society. They have guided us to
trust and follow reason and realism. But we were
forced to follow funerals more than reason. This has
exacted a heavy price from Jews, Muslims, Christians,
Druze. It is time that we rediscovered the Ten
Commandments, holy to all of us.
Right now it looks as if we are again sinking into
the past. The emotional conflict is greater than the
territorial gap. It is more difficult to muster the strength
and summon the spirit than to divide the land. In spite
of these difficulties, I daresay there is a hidden
opportunity in the vast divide. I feel strongly that while
we cannot recover lost time, we can introduce a new
vista in the Middle East.
Until now, the world related to the Middle East.
Now the Middle East has to relate to the new world.
Our neighbours — Palestinians and Arabs — know that
Israel is committed to contribute whatever it can to
renew a real peace process — not by force, not by
imposition, not by unilateral action, but through a
negotiated agreement, an agreed peace. There is no
peace but an agreed peace. Just as one cannot applaud
with one hand, there cannot be a one-handed peace.
Problems, naturally, have a date of birth.
Solutions must reach their maturity. It may not happen
at once, but it will happen. Yesterday, you would
hardly find, for example, support for a Palestinian State
and, although this is not yet a formal policy of the
Government of Israel, there is now support for
Palestinian independence and for a Palestinian State.
We do not want to dominate the Palestinians; we want
them to breathe freedom, to create a new economy, to
maintain their traditions, to enjoy the highest level of
education and to provide real security to all parties.
As far as Israel is concerned, we are convinced
that good neighbours are better than good guns. In
modern times, you cannot have real security dependent
only on fences, walls, fortifications or trenches; not
even on tanks and guns and missiles. All these
measures have already become anti-measures, making
them incomplete and temporary. The only strategy that
cannot be ignored is neighbourly relations, such as the
common market in Europe, the Rio Group in Latin
America, the North American Free Trade Agreement in
North America, the Association of South-East Asian
Nations in Asia and the New Partnership for African
Development in Africa. All these frameworks have
shown that answers to old historical, military and
political conflicts may reside in the economic domain.
What endangers the new solution is terror. Terror
is again endangering the world. The division is no
longer between East and West, North and South, but
between the union to stop terror and those who refuse
to recognize its menace. The assembly against terror
comprises most of humanity: the United States,
Europe, China, Russia, India, South America, many
countries in Africa and many countries in the Muslim
world.
Democracies must have a non-democratic
institution to defend themselves. Armies are non-
democratic, but without them democracy would not
prevail. You may have many views in a democratic
society, but only one authority that controls the military
and its arms. Armies must be subordinate to the elected
political body, but if you have one political authority
and several armed groups, you can have neither
democracy nor security.
The Palestinian Authority, which is a State in
being, must establish one authority over all arms, all
armies and all use of arms, not for the sake of Israel,
but for the sake of peace and for the sake of its own
destiny, so that bullets will not negate ballots.
As long as terror persists, Israel has no choice but
to defend its people. The word “terror” does not
describe an abstract dilemma for us. It refers to a
reality of between 30 to 40 violent incidents every
day — shootings, bombings, ambushes and killings. It
is perpetrated by suicide bombers who have no respect
for life, either their own or that of others. The only
place they can be intercepted is at the point from which
they depart.
Israel is, by definition, an experienced member of
the anti-terror camp. We know that terror can never win
if people protect and preserve their fundamental
security. Terror is strong as long as anti-terror is weak
and terror is frightening as long as people are afraid of
it. Terror basically represents cowardliness and does
not serve any real purpose. Terror neither follows
justice nor serves goals. It is not a remedy; it is a
malady.
12

We are at a juncture. The world is pursuing new
opportunities and frontiers. No longer will it be a world
divided between developed and underdeveloped
nations, black and white or men and women. It will
become a world where every person will have access to
knowledge and opportunity to participate in the new
genesis. States have become weaker economically and
strategically because economy and strategy have
themselves become global. Yet we do not have
organized world institutions to secure the globe and
distribute wealth more justly.
Two courses are open to every State: either to
join the new economy or to submit to old terror; the
creation of wealth or the threat of death. Each must
make its own choice between the promise of economy
or protest by terror. The Global Compact initiated by
the Secretary-General offers us a road map to the
former. It defines the functions and contributions of the
United Nations and imposes responsibilities on all of
us — nation States, the private sector and civil society.
It provides us with hope that, even as crises exist,
obscuring the opportunities just visible from the corner
of our eyes, the path to progress is clear to all with the
courage to embrace it.
We woke up to the twenty-first century with such
optimism. We must overcome the dangers so that our
children will again be raised in a world of almost
limitless opportunities. It can be done. We have learned
in Jerusalem that we can make a promised land into a
land of promise for all of us.






﻿May I first express my
condolences to the families and friends of those who
died in this morning's air crash. This was a tragedy in a
city that has already seen more than its share of tragedy
in recent times.
We meet in New York at this session of the
General Assembly under the shadow of terrorist attacks
on this city just two months ago. We mourn the lives of
nearly 5,000 people from 79 countries who, having
done nothing to deserve that fate, died in the attack.
The scale, premeditation, coordination and indifference
to mass murder that characterize this attack represent a
new age of terrorism. It is a terrorism that appears to
set no limit to its consequences. Those responsible for
it foreshadow a willingness to use biological, chemical
and nuclear weapons of mass destruction. The
potentially catastrophic effects if they are able to carry
out that threat demand an urgent and comprehensive
response to pre-empt any such action.
We cannot allow the rule of terror to replace the
rule of law. We cannot tolerate the damage that
terrorism has already done to the global economy. We
cannot allow terror to threaten basic human rights to
life and security.
New Zealand welcomes the lead by the United
Nations in coordinating an effective and enduring
response to terrorism. Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), adopted unanimously, sets out a blueprint for
action which every Member State has an obligation to
implement. Its emphasis is on measures to close off
financial support and the provision of refuge for
terrorist groups in every country of the world.
International cooperation in imposing these measures
and bringing the terrorists to justice will, in the longer
term, lie at the heart of the campaign to defeat
terrorism.
Removing the immediate threat posed by
terrorists such as those in Al Qaeda and those who
harbour them will, however, require more than
resolutions. Time and again over the past three years,
the Security Council has called on the Taliban to
prevent the use of Afghanistan by terrorists to launch
strikes against other countries. Those resolutions and
the sanctions that accompanied them have been ignored
by the Taliban. Where groups operate beyond the rule
of law and countries put themselves outside of
international codes of behaviour, the use of force
becomes a necessary part of our response.
Multilateral action and cooperation on a wider
front are also necessary if we are to be successful in
removing the threat of terrorism on an ongoing and
lasting basis. Comprehensive action is needed to
minimize the threat of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons falling into the hands of extremist groups. No
State should develop, test and hold weapons of this
nature. Such weapons are a threat to humanity. Their
use by States would destroy and otherwise harm
innocent human beings as certainly as did the actions
of the terrorist group that attacked New York.
Nations yet to sign and ratify the United Nations
Conventions on Chemical and Biological Weapons and
treaties to ban mines and inhumane weapons must do
so. Nations must equally commit themselves to the
elimination of nuclear weapons, the early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
and an immediate start to negotiations on a fissile
material cut-off treaty.
The attack of 11 September should also
encourage all nations to ratify the Rome Statute to
bring into effect the International Criminal Court as a
forum for pursuing action against those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
Suppression of terrorism must also involve action
to deal with its causes. States must consider whether
the suppression of dissident or minority groups rather
than allowing legitimate channels to voice dissent
leaves resort to force as the only option.
The events of 11 September should encourage all
countries and organizations, particularly those directly
involved, to renew efforts to find a just and peaceful
solution to the Middle East crisis. To achieve a
peaceful solution between Palestinians and Israelis
requires good will and flexibility on both sides. There
can be no double standards in how the principles of
15

human rights, freedom and social and economic
opportunity are applied to all peoples.
One consequence of the campaign against
terrorism has been to bring the world's attention to the
situation in Afghanistan. Afghanistan reminds us that
where a vacuum is created by the absence of legitimate
government and the rule of law, it will be filled by
extremist elements, criminal groups dealing in drug
trafficking and terrorist organizations, all of which can
operate with impunity.
The international community has for too long
been indifferent to the situation in Afghanistan and to
the long-standing refugee crisis that has resulted from
22 years of war, from famine and from Taliban
oppression. Pakistan and Iran have carried the burden
of 3.6 million refugees, while much of the world
showed concern only when a handful of those refugees
in desperation sought to enter other countries illegally.
Too little concern has been shown internationally to the
300,000 Afghan children who have died annually from
preventable causes. One in three children in refugee
camps die before they reach the age of five. The groups
now protesting against military intervention were silent
while this human catastrophe was unfolding over the
last few years.
Any loss of innocent life in conflict is tragic, and
extraordinary measures must be taken to avoid it. But a
failure to remove the Taliban regime and a failure to
assist the Afghan people to put in place a broad-based,
moderate and stable Government to replace the Taliban
will mean the ongoing loss of hundreds of thousands of
lives and the continued suffering of the Afghan people.
Renewed efforts are needed through United
Nations agencies to provide emergency relief to people
within Afghanistan and in the refugee camps to avoid
unnecessary loss of life through the winter and in the
months to come. The United Nations must stand ready
to assist Afghanistan to rebuild itself once the conflict
is over, working with as broad a coalition of Afghan
groups as is possible to create a viable political,
economic and social infrastructure.
Resolving the problems that have forced so many
millions of people from their homes is fundamental to
solving the growing refugee crisis. In Afghanistan and
elsewhere, people flee their homelands through fear of
death or persecution, or because of poverty and lack of
opportunity.
In a world made smaller by advances in
communication and transport, no State can ignore the
plight in other countries or expect not to face
consequences from unacceptable discrepancies in
wealth, opportunity and human rights standards.
Suppression of criminal organizations responsible
for people trafficking is a challenge which demands
increased international cooperation. Those who profit
from people's desperation and who, once paid, are
careless as to whether or not their human cargo
survives must be stamped out. However, removing the
causes of people fleeing from their countries remains
fundamental.
New Zealand's own region of the Pacific has not
been immune from violence and instability. In recent
years, we have seen conflict in East Timor, violence
between Government and separatist movements within
Indonesia and in Bougainville, ethnic conflict in the
Solomon Islands and a coup that overthrew a legitimate
Government in Fiji.
Problems remain in the region, but there have
been notable areas of improvement. A peace settlement
has been signed in Bougainville. Fiji has held
democratic elections. Indonesia is seeking to resolve
separatist conflict by offering greater autonomy. In
East Timor, there have been free elections, and that
country will gain independence as the first new nation
of the twenty-first century in May 2002. International
cooperation and a capable transitional administration
by the United Nations have achieved a remarkable
transformation in a poor and devastated country. I
congratulate the Security Council on its endorsement of
the Secretary-General's concept for a post-
independence United Nations presence in East Timor to
consolidate what has been achieved.
In acknowledging the role of United Nations
personnel, I would also stress the need to ensure their
proper protection in situations which are often
dangerous. The murder of United Nations relief
workers in Atambua, West Timor, and the failure to
bring to account those fully responsible are a reminder
that more must be done to protect our United Nations
personnel. We endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendations on extending the legal protection for
United Nations and other personnel involved in
humanitarian operations.
It is timely at this General Assembly to stress the
importance of the role of the United Nations. The
16

critical wars of the twenty-first century will not be won
by single nations, however powerful, or even by
coalitions. It is the United Nations acting collectively
which will win the wars against terrorism, poverty and
disease; threats to the environment; and the threats
posed by conflict and weapons of mass destruction.
The commitments made by heads of State and
Government in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration last year take on even greater relevance
following the events of 11 September.
However, for the United Nations to achieve its
potential, it must undergo reform. To prevent the
General Assembly and the Secretariat from becoming
overwhelmed by so many tasks that they fail to be
effective in tackling any of them, we need to prioritize
our agenda and to be more selective.
The Security Council needs reform. Its
membership should be expanded to reflect
contemporary realities, but without maintaining or
extending the veto. Countries contributing to
peacekeeping operations should be afforded greater
involvement in the Council's decision-making with
respect to those operations. Peacekeeping operations
must be sufficiently resourced.
The capacity of the United Nations for rapid
reaction must be strengthened. New Zealand is ready to
enter into discussions on a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations on its
participation in the standby arrangements system. This
is consistent with New Zealand's long-standing
readiness to contribute to peacekeeping operations and
its current involvement in more than 12 such
operations, including its commitment since 1999 of a
battalion to help ensure the success of the United
Nations operation in East Timor.
The United Nations was founded after the Second
World War to build a world free from poverty, violence
and the violation of human rights. Nations committed
themselves to a collective response to problems that
could not be solved by countries individually.
Countries agreed on rules of international behaviour.
No one would claim that the United Nations has
an unblemished record of success. But without it, the
world would be a much less secure place, much less
able to confront the difficulties which we face. Let this
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly reaffirm
our commitment to work collectively to defeat
terrorism, conflict, poverty and disease, and set the
agenda for peace, development and respect for human
rights for all.







﻿This session of the General Assembly is
taking place in the shadow of an unprecedented
challenge to humanity posed by international terrorism.
We all must seriously analyse how this could have
happened. However, it has already become perfectly
clear today that the period of globalization and the
threats and challenges to international and regional
security that it brings with it make it urgent for of all of
us to take fundamentally new approaches to
international affairs.
We face a tough dilemma, whose solution will
truly be of paramount importance. Either we work
together to responsibly construct a genuinely just and
democratic world order that can guarantee equal
security and sustainable development for all States in
the world, or we show ourselves to be unable to
counter real threats to global stability and security.
The most important task of the international
community today is to create a global system to
counteract new threats and challenges, first and
foremost among which is international terrorism. This
topic was the focus of negotiations between the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir V.
Putin, and the President of the United States of
America, Mr. George W. Bush, which recently took
place in Washington, D.C. and Crawford, Texas.
A universal anti-terrorist coalition has been
formed. The Russian Federation is a responsible
participant in this coalition. The creation of this
coalition has involved the United Nations playing a
very important role in consolidating and coordinating
activities. It is precisely the United Nations that has the
necessary universal character and authority to organize
a response to the threats and challenges that confront
mankind today.
The broad decisions taken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly create a solid
political and legal framework for efforts to neutralize
the threat of terrorism. It is now important for these
decisions to be implemented by all States.
If necessary, the use of the most decisive means
against terrorists may be permissible, including the use
of military force. The Charter grants that right. At the
same time, this threat cannot be overcome by force
alone. A comprehensive approach to eradicating
terrorism would imply the use of the whole range of
political, economic, financial and humanitarian
measures.
The consolidation of the international legal
framework for combating terrorism is now on our
agenda. It is extremely important to rapidly complete
and adopt the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and a convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism.
It would be of great importance to establish
within the United Nations a mechanism to monitor the
fulfilment by States of their treaty obligations
concerning the suppression of terrorism.
We consider promising the idea to establish,
under the aegis of the United Nations, a centre for
coordinating assistance to States to resolve crises
caused by terrorist acts. Such a structure could focus on
providing consultative and material and technical
support in managing the consequences of terrorist acts.
The Russian Federation also proposes studying
the possibility of including in international law the
5

principle of the responsibility of States for their failure
to take measures against terrorists in their territory or
under their jurisdiction.
Of key importance in the success of the
comprehensive fight against international terrorism is
the maintenance and strengthening of strategic stability
at both global and regional levels and strengthening the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The focus of the international community should
continue to be on the interdependence and merging of
international terrorism, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. The Russian Federation
favours the rapid entry into force of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its additional
protocols.
It is perfectly clear that the fight against terrorism
is not aimed at any particular religion, civilization or
culture. This was clearly demonstrated by the
discussions on the dialogue among civilizations during
the current session of the General Assembly. We also
hope that a practical contribution in this area can be
made by the implementation of the initiative put
forward by Islamic religious leaders from the Russian
Federation to organize an international conference
entitled “Islam against terrorism” in Moscow.
Terrorism is rooted in the gap between affluence
and poverty, both within States and in the international
arena. Thus, the task now, as never before, is to ensure
sustainable development throughout the world and to
ensure that the social aspects of the globalization
process are addressed.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
can do a lot to ensure effective rejection of extremism
of all forms. We suggest that thought should be given
to organizing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
world forum that would discuss what contribution civil
society and, particularly, the mass media could make to
combating terrorism.
International experience has shown that
successful prevention and settlement of regional
conflicts are an integral part of the counter-terrorist
efforts of the international community. This is yet
another compelling argument in favour of further
developing and ensuring greater effectiveness of
United Nations preventive and peacekeeping activities.
In particular, the Russian Federation advocates the
development within the United Nations of a
comprehensive strategy aimed at reliably blocking
channels for outside fuelling of the conflicts.
We need to ensure that there is regional
cooperation in fighting these new threats. An example
of such successful cooperation is that of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, under the
auspices of which a CIS anti-terrorist centre has been
set up and is working effectively.
Today, the moment of truth has arrived for each
of us. The Russian Federation is in favour of the
international community taking decisions that can
provide for strategic stability and equal security for all
States, sustainable development and prosperity for all
the peoples of the planet and peace and tranquillity for
each family and each individual.
These noble aims can only be achieved jointly, by
working cooperatively and uniting the efforts of the
entire international community. The United Nations has
a vital role to play in this regard. Our Organization
was, and indeed remains, the most important
instrument available to the international community,
whose effective and responsible use will allow us to
create a new democratic and just world order for the
twenty-first century.



﻿We meet in a Hall devoted to
peace; in a city scarred by violence; in a nation
awakened to danger; in a world uniting for a long
struggle. Every civilized nation here today is resolved
to keep the most basic commitment of civilization. We
will defend ourselves and our future against terror and
lawless violence.
The United Nations was founded in this cause. In
the Second World War, we learned that there is no
isolation from evil. We affirmed that some crimes are
so terrible they offend humanity itself, and we resolved
that the aggressions and ambitions of the wicked must
be opposed early, decisively and collectively, before
they threaten us all.
That evil has returned, and that cause is renewed.
A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a
tomb of rubble. Tomorrow, the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and I will visit that
site, where the names of every nation and region that
lost citizens will be read aloud. If we were to read out
the names of every person who died, it would take
more than three hours.
Those names include a citizen of the Gambia,
whose wife spent their fourth wedding anniversary, 12
September, searching in vain for her husband. Those
names include a man who supported his wife in
Mexico, sending home money every week. Those
names include a young Pakistani who prayed towards
Mecca five times a day and who died that day trying to
save others.
The suffering of 11 September was inflicted on
people of many faiths and many nations. All of the
victims, including Muslims, were killed with equal
indifference and equal satisfaction by the terrorist
leaders.
The terrorists are violating the tenets of every
religion, including the one they invoke. Last week, the
sheikh of Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest
Islamic institution of higher learning, declared that
terrorism is a disease and that Islam prohibits killing
innocent civilians. The terrorists call their cause holy,
yet they fund it with drug dealing. They encourage
murder and suicide in the name of a great faith that
forbids both. They dare to ask God’s blessing as they
set out to kill innocent men, women and children. But
8

the God of Isaac and Ishmael would never answer such
a prayer. And a murderer is not a martyr; he is just a
murderer.
Time is passing. Yet for the United States of
America, there will be no forgetting 11 September. We
will remember every rescuer who died in honour. We
will remember every family that lives in grief. We will
remember the fire and ash, the last phone calls, the
funerals of the children.
And the people of my country will remember
those who have plotted against us. We are learning
their names. We are coming to know their faces. There
is no corner of the Earth distant or dark enough to
protect them. However long it takes, their hour of
justice will come.
Every nation has a stake in this cause. As we
meet, the terrorists are planning more murder —
perhaps in my country, or perhaps, fellow members, in
yours. They kill because they aspire to dominate. They
seek to overthrow Governments and to destabilize
entire regions. Last week, anticipating this meeting of
the General Assembly, they denounced the United
Nations; they called our Secretary-General a criminal
and they condemned all Arab nations here as traitors to
Islam. Few countries meet their exacting standards of
brutality and oppression. Every other country is a
potential target.
And all the world faces the most horrifying
prospect of all: those same terrorists are searching for
weapons of mass destruction, the tools to turn their
hatred into holocaust. They can be expected to use
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons the moment
they are capable of doing so. No hint of conscience
would prevent it. That threat cannot be ignored; that
threat cannot be appeased. Civilization itself — the
civilization we share — is threatened. History will
record our response and will judge or justify every
nation in this Hall.
The civilized world is now responding. We act to
defend ourselves and to deliver our children from a
future of fear. We choose the dignity of life over a
culture of death. We choose lawful change and civil
disagreement over coercion, subversion and chaos.
Those commitments — hope and order, law and life —
unite people across cultures and continents. Upon those
commitments depend all peace and progress. For those
commitments, we are determined to fight.
The United Nations has risen to this
responsibility: on 12 September, these buildings
opened for emergency meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. Before the sun
had set, these attacks on the world stood condemned by
the world, and I want to thank you, fellow members,
for that strong and principled stand.
I also thank the Arab and Islamic countries that
have condemned terrorist murder. Many of you have
seen the destruction of terror in your own lands. The
terrorists are increasingly isolated by their own hatred
and extremism. They cannot hide behind Islam. The
authors of mass murder and their allies have no place
in any culture, and no home in any faith.
The conspiracies of terror are being answered by
an expanding global coalition. Not every nation will be
part of every action against the enemy. But every
nation in our coalition has duties. Those duties can be
demanding, as we in America are learning. We have
already made adjustments in our laws and in our daily
lives. We are taking new measures to investigate terror
and to protect against threats.
The leaders of all nations must now carefully
consider their responsibilities and their future. Terrorist
groups such as Al Qaeda depend upon the aid or
indifference of Governments. They need the support of
a financial infrastructure and safe havens to train and
plan and hide.
Some nations want to play their part in the fight
against terror but tell us they lack the means to enforce
their laws and control their borders. We stand ready to
help.
Some Governments still turn a blind eye to the
terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by. They are
mistaken.
And some Governments, while pledging to
uphold the principles of the United Nations, have cast
their lot with the terrorists. They support them and
harbour them. And they will find that their welcomed
guests are parasites that will weaken them and
eventually consume them. For every regime that
sponsors terror there is a price to be paid, and it will be
paid. The allies of terror are equally guilty of murder
and equally accountable to justice.
The Taliban are now learning that lesson. That
regime and the terrorists who support it are now
virtually indistinguishable. Together they promote
9

terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on the
Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabul’s soccer
stadium. They can be beaten for wearing socks that are
too thin. Men are jailed for missing prayer meetings.
The United States, supported by many nations, is
bringing justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We are
making progress against military targets — and that is
our objective. Unlike the enemy, we seek to minimize,
not maximize, the loss of innocent life. I am proud of
the honourable conduct of the American military. And
my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban
have brought upon Afghanistan, including the terrible
burden of war.
The Afghan people do not deserve their present
rulers. Years of Taliban misrule have brought nothing
but misery and starvation. Even before this current
crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the
United States and other nations, and millions of
Afghans were refugees from Taliban oppression.
I make this promise to all the victims of that
regime: the Taliban’s days of harbouring terrorists, and
dealing in heroin, and brutalizing women are drawing
to a close. When that regime is gone, the people of
Afghanistan will say, with the rest of the world, good
riddance.
I can promise, too, that America will join the
world in helping the people of Afghanistan rebuild
their country.
Many nations, including mine, are sending food
and medicine to help Afghans through the winter.
America has airdropped over 1.3 million packages of
rations in Afghanistan. Just this week, we airlifted
20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into
the region. We continue to provide humanitarian aid,
even while the Taliban try to steal the food we send.
More help, eventually, will be needed. The
United States will work closely with the United
Nations and development banks to reconstruct
Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the
Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States
will work with the United Nations to support a post-
Taliban Government that represents all of the Afghan
people.
In this war of terror, each of us must answer for
what we have done or what we have left undone. After
tragedy, there is a time for sympathy and condolence.
My country has been very grateful for both.
The memorials and vigils around the world will
not be forgotten. But the time for sympathy has now
passed. The time for action has now arrived.
The most basic obligations in this new conflict
have already been defined by the United Nations. On
28 September, the Security Council adopted resolution
1373 (2001). Its requirements are clear: every
United Nations Member has a responsibility to crack
down on terrorist financing. We must pass all necessary
laws in our own countries to allow the confiscation of
terrorist assets. We must apply those laws to every
financial institution in every nation.
We have a responsibility to share intelligence and
coordinate the efforts of law enforcement. If you know
something, tell us. If we know something, we will tell
you. And when we find the terrorists, we must work
together to bring them to justice.
We have a responsibility to deny any sanctuary,
safe haven, or transit to terrorists. Every known
terrorist camp must be shut down, its operators
apprehended, and evidence of their arrest presented to
the United Nations.
We have a responsibility to deny weapons to
terrorists — and to actively prevent private citizens
from providing them.
These obligations are urgent, and they are binding
on every nation with a place in this Hall. Many
Governments are taking these obligations seriously,
and my country appreciates it. Yet even beyond
resolution 1373 (2001), more is required — and more
is expected — of our coalition against terror. We are
asking for a comprehensive commitment to this fight.
We must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just
some of them. In this world, there are good causes and
bad causes, and we may disagree on where that line is
drawn. Yet there is no such thing as a good terrorist.
No national aspiration, no remembered wrong, can ever
justify the deliberate murder of the innocent. Any
Government that rejects this principle — trying to pick
and choose its terrorist friends — will know the
consequences.
We must speak the truth about terror. Let us never
tolerate outrageous conspiracy theories concerning the
attacks of 11 September — malicious lies that attempt
to shift the blame away from the terrorists themselves,
away from the guilty. To inflame ethnic hatred is to
advance the cause of terror.
10

The war against terror must not serve as an
excuse to persecute ethnic and religious minorities in
any country. Innocent people must be allowed to live
their own lives, by their own customs, under their own
religion. And every nation must have avenues for the
peaceful expression of opinion and dissent. When these
avenues are closed, the temptation to speak through
violence grows.
We must press on with our agenda for peace and
prosperity in every land. My country is pledged to
encouraging development and expanding trade. My
country is pledged to investing in education and
combating AIDS and other infectious diseases around
the world. Following 11 September, these pledges are
even more important. In our struggle against hateful
groups that exploit poverty and despair, we must offer
an alternative of opportunity and hope.
The American Government also stands by its
commitment to a just peace in the Middle East. We are
working towards a day when two States — Israel and
Palestine — live peacefully together, within secure and
recognized borders, as called for by the Security
Council resolutions. We will do all in our power to
bring both parties back into negotiations. But peace
will come only when all have sworn off — forever —
incitement, violence and terror.
Finally, this struggle is a defining moment for the
United Nations itself — and the world needs its
principled leadership. It undermines the credibility of
this great institution, for example, when the
Commission on Human Rights offers seats to some of
the world’s most persistent violators of human rights.
The United Nations depends, above all, on its moral
authority — and that authority must be preserved.
The steps I have described will not be easy. For
all nations, they will require effort. For some nations,
they will require great courage. Yet the cost of inaction
is far greater. The only alternative to victory is a
nightmare world where every city is a potential killing
field.
As I told the American people, freedom and fear
are at war. We face enemies that hate not our policies,
but our existence — the tolerance of openness and the
creative culture that define us. But the outcome of this
conflict is certain.
There is a current in history, and it runs towards
freedom. Our enemies resent it and dismiss it, but the
dreams of mankind are defined by liberty — the natural
right to create, and build, and worship, and live in
dignity. When men and women are released from
oppression and isolation, they find fulfilment and hope,
and they leave poverty by the millions. These
aspirations are lifting up the peoples of Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas, and they can lift up all of the
Islamic world. We stand for the permanent hopes of
humanity, and those hopes will not be denied.
We are confident, too, that history has an author,
who fills time and eternity with his purpose. We know
that evil is real, but good will prevail against it. This is
the teaching of many faiths. And in that assurance, we
gain strength for a long journey.
It is our task — the task of this generation — to
provide the response to aggression and terror. We have
no other choice, because there is no other peace. We
did not ask for this mission, yet there is honour in
history’s call. We have a chance to write the story of
our times — a story of courage defeating cruelty, and
light overcoming darkness. This calling is worthy of
any life, and worthy of every nation. So let us go
forward — confident, determined and unafraid.



﻿Please accept my
congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this important Assembly.
11

We also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for the skilful manner in which he
guided the work of the Millennium Assembly of the
United Nations.
Allow me also to salute the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, on being elected to a second term and,
together with the United Nations, being awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize for 2001. This is because of the
tireless work of both the Secretary-General and the
United Nations to realize the ideal that we all cherish: a
world in which all people can live in peace, security,
freedom, equality and justice.
As has already been noted and as we all know,
this general debate has begun later than usual. The
reason for this is that two months ago, the forces of
terror struck at this city, New York — the Headquarters
of this Organization — and Washington, D.C., the
capital city of the United States of America.
It is proper that we take advantage of this
occasion once more to convey our condolences and
deepest sympathy to the people and the Government of
the United States for the immense loss of life and
property imposed on them through a callous act of
murder. We extend the same sympathy to all other
peoples who lost citizens as a result of the colossal
outrage of 11 September. We speak here about the
terrible tragedy of 11 September on behalf of our
Government and the people of South Africa. We speak
also on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Commonwealth.
There can be no doubt but that the peoples of the
world have to unite in action to defeat terrorism. There
can be no hesitation among any of us in the resolve to
work together to ensure that those responsible for the
heinous actions of September 11 are brought to justice.
This is so not only because many nations lost
their citizens on that terrible day, important as that is. It
is so, because terrorism has demonstrated that it has no
respect for borders. It has shown in a very graphic,
tragic and painful manner, as it did also in Kenya and
Tanzania, that our very humanity renders all of us,
without exception, potential targets of cold-blooded
murder.
Where we might have used the concept of a
global village loosely in the past, on 11 September
terrorism taught us the abiding lesson that we do
indeed belong to a global village. None within this
village will be safe unless all the villagers act together
to secure and guarantee that safety. All must act to
promote the safety and security of one and all, on the
basis of a shared responsibility born of a shared danger.
Accordingly, we have no choice but to get
together in the village square to agree on the threat that
confronts us. Together, in that village square, we have
to determine what we do about this commonly defined
threat. This is the ineluctable conclusion we must draw
from the terrorist attacks of 11 September.
To guarantee world peace and security in the light
of the threat posed by terrorism requires that this
Organization, the United Nations, must discharge its
responsibility to unite the peoples of the world to adopt
an international convention against terrorism.
Necessarily, all of us must experience a shared
sense of ownership of this convention, precisely
because it would not be merely a statement of
principles, but a set of injunctions and prescriptions
that will be binding on all of us as States. Thus should
each one of us be ready to integrate our respective
sovereignties within a global human sovereignty,
defined and governed by all of us, with none treated as
superior or inferior.
The challenge to unite the peoples of the world to
fight the common threat of terrorism brings to the fore
the need to speed up the transformation of the United
Nations so that it is able to respond to the global
challenges we face together, in an equitable manner.
This means that it needs to be efficient, effective and
responsive to the needs of humanity as a whole.
11 September emphasized the point that, even as
the democratic system of government is being
consolidated throughout the world, even as we all work
to sustain the possibility of a serious and meaningful
global dialogue, there are some who are prepared to
resort to force in pursuit of their goals. Clearly, there
must be a response. But what should that response be?
Immediately, it is correct that we must achieve
global security cooperation so that the perpetrators of
the 11 September acts of terrorism are apprehended and
punished. Correctly, the Government of the United
States has emphasized that all action that is carried out
must be clearly targeted against the terrorists. It has
stated that such actions, including military actions,
should not degenerate into collective punishment
against any people on any grounds whatsoever,
12

including those of religion, race or ethnicity.
Accordingly, it is indeed necessary that humanitarian
assistance be extended to the people of Afghanistan.
We fully agree with that approach. The United States
Government has also said that these actions should be
of the shortest duration possible, consistent with the
objective that must be achieved. Again, we agree with
this without reservation.
The call has gone out that all Governments and
countries should contribute whatever they can to ensure
that the common efforts to find and punish the
terrorists responsible for 11 September are met with
their just results. We have responded positively to this
call because it is timely, correct and just.
All these are important elements of what has to
be done to respond to those who committed the mass
murders of 11 September. But they also indicate the
way forward as we consider the rules that should guide
us as we confront the threat of terrorism over the
longer term and beyond the critically important
operations and activities focused on the events of 11
September. They put the matter firmly on our common
agenda: We must also achieve global cooperation for
the speedy resolution of conflict situations everywhere
in the world.
In this regard, it is clear that the situation in the
Middle East cries out for an urgent and lasting solution.
In this context, we might recall the words of the Irish
poet, William Butler Yeats, when he said “too long a
sacrifice can make a stone of the heart”. The sacrifice
of the Palestinian people should not be allowed to drag
on any longer. Whatever these long-suffering people
might themselves think and feel, it is clear that there
are some in the world who will justify their destructive
rage by claiming to be front-line fighters for the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
Beyond this, we must act together to determine
the issues that drive people to resort to force and agree
on what we should do to eliminate those issues. At the
same time, we must make the point patently clear that
such determination does not in any way constitute an
attempt to justify terrorism. Together, we must take the
firm position that no circumstances whatsoever can
ever justify resort to terrorism.
The need to realize together the goal of
determining the matters that make for peace once again
underlines the need for properly representative
international institutions to build the necessary global
consensus. It would seem obvious that the fundamental
source of conflict in the world today is the socio-
economic deprivation of billions of people across the
globe, coexisting side by side with islands of enormous
wealth and prosperity within and among countries. This
necessarily breeds a deep sense of injustice, social
alienation and despair and a willingness to sacrifice
their lives among those who feel they have nothing to
lose and everything to gain, regardless of the form of
action to which they resort.
As the Durban World Conference concluded,
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance remain a critical part of the practices that
serve to alienate billions of people and contribute to
mutual antagonisms among human beings. The
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that this affront to human dignity is totally
eradicated.
Last year, we convened in this very Hall in the
historic Millennium Summit. Solemnly, and with
serious intent, we adopted the Millennium Declaration.
The heavy and urgent obligation we now face is to
implement the programme of action spelt out in that
Declaration. This constitutes and must constitute the
decisive front of struggle against terrorism.
Africa, for its part, has developed a New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, which is a
product of the consciousness among the African people
that they themselves hold the key to the continent’s
development, security and stability. Africans across the
continent have arrived at the correct determination that
human rights, democracy, peace, stability and justice
are the fundamental building blocks for a prosperous
continent. Concomitantly, African countries are taking
measures, jointly and severally, to improve the
conditions for much-needed investment, economic
renewal and development. Naturally, the United
Nations has a pivotal role to play in this regard.
As we meet here, members of the World Trade
Organization are engaged in critical negotiations in
Doha, Qatar, hopefully to agree to a new equitable
trading relationship that is fair and just. It is imperative
that there be a non-discriminatory and equitable trading
system that promotes sustainable development.
Soon, ministers of health, the World Health
Organization and others concerned will be finalizing
the details relating to the global health fund to deal
13

with the major communicable diseases, including
malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS.
The International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held next March in Mexico, will
cover a range of pertinent issues, such as debt relief,
official development assistance and foreign direct
investment. As we all know, substantial capital flows
into the developing countries are critical in the struggle
to defeat poverty and underdevelopment.
All these constitute vital component parts of what
must inform the outcome of the Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development in September
next year. We are confident that the Summit will reach
positive conclusions that will include firm global,
regional and national commitments to the elaboration,
integration and implementation of economically
efficient, socially responsible and environmentally
sound development policies.
There is no doubt that our global village has the
resources and capacity to meet the needs of all its
citizens. What is needed is the collective will of the
international community to act decisively to meet this
challenge, inspired by a sense of human solidarity.
Peace and security for all, freedom and democracy for
all, prosperity for all and genuine equality in conditions
of diversity must surely be the outcomes towards which
the United Nations and all of us must strive. Our
actions must affirm the seriousness of our intent.




﻿Mr. President, first of all, please allow me to warmly
congratulate you on your election as President of the
fifty-sixth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. I am confident that under your able
guidance and with the close cooperation of all
delegates, this session will be crowned with success. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere thanks to Mr. Holkeri for what he did as
President of the last session of the General Assembly.
A year ago, the United Nations convened the
historic Millennium Summit. The United Nations
Millennium Declaration issued by the Summit
identifies the objectives for promoting world peace and
development in the new century.
International developments over the past year
demonstrate that more and more countries have opted
for increasing dialogue and cooperation, preserving
world peace and seeking common development. To be
sure, the cause of human progress still involves a long
and arduous effort. Factors of uncertainty in the
international situation are on the rise. More efforts
should be made to democratize international relations,
and there has been no marked change in the irrational
international economic order.
Terrorism is a widespread scourge that threatens
world peace and stability. We strongly condemn the
terrorist attacks on the United States on 11 September,
and extend our deepest sympathy and condolences to
the families of the innocent victims, as well as to the
Government and the people of the United States. China
has always opposed all forms of terrorism. No matter
when, where or in what form terrorism strikes, and no
matter whom it is directed against, it should be met
with condemnation and responded to with counter-
strikes by the international community, which should
adopt a unified position on the matter.
China has taken an active part in international
cooperation against terrorism. In addition to joining
most of the international conventions against terrorism,
China has ratified the Shanghai Convention on
Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism,
concluded by the member States of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
China is in favour of a primary role for the United
Nations and the Security Council in the international
effort against terrorism. China supports the relevant
resolutions that have been adopted and is in favour of
closer cooperation and coordination among the various
countries concerned to this end.
China strongly believes that any military action
against terrorism should have a clearly defined target
and avoid harming innocent people. All such actions
should be consistent with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and other
universally recognized norms of international law, and
should serve the long-term interests of peace in the
region and the world at large.
China believes that terrorism is a tiny fringe of
extreme evil, representing neither one particular ethnic
group nor one particular religion. They must not,
therefore, be lumped together. China, too, is threatened
by terrorism. The “Eastern Turkestan” terrorist forces
are trained, equipped and financed by international
terrorist organizations. The fight against the “Eastern
Turkestan” group is an important aspect of the
international fight against terrorism.
19

In today’s world, the question of security is
becoming increasingly multifaceted and globalized.
Only enhanced international cooperation can help us
effectively cope with global security challenges and
bring about universal and lasting security. Countries
should endeavour to foster a new security concept,
based on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
collaboration. They should seek security through
mutual trust and pursue cooperation to their mutual
benefit so as to effectively reduce factors of insecurity.
The issue of arms control has always been closely
interrelated with that of security. In the face of the new
situation, we should go on working for the preservation
of the existing legal regime for international arms
control and disarmament and for the maintenance of
global strategic stability, without jeopardizing the
security of any country.
Tackling regional hot spots is vital to regional
and global security. We are following with deep
concern the current developments in the Middle East.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict that broke out in
September last year is continuing unabated. It poses a
grave threat to the Middle East peace process and to
regional stability. China supports the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace.
It also supports the Palestinian people in their just
struggle to regain their legitimate national rights and
interests. We hope that the Israeli and Palestinian sides
will take constructive measures and closely coordinate
with the international community in its mediating
efforts so as to create conditions for easing the tension
and reactivating the peace process. China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in this respect.
We are concerned about the situation in South
Asia. Given the current complex situation, we hope
that the countries in the region will strengthen mutual
understanding and mutual trust and coexist in peace
and amity. As a neighbour of Afghanistan, we have
been following the changing Afghan situation closely.
We believe that, in order to find a solution to the
Afghan issue, the following principles should be
observed. First, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan should be ensured.
Secondly, the Afghan people should be allowed to
decide on a solution independently. Thirdly, the future
government in Afghanistan should be broad-based and
embody the interests of all ethnic groups in the
country; Afghanistan should live in amity with all
countries, particularly its neighbours. Fourthly, the
solution should serve peace and stability in the region.
Fifthly, the United Nations should play a more active
role.
Since the beginning of this year, the world
economy has clearly slowed down, and the situation
has been further aggravated by the incidents of 11
September. Developing countries are finding
themselves in increasingly dire straits. The
international community must act with a greater sense
of urgency and accord higher priority to development.
Developed countries should act more vigorously
to promote development. They should adopt effective
measures and make greater efforts to revitalize the
global economy. We hope that the developed countries
will demonstrate a broader vision and a cooperative
spirit in providing assistance to developing countries.
In recent years, anti-globalization activities in
many parts of the world have increased. In fact,
globalization is neither a panacea for development nor
a monster causing disaster. The appropriate response to
globalization should maximize its advantages and
minimize its disadvantages so that all countries can
come out winners and prosper side by side.
Globalization should benefit all people from all social
strata in all countries.
The United Nations has an irreplaceable role to
play in international cooperation in response to
globalization. It should increase its input in
development and work more effectively to fulfil the
development objectives set forth in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration.
China is supportive of the World Trade
Organization’s plans to launch a new round of
multilateral trade talks. It is our hope that the new
round will give full consideration to the concerns and
interests of the developing countries.
The Ninth Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) Economic Leaders Meeting was held
successfully in October in Shanghai, China. The
meeting was convened at a critical moment, soon after
the incidents of 11 September, when prospects for the
global economy seemed grim. Focusing on the theme
“Meeting new challenges in the new century:
promoting common prosperity through participation
and cooperation”, the leaders conducted an in-depth
exchange of views and reached broad consensus.
Having boosted intra-APEC cooperation among the
20

members and reinforced their resolve to restore
economic growth, the meeting sent out a clear, positive
signal to markets throughout the world and took a
resolute step forward in advancing cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. The meeting will have a positive
and far-reaching impact on Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation.
President Jiang Zemin made clear to the world
China’s future objectives, guiding principles and
domestic and foreign policies in the important speech
that he delivered on 1 July this year. The principal task
for the Chinese people in the new century is to press
ahead with the modernization programme, work
towards the grand cause of national reunification,
safeguard world peace and promote common
development.
Indeed, the purpose of China’s foreign policy is
to safeguard world peace and promote common
development. China needs an environment of
friendship and good-neighbourliness and external
conditions of stability and prosperity. To achieve, and
safeguard, such an international environment serves
China’s national interests. It is also China’s duty as a
member of the international community.
We believe that all civilizations and social
systems in the world can, and should, exist side by side
on a long-term basis, complementing one another and
making progress together, in a spirit of seeking
common ground while putting aside differences.
We stand ready to engage in mutually beneficial
cooperation with all countries in the world on an equal
footing towards world peace and development, with the
aim of achieving common development. Our entry into
the World Trade Organization will usher in a
completely new phase of our opening-up process.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
restoration of China’s lawful seat in the United
Nations. Tremendous changes have since taken place in
the world, in China and in the United Nations. China’s
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
however, remains unchanged. In the new century,
China will, as always, vigorously support the work of
the United Nations and continue to work together with
other Member States for a better world.




﻿Only a few moments ago, we were informed of the
crash of a commercial airliner not far from here, in
Queens. At the moment, we do not know the cause of
this disaster, but we are shocked and horrified. I would
express to the bereaved families and to the American
people our sincere condolences and sympathy.
It has been only two months since thousands of
innocent persons lost their lives in the World Trade
Center here in New York. Today, we are seeing the
extent to which the people here have been affected. In
the entire history of the United Nations, there has never
been a situation like this one.
Throughout the world, people have expressed
their sincere solidarity with and commiseration for the
victims and their families. These horrific terrorist
attacks struck not just Americans, but also innocent
people from over 80 countries, members of all the
major world religions and cultures. They targeted us
all. It must therefore be a common concern of humanity
to prevent a recurrence of this tragedy or indeed
something even worse.
The events of 11 September thrust a dangerous
future upon the world. We now live in the terrible
knowledge that no country in the globalized world is
invulnerable and that enemies within, who are
determined to kill and to die, can perpetrate mass
murder at any time. This eerie, awful danger has at a
stroke dramatically altered the foundations of security
policy as we know it. The fight against internationally
operative terrorist networks will require new responses
from the community of States. International terrorism
is a challenge above all for politics, the military, the
police and the judiciary, as well as for the economy
and — very importantly — for culture. At the dawn of
the twenty-first century, the issue of peace and security
has thus taken on an entirely new perspective.
Humanity has rarely been as united as it was on
that terrible day two months ago. This unity was born
not only of horror and compassion, but also of the
realization that we can successfully counter this new
deadly threat only if we combine our full force and
energy. The day of 11 September was a defining
moment that altered the direction of world politics. A
new alliance was created. It must now be strengthened
and developed into a genuine partnership. If this is
achieved, 11 September could go down in history not
only as a horrific day for humanity, but also as the
beginning of a new era of cooperation and
multilateralism.
What drives people to commit these
inconceivable crimes and to blow up themselves and
thousands of innocents? From where does such
uncontrollable hatred come? How can it be curbed?
How can it be conquered? It is certain that in any
attempt to develop an effective counter-strategy we
must, while waging the war on terrorism, analyse the
full range of causes and circumstances that permit such
hatred and violence to grow.
The United Nations is uniquely suited to the task
ahead. It provides the forum required for the creation
12

of a universal coalition. Only it can give international
legitimacy to the response to terrorism. It has at its
disposal the instruments to manage political conflicts
and the underlying development problems that nurture
hatred and despair.
A comprehensive strategy against terrorism must
concentrate primarily on prevention. Developing such a
strategy means nothing less than drafting a policy for a
cooperative world order for the twenty-first century, a
policy that no longer tolerates areas characterized by a
breakdown of order, a policy that has as its goal a
world order under which all peoples can claim their
full and equitable share. This includes making
economic globalization more socially just for more
people and supplementing it with the political
globalization so urgently needed.
The Security Council responded to 11 September
with rare solidarity and, with resolutions 1368 (2001)
and 1373 (2001), took decisions on concrete,
internationally binding anti-terrorism measures that
point the way ahead. The General Assembly, too,
severely condemned the terrorist attacks and called for
joint action against international terrorism.
This path must now be rigorously pursued with
the rapid and universal ratification and implementation
of the 12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions
and the adoption of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. We must endeavour anew to
bring this project, on which we all place so much hope,
to a successful conclusion. I therefore call upon all
States that have not yet approved the present
compromise to reconsider their position.
The International Criminal Court can also become
a valuable instrument in the fight against terrorism.
Under article 7, paragraph 1, of its statute, it will have
jurisdiction to try cases of murder “when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack directed
against any civilian population”. There can be no doubt
that the attacks on New York, Washington and
Pennsylvania fulfil this requirement. For this reason, I
would like to ask you all once again to ratify the Rome
Statute as quickly as possible.
The attack on the World Trade Center was a
wake-up call to the profound threat to world peace that
can be posed by failing States. Areas where political
and social order has collapsed offer terrorists a safe
haven from which they can organize their murderous
networks worldwide. The community of States urgently
needs to take a closer and preventive look at the
problem of failing States — but not just in
Afghanistan, and not only after a catastrophe has
occurred.
No conflict prevention measures have ever been
undertaken in Afghanistan. Far from it. This has
proved to be a fatal error. For more than 20 years, a
humanitarian catastrophe has been playing itself out
before the eyes of the world, in which women and
children, in particular, have suffered. Civil war, human
rights violations and abject misery have also been the
nourishing ground for the unprecedented symbiosis
between the terrorists of the Al Qaeda group and the
Taliban regime.
From there the trail leads directly to the horrific
attacks in the United States. As hard as this decision
may be, without the use of military means, this threat
cannot be averted. We must not forget that the suffering
of the people in Afghanistan is above all the work of
the Taliban. It was the Taliban that, long before 11
September, increasingly impeded effective
humanitarian relief, robbed women and girls of all their
rights and actively supported terrorism, also with the
goal of destabilizing Arab and Muslim States.
Not to react would indeed be to invite further
terror and oppression and would be extremely
dangerous for world peace. The dramatic nature of this
threat is illustrated by Osama bin Laden’s statement
that he will not shrink from using even nuclear
weapons. Civilian means alone are unfortunately not
always enough to put an end to violence and terror.
This was the case in the Balkans.
In Afghanistan, too, the root of the tragic conflict
is profoundly political, and so the solution, too, can
ultimately only be a political one. It must come from
within, must reflect the diversity of peoples in Afghan
society and must be accepted by the Afghan people.
But a peaceful solution also requires assistance from
the international community. Afghanistan must not be
left alone with its problems yet again.
A clear political and humanitarian perspective for
Afghanistan is now crucial. The United Nations should
be the coordinating agency for all peace efforts. It is
indispensable as the framework for the political
process and as the guarantor of internal agreements
within Afghanistan. Only a peace process under the
auspices of the United Nations will succeed in
excluding external involvement in the future and
13

ensuring a peaceful future for the country in harmony
with its neighbours. Germany and the European Union
are willing to play their part towards a political
solution for Afghanistan and to participate in the long
term in the economic and social reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
More than anything, the refugees and the civilian
population must be helped. We cannot tolerate the fact
that the Taliban is hindering humanitarian access and is
using the civilian population as a shield. Especially
because of the approaching winter, we must do
everything in our power to provide the people with at
least the most basic necessities and to alleviate their
despair and hardship. Is it possible to establish
humanitarian protected areas, to use the expulsion of
the Taliban from Mazar-e-Sharif and other towns to
improve the humanitarian situation, and to make a
town like Kabul an open city? Of course this will be
very difficult, but let us nevertheless think without
taboos about absolutely all ways in which we could
help the people. As chair of the Afghanistan Support
Group, Germany has issued an invitation to a meeting
in Berlin at the beginning of December. I appeal to all
States to make a great humanitarian effort now and to
come to the aid of the downtrodden Afghan people.
Solving regional conflicts will be of critical
importance in the fight against terrorism. The Middle
East conflict is a top priority. Our hearts go out to the
many innocent victims on all sides. Both the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples have a right to live free of fear, in
dignity and in peace. This is indivisible not only from
Israel’s right of statehood, as recognized in Madrid —
which is, in our view, inviolable — but also from its
security. Germany bears a special responsibility
towards Israel stemming from its past. Any policy that
aims at destroying Israel by means of terrorism or
otherwise will face determined opposition from
Germany. However, we equally advocate the
Palestinians’ right to self-determination and their right
to their own State, Palestine. In the European Union
Berlin Declaration of March 1999 we stated that “the
creation of a democratic, viable and peaceful sovereign
Palestinian State on the basis of existing agreements
and through negotiations would be the best guarantee
of Israel’s security”. This is truer today than ever
before.
Never before has there been broader international
backing for a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Mitchell recommendations still form the
basis for the timetable accepted by all sides, and in
their spirit we call on Israelis and Palestinians alike to
put an immediate and lasting end to violence and
confrontation, to resume the agreed direct talks without
delay and to seriously implement the negotiated
ceasefires. These talks must lead to genuine
negotiations on a viable political solution.
The real aim of the terrorists is to trigger a clash
of civilizations and to inflame the situation in the Near
and Middle East. Under no circumstances can we allow
ourselves to be drawn into such a conflict. We are
fighting international terrorism, not Islam.
We must counter the terrorist strategy designed to
bring about the clash of civilizations with a dialogue of
cultures and religions. We need a spiritual debate based
on mutual understanding that attempts to reach genuine
agreement on the fundamental values that unite us.
Such a dialogue presupposes the existence of shared
values, but also respect for other traditions and
differences between peoples. However, one thing must
be clear: human rights are universal, not Western
values. Consensus was reached on them by the
international community of States in the Charter of the
United Nations and the human rights conventions.
Any dialogue must build on the universality of
human rights. It must be conducted with respect for the
dignity of all involved, in tolerance and openness. It
must start at home, within cultures themselves. It can
bear fruit only if it is pursued free of all constraint.
And it has a purpose only if all participants are also
ready to offer self-criticism.
The insidious anthrax attacks since 11 September
show that the threat from weapons of mass destruction
in terrorist hands, which yesterday seemed abstract, is
today a real and deadly danger. The community of
States must do everything in its power to counter it
with a new push for non-proliferation and global
disarmament.
The dangers of the dissemination of weapons to
non-State groups and of regional arms races require
new answers and effective, internationally enforceable
criminal sanctions. In the nuclear field, the
commitment contained in the Non-Proliferation Treaty
to complete nuclear disarmament remains crucial. As
regards biological weapons, in view of the acute threat,
effective global control mechanisms must finally be
created. The Chemical Weapons Convention must be
more rigorously implemented. All States are called
14

upon to participate in the negotiation of an
international code of conduct on ballistic missile
proliferation.
The fight now beginning against terrorism must
build on the awareness that the first world cannot in the
long term live secure and safe from the tensions and
conflicts of the third world. Almost one quarter of the
world population is starving. Ninety-five per cent of
those infected with AIDS live in developing countries.
Africa is particularly hard hit. At present only a
minority of the world’s citizens profit from the
opportunities for growth offered by globalization and
from the use of the new information technologies. This
state of affairs cannot be accepted, even by the rich
countries — for moral reasons, but also because
tensions and conflicts today spread much more quickly
and widely than ever before.
The battle against poverty cannot be won unless
we take equally determined steps to preserve the
natural resources on which life depends. At the coming
World Summit in Johannesburg we must make a
quantum leap forward towards sustainable
development, improved poverty eradication and better
management of our natural resources. The Kyoto
Protocol must enter into force next year. And we must
strengthen the sole advocate of the global environment,
the United Nations Environment Programme,
institutionally, operationally and financially.
11 September made it horrifyingly clear that the
human race will not be able to live in peace and
security in the absence of political order at the global
and regional levels.
Germany will continue to do its utmost to bring
about the strengthening of the United Nations and its
capacity to act, so that the world will be a more
peaceful, just and humane place in the twenty-first
century than it was in the twentieth century. The future
belongs to responsible governance for one world,
governance based not on hegemonic claims, but on
cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. If together
we succeed in implementing such a policy, we will not
just ultimately win the war against terrorism but will
also be able to eradicate its roots forever.




﻿At the
outset, it is a great pleasure for me to congratulate the
President on his election, which is a sign of the esteem
in which he and his country are held.
Coming after his re-election to a second term ─
which is a sign of the general confidence he has
earned ─ the Nobel Peace Prize that has been awarded
to the Secretary-General is a well-deserved tribute to
his work and, through him, to the United Nations
Organization as a whole, thereby inspiring greater hope
than ever before.
On this my third visit to New York since the
tragedy of 11 September, I also want to express once
again my profound emotion and pay homage to the
people of New York, who are being so severely tested,
and to their courageous mayor, who is now finishing
his term.
The unprecedented magnitude and gravity of the
terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11
September warrant our unfailing solidarity and an
exceptional response. In its resolution 1368 (2001),
which was adopted unanimously, the Security Council
rightly qualified those acts as attacks and, hence, as
legitimately meriting a defensive response under
Article 51 of the Charter. The United States is thus
entirely within its legal and political rights in carrying
out its targeted military response against the terrorist
organizations responsible for those acts. The military
action under way was therefore inevitable, and must be
pursued until all its objectives have been achieved.
Given the preliminary results achieved yesterday, I
hope that those objectives will be met as soon as
possible. The leaders of these terrorist networks and
those who support them must be decisively prevented
from committing further harm.
But that military action should, as a matter of
course, form part of an overarching strategy that
includes immediate, broad-scale humanitarian action
that is better adapted to the needs of people in distress.
France has put forward several proposals in this regard
and supports the current initiatives for better
coordination. That overarching strategy should also
include a political solution — something that has now
become urgent — and strive to ensure that the demise
of the Taliban regime does not lead to factional
infighting and chaos; and it must once again make the
Afghan people masters of their own future. That is the
aim of the action plan for Afghanistan that France
proposed back on 1 October, and of the other
contributions it has made with the same goals in mind.
We await Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi’s proposals with
interest; they should set forth broad outlines of action
for the United Nations. On these bases, the Security
Council should be able to adopt a framework resolution
within a few days, endorsing Mr. Brahimi’s proposals
and spelling out the modalities of United Nations
support for the establishment of an Afghan
26

Government representative of the various constituents
of the population. There is no question of imposing on
Afghanistan some ready-made solution concocted by
outsiders. I call on all the constituents of the Afghan
nation and all neighbouring countries to heed the
general interest of Afghanistan and its people. This is
compatible with respect for the legitimate interests of
the various parties concerned and it is the only way to
turn our backs on the past.
Beyond immediate military, diplomatic and
humanitarian action, our common fight against
terrorism needs to be pursued in all its forms, including
police, judicial and others. The United Nations will
have a crucial role to play in this difficult struggle,
laying down universal obligations for each State and
the framework for our action. A series of conventions
has already been concluded, particularly the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, which I proposed in this very
place in 1999. We must speed up the signature and
ratification of those conventions. The General
Assembly must quickly conclude the negotiations on
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. For its part, the Security Council should
oversee the coordinated implementation by States of its
resolution 1373 (2001).
Action against terrorism also needs to be carried
out through other organizations, in conjunction with
the United Nations and consistent with its policies. For
its part, the European Union (EU) has just taken
unprecedented steps to strengthen police and judicial
cooperation among its member States, including the
creation of a European arrest warrant. An ambitious
action plan has been agreed. The 29 members of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have decided to
extend the fight against money-laundering to the fight
against the financing of terrorism. Beyond that, I
propose the creation of a dialogue forum to move us in
this direction. Several other organizations, too, will
have a role to play, so that at the end of the day every
country will be making a contribution.
Leaving aside the hoped-for short-term results,
the obstacles notwithstanding, we will not achieve
lasting victory against all forms of terrorism unless we
succeed in depriving terrorists of their breeding ground
and eliminating the pretexts from which they
fallaciously draw their justification, and unless we
eradicate them in the true sense of the term. That
implies nothing short of changing our world. And let
no one claim that this would be tantamount to
justifying the terrorists. For neither my country, nor
Europe, nor the United Nations — in other words, none
of us — waited for 11 September to discover, condemn
and seek to remedy the ills of the world. Yet how many
good intentions have come to naught? How many
resolutions have gone unimplemented? How many
announcements have failed to materialize, which now
feed a sense of bitterness and incomprehension? It is
pointless to condemn or deny the theory of a clash of
civilizations. Rather, we must fight against such a risk,
which is by no means wholly imaginary, and against
those who would make it a reality.
This should be one more pressing reason for us
all to find a solution to regional crises, particularly in
the Middle East. Since 1982, France has called for the
creation of a Palestinian State. Naturally, it would have
to be viable, democratic and peaceful, and it should
give credible undertakings as regards Israel’s security.
Guarantees will be needed, yet the Palestinian State is
not the problem; it is the solution for reasons based on
rights, humanity and security. Such is the EU’s
common stance today. This morning, before the
Assembly, President Bush himself has made this his
objective. It is the path of reason — the only path that
can halt the murderous spiral of conflict between the
two peoples.
Admittedly, responsibility for a lasting peace
agreement lies first and foremost with the protagonists.
Unless they make the move, no one else will be able to
overcome their fears and resentment and put an end to
the suffering of these two peoples. Yet, the increasing
threat that this conflict poses to international peace and
security requires that those who have the will and the
means join forces in a push for peace, given that the
main players are evidently unable to do so unaided.
The urgency of the situation in the Near East
obviously should not make us forget Iraq. Regional
security still needs to be secured by restoring an
international monitoring capability and by alleviating
the suffering of the Iraqi people through the lifting of
the embargo on civilian goods. I hope the discussions
now in progress in the Security Council will finally
bring this about.
Nor should we forget the Caucasus, where ancient
quarrels live on and where new ones are rising to the
fore. Yet, here again there is no other way than to seek
negotiated political solutions.
27

In the Balkans, we realized that international
involvement must be sustainable. Thanks to it, and
thanks to new leaders, noteworthy progress has been
achieved towards democracy, reconciliation and
regional cooperation over the last two years. We must
make sure these positive changes are not challenged by
outmoded patterns of behaviour. We must maintain and
pursue the Europeanization of the Balkans.
Turning to the Great Lakes region, we know that
the lasting resolution of the conflict, which involves
more than eight countries, will be a negotiated solution
that will ensure the restoration of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and include as well
safeguard clauses to protect the security of each of the
States. The Lusaka Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions provide the framework for
ending this crisis, but they should be applied as quickly
as possible. To halt the illegal use of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which often
occurs in association with forced child labour, should
be an immediate priority.
In all the cases I have just referred to briefly —
and there are others — the problem we have to resolve
is the coexistence of peoples who are at once close and
antagonistic, deeply affected and divided by history
and separated by fear and the spirit of revenge. We will
achieve this only through perseverance and a clear
understanding of each particular situation, guided by
the principles of the United Nations.
Even if we managed to resolve all these regional
crises and others as well, our task would still not be
over because, at the global level, the gulf between
intentions for the world as stated at international
meetings and actual realities is becoming intolerable
for many peoples. We must redouble our efforts to
create humane globalization. We saw this in Seattle, we
saw it in Genoa, and even more so in Durban. We can
see it in the reactions to the Afghan crisis and to many
other issues. Despite the United Nations and our good
resolutions, there is still no real universal consensus.
What we call “the international community” has yet to
be built. Is this a reason to throw in the towel? To the
contrary – absolutely not. France has long been
determined to add its stone to this edifice. We have
already put forward numerous proposals to that end and
will continue to do so, with increased conviction.
Need I recall our well-known major objectives for
the world?
First, we must achieve a fairer distribution of
wealth; 3 billion people currently live on less than 2
dollars per day, and the global income gap between the
richest and the poorest has doubled over the last 40
years.
Second, we must end impunity.
Third, we must guarantee sustainable
development everywhere — “sustainable”, that little
word that makes all the difference, or which should
make all the difference. The World Summit in
Johannesburg in September 2002 will provide an
opportunity to affirm a vision and a benchmark of
development based on three intimately linked pillars:
economic, social and environmental.
Fourth, we must help refugees and fully respect
the right of asylum.
Fifth, we must manage population movements in
a humanitarian manner.
Sixth, we must draft international standards in a
democratic way to ensure that they are entirely
legitimate and that everyone will consequently be
bound to comply with them.
Seventh, we must no longer tolerate situations of
human distress. State sovereignty, which remains an
essential feature of the international system, cannot, in
extreme emergencies, be regarded as an absolute
principle serving as a pretext for inaction. The Security
Council must be able to fully assume its
responsibilities in cases of gross human rights
violations, for these also pose threats to international
peace and security.
Eighth, we must aim at promoting balanced and
negotiated disarmament, which strengthens security
and strategic stability.
Ninth, we must strive to allow all languages,
cultures and civilizations to exist while maintaining a
dialogue with one another.
Tenth, we must seek to improve the state of
health worldwide, which for one thing means devoting
more resources to combating HIV/AIDS. I would hope
that the new Global AIDS and Health Fund will be
made operational by the beginning of 2002.
But we are undoubtedly now more aware than in
recent years that the attainment of these objectives,
which are both indispensable, and very ambitious, calls
28

different rules and different mechanisms, starting with
the reform and enlargement of the Security Council,
which we have waited for all too long; with respect for
the role of the General Assembly; with the ratification
of the major multilateral instruments — I am thinking
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court and
the Kyoto Protocol, among others; with a more
appropriate and less indiscriminate use of sanctions
when they are needed; with a clarification of the
respective and legitimate roles of Governments and
civil society; with an agreement on the modalities of
interference to deal with large-scale and extreme
emergency situations; with a regulation and
development round at the World Trade Organization
(WTO), which is starting today in Doha; with closer
cooperation and greater consistency between the WTO
and the International Labour Organization; with the
creation of a world environmental organization; and
with reform of the international financial institutions. I
shall stop this list here. I could go on, for there is so
much that remains to be done.
All of us, as Members of the United Nations, are
faced with this challenge. But I do not hesitate to say
here that the rich countries — in other words, the West
and a handful of other countries from the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, where
some 1.135 billion men and women live, have even
more responsibility than others. Now that the illusions
of the last 10 years have been dispelled, the choice
before us is harsh, but clear: either a world so unjust
that we have conflict with no foreseeable end, or, on
the contrary, an international community of the United
Nations, at last worthy of the name, to solve together
humanity’s common problems and ensure its future.
But building this community, instead of just talking
about it or yearning for it, will mean for some of us
giving up privileges, sharing wealth and power in new
ways, and rewriting certain rules hitherto held to be
inviolable. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist
Joseph Stiglitz has written, free trade was designed by
Western countries for the Western countries. This is
debatable, of course, but none of this will happen
without sacrifices, above all on the part of the rich and
powerful countries.
At this very moment, a reshuffling of diplomatic
cards on a grand scale is under way between the United
States, Russia, China, Europe, the Arab or Muslim
world, the other coalition partners, the rest of the world
and the United Nations. I hope — I truly hope — that
this will help to bring about a vital awakening and that
my country, Europe and the United Nations will follow
new avenues, in deeds and not just words, and that all
of us, together, will successfully extend the needed
coalition against terrorism to turn it into a coalition for
an equitable world, and that this will lay the
groundwork for a renewal of the international system.






﻿Please allow me
warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
This day, 11 November, is the anniversary of the
Armistice which ended the slaughter of the First World
War and is a day of remembrance here in the United
States, in the United Kingdom and across much of the
world. It is a day when all of us remember the sacrifice
of those who, over the last century, gave their lives that
others might live in freedom.
For our parents and grandparents, the end of the
Second World War stood as a turning point, a moment
to establish a new world order. Their vision was
inscribed at the very beginning of the Charter of the
United Nations:
“We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”.
With these words, they founded the international
community.
For some of us, the subsequent half-century has
been the most peaceful era of our history. Yet we know
that no one’s freedom can be secure while others suffer.
On this Remembrance Day, we remember
something else — the thousands who died just two
months ago, on 11 September. A third of the nations
represented here in the General Assembly lost citizens
at the World Trade Center. But just as our predecessors
saw hope in the midst of despair, so we now face the
task of building a new and better world.
It is fitting that it was here at the United Nations,
on 12 September, that the world began to fight back
against the terrorist threat. We showed our joint
resolve, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, when we adopted resolutions demanding
that terrorists and those who harbour them be held to
account for their evil actions.
I applaud Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), which established the Counter-terrorism
Committee and which requires all Member States to
respond to the global terrorist threat.
21

We do surely have to take every effective
measure against international terrorist networks, whose
malign influence is felt in every part of the globe, not
least by adopting a comprehensive convention on
terrorism and the draft Nuclear Terrorism Convention.
We also have to confront an unpalatable truth:
that we still face a real and immediate danger. The
murderous groups who plotted the terrible events of 11
September could strike again at any time. Thus our first
duty, to our citizens and to each other, is to defend
ourselves against that threat.
When the nations of the world agreed the United
Nations Charter, they recognized the right of self-
defence in Article 51. It is in exercise of this right that
the military coalition is now engaged in action against
Al Qaeda and the Taliban regime which harbours them.
Taking military action is always a tough decision.
But here it truly was unavoidable, and we all owe a
debt of gratitude to President Bush for the steadfast and
careful manner in which the United States proceeded.
But in defending the world from terror, we have
to do our utmost to spare innocent Afghan people
further suffering. For decades, the Afghans have seen
their country exploited by outside powers and riven by
conflict. In five years, their society has been
systematically destroyed by one of the most brutal
regimes the world has ever known.
But at last today, the international community is
united in its efforts to feed and shelter the millions of
refugees through this harsh winter, and it is determined
to help build a new Afghanistan.
For the first time in decades, there is consensus in
the Security Council as a whole, and among
Afghanistan’s neighbours, that there should be a broad-
based government in Kabul, reflecting Afghanistan’s
rich ethnic diversity, and that the future of Afghanistan
must be put into the hands of the Afghan people. There
must be no more Great Games with Afghan people as
the pawns, and no more regional rivalries, with Afghan
people as the victims.
We know that the one institution in the world
which can deliver this better future is here now: the
United Nations. We should all give Ambassador
Brahimi every support in planning a future that leads to
Afghanistan retaking its place as a fully fledged
member of the international community, able to protect
and promote the interests of all of its people.
That nations have come so closely together to
fight terrorism shows how the world is changing.
However, we have to build a deeper and wider
consensus to tackle the other great issues which we
face. It is not just the Afghan people who have been
excluded from the values on which the United Nations
was founded.
Conflict, poverty, discrimination and injustice
still blight the lives of millions in every part of the
globe. Individuals’ rights, especially women’s rights,
are ignored with impunity, and then the very structure
of communities collapses. Where this happens, where
societies disintegrate or States fail, we put at risk the
basis of global society itself.
If 11 September teaches us anything, it is surely
this: that if we ignore our moral responsibilities to each
other, we will be forced later to face painful
consequences.
Nowhere is the need for action now more obvious
than in Africa. Yes, there has been some progress there.
International work on the ground to resolve conflict has
brought hope to Sierra Leone and to the Great Lakes
region. Responsible Governments working across the
continent in partnership with effective international
donors have succeeded in reducing poverty. But we
should not delude ourselves about the scale of the task
that remains in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa average
income today is much lower than it was 30 years ago.
The New Partnership for African Development
therefore requires the support of the whole community
of nations. Africa deserves the same opportunities that
we in the West take for granted. We in the West must
acknowledge that while removing barriers to global
trade and to finance, we have not always dismantled
barriers to dignity and equality. In theory, global free
trade should have created the conditions for every
economy to exploit its comparative advantage in the
world marketplace. In practice, protectionist barriers
still survive, especially against trade in agriculture,
damaging Africa’s interests today, and all our interests
tomorrow.
As we meet here in New York, our colleagues at
the World Trade Organization meeting in Doha have
the opportunity to begin to put these injustices right.
Launching a new trade round would be the clearest
possible signal of the world’s determination to spread
the benefits of wealth and of prosperity more fairly.
22

Our predecessors gave us the United Nations. In
the succeeding years, it developed expertise in
peacekeeping, in conflict prevention, in human rights
and in reconstruction, to consolidate the gains of 1945.
My message today is that our generation faces as
daunting a task, but a different one. That task is to
defeat international terrorism. But to do that we have to
combine the agenda of 10 September with the agenda
of 11 September, as the Secretary-General emphasized
in his powerful speech yesterday. And we must take not
only military action, but also diplomatic action to
reduce tensions that terrorists exploit.
Nowhere are those tensions greater than in the
Middle East. The path to a settlement there is plain. It
has to be based on a political process that implements
United Nations resolutions. It must deliver security for
Israel within recognized borders while at the same time
creating a viable Palestinian State. We should give the
parties every help to reach a settlement. But our efforts
will be wasted unless the parties themselves show the
political will to bring violence to a halt, and the
political courage to make a deal.
We have seen, in the most graphic and brutal way
possible, that chaos in one part of the world can
undermine security in all parts of the world. Against
that chaos we must set our vision of peaceful
cooperation among stable nations. Achieving that
vision has now taken on a new urgency. Indeed, we are
at a moment of strategic opportunity, which comes no
more than once to any generation. We owe it to those
who founded the international community to seize this
moment. Most of all, we owe it to those who will come
after us.
Today we remember with sorrow the sacrifices
that earlier generations made. We remember with pride
the brave decisions that they took to build a better
world for us, and we salute the reconciliation and
recovery that followed. My hope is that our children
and our grandchildren will look back on this period
with no less pride, and that future generations will be
able to say that we here faced up to a great evil; we did
not duck the decisions we had to take; we established
peace in Afghanistan, constructive coexistence in the
Middle East and sustained development in Africa. We
made the necessary endeavour in the finest tradition of
the United Nations.
The United Nations stands for everything the
terrorist seeks to destroy. My hope is that our
successors will look back on this era and say that we
saved succeeding generations from the scourge of
terrorism as well as from the scourge of war.





﻿I congratulate the President on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session. I also take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and the United Nations on being honoured with the
Nobel Peace Prize.
This session of the General Assembly is being
held in the shadow of the barbaric terrorist acts of 11
September, which dramatically reminded us that
neither distance nor power insulates a State from
terrorism. Such acts represent an arrogant rejection of
the values of freedom and tolerance, which democratic
and pluralistic societies cherish.
Even while uniting the nations of the world in
their grief, this terrible tragedy has created the
opportunity to fashion a determined global response to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
it exists and under whatever name.
We in India know from our own bitter experience
that terrorists develop global networks driven by
religious extremism. Their operations are supported by
drug trafficking, money laundering and arms
smuggling. Some States follow a policy of sponsoring
and sheltering them. Terrorists can only be countered
through closely coordinated efforts of the international
community.
Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and
1373 (2001) are steps in the right direction, but it
requires the firm political will of the freedom-loving
world to implement them rigorously. The two crucial
elements in this would be strict curbs on sources of
financing for terrorists and denying them safe havens
for training, arming and operation.
We must firmly rebuff any ideological, political
or religious justification for terrorism. We should reject
self-serving arguments seeking to classify terrorism
according to its root causes, and therefore justifying
32

terrorist action somewhere while condemning it
elsewhere. Those that advance these arguments should
explain what the root causes of the brutal acts of 11
September were.
India supports the current campaign against the
terrorist networks in Afghanistan. We hope that it
reaches an early and successful conclusion. That
country’s current travails can only end with the
establishment of a broad-based, representative and
neutral Government, which would stop the export of
terrorism and extremism. The international community
should work towards this goal, even while the military
campaign continues, so that we avoid a political
vacuum at the end of the campaign.
We must recognize that current structures to
facilitate a post-Taliban political settlement are
unrepresentative and therefore ineffective. Located as
it is in Afghanistan’s neighbourhood, India’s vital
national interests are affected by developments in it.
We also have traditionally close links with
Afghanistan. This is the basis for our belief that India
can play a useful role in this process.
The task of reconstruction in post-conflict
Afghanistan also merits the urgent attention of the
international community. It would require massive
external assistance to create an economic situation
conducive to the speedy return and rehabilitation of the
millions of Afghans who have taken refuge in other
countries of this region. Again India stands ready to
join international efforts for this.
We have already announced relief assistance of a
million tons of wheat, medicines and medical
assistance for needy Afghans within, and outside, the
country. We have also pledged $100 million to post-
conflict Afghanistan for reconstruction. We are
prepared to do more.
Nearly 6,000 lives were lost on 11 September, but
the global economic downturn in its aftermath will take
a far larger human toll, mainly in the developing world.
The World Bank has estimated that tens of thousands
more children will die worldwide and some 10 million
more people are likely to go below the poverty line of
$1 a day. It is pertinent to reflect on these chilling
statistics even as the Ministerial Conference gets under
way in Doha to consider World Trade Organization
(WTO) issues. Before we embark on any new
initiatives for globalization and sustainable
development, we should recognize that political
support for them will be determined primarily by the
impact of these regimes on poverty.
For most developing countries, the Uruguay
Round has done little for economic growth, while
poverty levels and income gaps have worsened.
Globalization has constrained developing countries in
mobilizing public resources for poverty alleviation.
That is why public support for the globalization regime
has vanished in developing countries. This is also why
we have argued strongly that implementation issues
should first be resolved before we try to widen the
WTO agenda further. Our public is unwilling to accept
another post-dated cheque, when an earlier one has
bounced.
Similarly, the movement towards sustainable
development has proved a disappointment. Developing
countries are unable to realize fair payments for their
sovereign biodiversity resources and traditional
knowledge. The treaties on climate change and
biodiversity have also failed to activate the anticipated
investment and technology transfers to developing
countries. Industrialized countries have not shown the
political will to enhance their overseas development
budgets. Multilateral development agencies are also
constrained in their resources, of which, in any case,
very little is available on concessional terms.
The inevitable conclusion is that for current
regimes of globalization and sustainable development
to be strengthened, or even to survive, they must be re-
engineered to generate large-scale finances for poverty
alleviation. The passion for globalization has to be
tempered by compassion for its victims. Sadly, this
thought has not penetrated into the thinking of the
developed economies. Their actions also do not reflect
the realization that there cannot be a sustainable revival
of their own sluggish economies unless the
globalization and sustainable development priorities
are re-oriented and anchored in the developmental
needs of two-thirds of the global population.
A year ago, I suggested in my speech to the
United States Congress a comprehensive global
dialogue on development. The aim of such a dialogue
would be to address the highly unstable situation in
which one-third of the world’s population lives in
luxury and condemns the remaining two-thirds to
poverty and want. It is a fertile breeding ground for
political unrest, economic chaos and social fractures.
33

India would be happy to coordinate this dialogue,
with the immediate objective of mobilizing resources
for poverty alleviation programmes in developing
countries. A preliminary agenda for the dialogue could
include the accelerated liquidation of external debts of
low-income and highly indebted countries; poverty
alleviation programmes specifically aimed at
developing countries facing financial crises;
stabilization of international prices of primary
commodity exports; and, most importantly, welfare and
development programmes for all the world’s needy
children — for their nutrition, health, education and
protection from degrading and hazardous employment.
The struggle for equitable development and the
war against poverty are as important as our campaign
against terrorism and our collective search for security.
At a time when an external stimulus has motivated us
to unite against terrorism and for security, let us
summon an equally strong inner resolve for
development and poverty alleviation. They are just as
crucial for a global order at peace with itself.
This fundamental and seamless linkage between
peace, security and development can be recalled in the
sage words of the great Indian poet Rabindranath
Tagore:
“From now onward, any nation that takes an
isolated view of its own interests will run
contrary to the spirit of the New Age, and will
know no peace. From now onward, the anxiety
that each country has for its own safety must
embrace the welfare of the whole world.”


﻿First of all, I would really like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President
of the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I
know that you bring with you a wealth of experience, a
breadth of understanding and hope for many people. I
would also like to express my highest regard for
9

Secretary-General Kofi Annan on his well-deserved
recognition as Nobel Prize Laureate for his fresh ideas
and great vision on how to meet a new world with an
open mind, a sense of unity and hope.
There is hidden light and needed hope in this
gathering to overturn the darkness that has descended
upon us. There is enough strength and resolve in the
midst of civilized nations to deflect evil.
Humanity woke up happy to welcome the twenty-
first century. We turned around and looked, and there
was brightness and freshness in the air. We had
departed from a traditional history that was written
with red ink — wars, skirmishes, conflicts and
murders — many of which arose because human
existence was dependent upon land and natural
resources. We have had to protect our own lands.
Modern science emerged to supersede land,
opening new horizons of limitless opportunities.
Science rendered borders marginal, and old prejudices
and distances began to dissipate from our minds.
Technology created a new interdependence. No longer
were our connections dependent upon land or sea —
upon distance. Air became the new means of
communication for nations, peoples, businesses and
development. High technology introduced new
promises and recalled the importance of old values.
The perception was that every person,
irrespective of location, race, religion or sex, could
reach new heights. And then we learned that high
technology is not just a technical matter. We cannot
separate technology from values; it is impossible.
For example, you cannot combine lies and
science. You cannot lie scientifically. To have a
science-based economy, you have to pursue peace
uncompromisingly and openness uninterruptedly.
Science requires an open society; it demands constant
dialogue. You cannot have new innovations without
unrestricted research. You cannot have unrestricted
research without being a free society. You cannot
develop a scientific economy without making
education a top priority, available and accessible to all
people. You cannot attract investment unless you have
transparency.
In a competitive world, to keep young scientists
your land and water should be free from pollution, your
financial system free from corruption, your government
without arbitrariness. Truth, freedom and openness
became conditions for science and high technology
and, consequently, for the advancement of any society.
It is true that the world is still divided between
the haves and the have nots. But for the have nots, a
new option is that of becoming connected to the new
age and the more developed aspects of our times.
There had been a new beginning, but like many
beginnings, one mixed with shadows and revolt. The
shadows were not yet heavy; at the beginning they
looked pale and distant. So we felt like one promised
world, like one assembly. The economy was no longer
national; it became global — open to every nation. And
since we could not form a global government, the
national Governments agreed that the global economy
would be managed by private enterprises — hence,
privatization. Globalization decreased the importance
of traditional States and increased the importance of
non-governmental organizations and worldwide
connections. It looked as if borderless progress was
evolving. And then ambushing clouds, global in nature,
moved in as a new horror.
The horrific events of 11 September — the
savage attack on innocent American people —
signalled a new warning to world history. On 11
September, we learned that the very same technology I
mentioned earlier — openness and a frontier-less,
connected world — could also spread viciousness. This
attack was brutal, because it was directed at everything
we stand for, against everything for which nations, and
the United Nations, have toiled.
The emerging terror, like the emerging economy,
is no longer national or delineated by boundaries.
Rather, it is borderless, and it contains unlimited,
awesome potential. It can begin with knives, and it may
wind up with germs. Terror does not have a visible
address, a merciful lord in heaven, a court or an elected
government. Nor does it need the approval of the many.
It is built on the fanaticism of a small group of
murderers, lacking the checks and balances of an
accountable society. It may arrive unexpectedly,
uninvited, spreading fear in every corner of the globe,
paralysing us at work and home, grounding flights,
impeding movement, disrupting commerce and
production. Eventually, it can endanger the freshness of
air, the purity of water.
Global economy arrived as an historic surprise;
global terrorism also arrived without prior warning.
But, whereas a solution was found to regulate the
10

global economy, through privatization, there is no
private answer to meet global terrorism. Many nations
have armies, without necessarily having enemies. Yet,
for the time being, global dangers remain without
global answers or global armies.
The United States played the pivotal role in
introducing the new economy. Now again, it falls upon
the United States, as the first target of global terrorism,
to offer a strategy, to take the lead and to bring back
the promise of freedom and security to many of us.
We pay tribute to the United States, a nation that
had the capacity to welcome new modes of creativity,
planning, production and innovation at home and
abroad. And while becoming mighty, it did not stop
caring for the rest of the world. The United States has
helped nations in Europe and Asia and elsewhere
regain freedom and security in times of danger.
American boys fought, and many of them lost
their lives, in European and Asian wars. They won
wars and gained land, but they did not keep those
assets for themselves. They returned to Japan an
improved Japan. They returned to Germany an
improved Germany. The Marshall Plan helped to
rebuild Europe. Needy countries were offered food and
assistance, industries were restored, economies were
rehabilitated. There was generosity in their victory.
Indeed, America has emerged as the “indispensable
nation”.
Now America has become a target for reasons
which are not necessarily its own. Terrorism was
directed at America to frustrate its democracy, weaken
its respect for human rights, reduce its enterprise and
threaten its individualism so that it would not be able
to help others. This was an assault on the very
existence of humanity.
The bin Laden group are afraid of progress. They
are proponents of backwardness. They want us to
return to living in caves. They represent the darkest
ages in the annals of human history. They are self-
appointed killers of any persons who think differently
from them. They are not just evil — they are an agency
of death.
America is not just a new world or continent — it
is a great constitution, a shining city on the hill of
freedom. It is not just a concrete structure — it is a
solid idea. You can attack America, hurt it, but
America cannot be destroyed.
America’s war on terrorism is the war of all of us.
By “us”, I mean every country in this Assembly and
every human being on this planet. Bin Laden claims
that he fights crusaders, who no longer exist. Bin
Laden claims that he wants to help the Palestinians, but
in the eyes of the Palestinians, he is an obstacle, not an
aid.
Israel made peace with Egypt and returned all the
land and water without bin Ladens, without terror. We
did likewise with the Jordanians — not because of
terror, but because terror came to an end. At Camp
David in July 2000, we offered the Palestinians
practically all the land without bin Ladens, without
terror. And if there remained a difference of 1 or 2 per
cent, that does not justify the killing of thousands of
men and women in America. Political differences do
not justify murdering even a single child, no matter of
which nation.
Bin Laden and his abhorrent ideas can never
contribute to peace. They offer no solution and no hope
to any nation, religion or person. They spread hatred,
disseminate fear and plant mines. They are a
catastrophe at large.
The new world economy enabled two of the most
populous countries — China and India — to move
forward and offer new life and opportunity to hundreds
of millions of people. It has changed the face of
Europe. It has reversed the fortunes of Latin America.
It has extended an open invitation to every country to
acquire computers, widen education, open its gates and
join a new age without giving up its old values and
traditions. The new world economy called for an
assembly of responsible nations to build a dam against
terror, knowing perfectly well that the fight against
terror cannot be postponed, cannot be forgiven, cannot
be compromised. It is a matter of life and death for
humanity in the new chapter of our existence.
All of us, nations and individuals, will either
contribute to safety and freedom or become targets of
death and backwardness. Every country must choose its
place in the new world, either in the realm of science
and technology or in the wastebasket of the old land
economy, dependent on the whims of nature,
condemned to the poverty of hopelessness. It is the
responsibility of affluent nations to share the wealth of
knowledge so that others can join them. Rich countries
should become a locomotive for the deprived, not a
luxury liner for the privileged.
11

We pray wholeheartedly from the great and united
city of Jerusalem, as we did in the early days of our
existence, that we shall know again how to distinguish
between good and evil, between tohu va’vo-hu —
chaos — and a new tomorrow. Our region gave birth to
the greatest prophets, their moral dictums setting the
moral fabric of our society. They have guided us to
trust and follow reason and realism. But we were
forced to follow funerals more than reason. This has
exacted a heavy price from Jews, Muslims, Christians,
Druze. It is time that we rediscovered the Ten
Commandments, holy to all of us.
Right now it looks as if we are again sinking into
the past. The emotional conflict is greater than the
territorial gap. It is more difficult to muster the strength
and summon the spirit than to divide the land. In spite
of these difficulties, I daresay there is a hidden
opportunity in the vast divide. I feel strongly that while
we cannot recover lost time, we can introduce a new
vista in the Middle East.
Until now, the world related to the Middle East.
Now the Middle East has to relate to the new world.
Our neighbours — Palestinians and Arabs — know that
Israel is committed to contribute whatever it can to
renew a real peace process — not by force, not by
imposition, not by unilateral action, but through a
negotiated agreement, an agreed peace. There is no
peace but an agreed peace. Just as one cannot applaud
with one hand, there cannot be a one-handed peace.
Problems, naturally, have a date of birth.
Solutions must reach their maturity. It may not happen
at once, but it will happen. Yesterday, you would
hardly find, for example, support for a Palestinian State
and, although this is not yet a formal policy of the
Government of Israel, there is now support for
Palestinian independence and for a Palestinian State.
We do not want to dominate the Palestinians; we want
them to breathe freedom, to create a new economy, to
maintain their traditions, to enjoy the highest level of
education and to provide real security to all parties.
As far as Israel is concerned, we are convinced
that good neighbours are better than good guns. In
modern times, you cannot have real security dependent
only on fences, walls, fortifications or trenches; not
even on tanks and guns and missiles. All these
measures have already become anti-measures, making
them incomplete and temporary. The only strategy that
cannot be ignored is neighbourly relations, such as the
common market in Europe, the Rio Group in Latin
America, the North American Free Trade Agreement in
North America, the Association of South-East Asian
Nations in Asia and the New Partnership for African
Development in Africa. All these frameworks have
shown that answers to old historical, military and
political conflicts may reside in the economic domain.
What endangers the new solution is terror. Terror
is again endangering the world. The division is no
longer between East and West, North and South, but
between the union to stop terror and those who refuse
to recognize its menace. The assembly against terror
comprises most of humanity: the United States,
Europe, China, Russia, India, South America, many
countries in Africa and many countries in the Muslim
world.
Democracies must have a non-democratic
institution to defend themselves. Armies are non-
democratic, but without them democracy would not
prevail. You may have many views in a democratic
society, but only one authority that controls the military
and its arms. Armies must be subordinate to the elected
political body, but if you have one political authority
and several armed groups, you can have neither
democracy nor security.
The Palestinian Authority, which is a State in
being, must establish one authority over all arms, all
armies and all use of arms, not for the sake of Israel,
but for the sake of peace and for the sake of its own
destiny, so that bullets will not negate ballots.
As long as terror persists, Israel has no choice but
to defend its people. The word “terror” does not
describe an abstract dilemma for us. It refers to a
reality of between 30 to 40 violent incidents every
day — shootings, bombings, ambushes and killings. It
is perpetrated by suicide bombers who have no respect
for life, either their own or that of others. The only
place they can be intercepted is at the point from which
they depart.
Israel is, by definition, an experienced member of
the anti-terror camp. We know that terror can never win
if people protect and preserve their fundamental
security. Terror is strong as long as anti-terror is weak
and terror is frightening as long as people are afraid of
it. Terror basically represents cowardliness and does
not serve any real purpose. Terror neither follows
justice nor serves goals. It is not a remedy; it is a
malady.
12

We are at a juncture. The world is pursuing new
opportunities and frontiers. No longer will it be a world
divided between developed and underdeveloped
nations, black and white or men and women. It will
become a world where every person will have access to
knowledge and opportunity to participate in the new
genesis. States have become weaker economically and
strategically because economy and strategy have
themselves become global. Yet we do not have
organized world institutions to secure the globe and
distribute wealth more justly.
Two courses are open to every State: either to
join the new economy or to submit to old terror; the
creation of wealth or the threat of death. Each must
make its own choice between the promise of economy
or protest by terror. The Global Compact initiated by
the Secretary-General offers us a road map to the
former. It defines the functions and contributions of the
United Nations and imposes responsibilities on all of
us — nation States, the private sector and civil society.
It provides us with hope that, even as crises exist,
obscuring the opportunities just visible from the corner
of our eyes, the path to progress is clear to all with the
courage to embrace it.
We woke up to the twenty-first century with such
optimism. We must overcome the dangers so that our
children will again be raised in a world of almost
limitless opportunities. It can be done. We have learned
in Jerusalem that we can make a promised land into a
land of promise for all of us.






﻿May I first express my
condolences to the families and friends of those who
died in this morning's air crash. This was a tragedy in a
city that has already seen more than its share of tragedy
in recent times.
We meet in New York at this session of the
General Assembly under the shadow of terrorist attacks
on this city just two months ago. We mourn the lives of
nearly 5,000 people from 79 countries who, having
done nothing to deserve that fate, died in the attack.
The scale, premeditation, coordination and indifference
to mass murder that characterize this attack represent a
new age of terrorism. It is a terrorism that appears to
set no limit to its consequences. Those responsible for
it foreshadow a willingness to use biological, chemical
and nuclear weapons of mass destruction. The
potentially catastrophic effects if they are able to carry
out that threat demand an urgent and comprehensive
response to pre-empt any such action.
We cannot allow the rule of terror to replace the
rule of law. We cannot tolerate the damage that
terrorism has already done to the global economy. We
cannot allow terror to threaten basic human rights to
life and security.
New Zealand welcomes the lead by the United
Nations in coordinating an effective and enduring
response to terrorism. Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), adopted unanimously, sets out a blueprint for
action which every Member State has an obligation to
implement. Its emphasis is on measures to close off
financial support and the provision of refuge for
terrorist groups in every country of the world.
International cooperation in imposing these measures
and bringing the terrorists to justice will, in the longer
term, lie at the heart of the campaign to defeat
terrorism.
Removing the immediate threat posed by
terrorists such as those in Al Qaeda and those who
harbour them will, however, require more than
resolutions. Time and again over the past three years,
the Security Council has called on the Taliban to
prevent the use of Afghanistan by terrorists to launch
strikes against other countries. Those resolutions and
the sanctions that accompanied them have been ignored
by the Taliban. Where groups operate beyond the rule
of law and countries put themselves outside of
international codes of behaviour, the use of force
becomes a necessary part of our response.
Multilateral action and cooperation on a wider
front are also necessary if we are to be successful in
removing the threat of terrorism on an ongoing and
lasting basis. Comprehensive action is needed to
minimize the threat of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons falling into the hands of extremist groups. No
State should develop, test and hold weapons of this
nature. Such weapons are a threat to humanity. Their
use by States would destroy and otherwise harm
innocent human beings as certainly as did the actions
of the terrorist group that attacked New York.
Nations yet to sign and ratify the United Nations
Conventions on Chemical and Biological Weapons and
treaties to ban mines and inhumane weapons must do
so. Nations must equally commit themselves to the
elimination of nuclear weapons, the early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
and an immediate start to negotiations on a fissile
material cut-off treaty.
The attack of 11 September should also
encourage all nations to ratify the Rome Statute to
bring into effect the International Criminal Court as a
forum for pursuing action against those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
Suppression of terrorism must also involve action
to deal with its causes. States must consider whether
the suppression of dissident or minority groups rather
than allowing legitimate channels to voice dissent
leaves resort to force as the only option.
The events of 11 September should encourage all
countries and organizations, particularly those directly
involved, to renew efforts to find a just and peaceful
solution to the Middle East crisis. To achieve a
peaceful solution between Palestinians and Israelis
requires good will and flexibility on both sides. There
can be no double standards in how the principles of
15

human rights, freedom and social and economic
opportunity are applied to all peoples.
One consequence of the campaign against
terrorism has been to bring the world's attention to the
situation in Afghanistan. Afghanistan reminds us that
where a vacuum is created by the absence of legitimate
government and the rule of law, it will be filled by
extremist elements, criminal groups dealing in drug
trafficking and terrorist organizations, all of which can
operate with impunity.
The international community has for too long
been indifferent to the situation in Afghanistan and to
the long-standing refugee crisis that has resulted from
22 years of war, from famine and from Taliban
oppression. Pakistan and Iran have carried the burden
of 3.6 million refugees, while much of the world
showed concern only when a handful of those refugees
in desperation sought to enter other countries illegally.
Too little concern has been shown internationally to the
300,000 Afghan children who have died annually from
preventable causes. One in three children in refugee
camps die before they reach the age of five. The groups
now protesting against military intervention were silent
while this human catastrophe was unfolding over the
last few years.
Any loss of innocent life in conflict is tragic, and
extraordinary measures must be taken to avoid it. But a
failure to remove the Taliban regime and a failure to
assist the Afghan people to put in place a broad-based,
moderate and stable Government to replace the Taliban
will mean the ongoing loss of hundreds of thousands of
lives and the continued suffering of the Afghan people.
Renewed efforts are needed through United
Nations agencies to provide emergency relief to people
within Afghanistan and in the refugee camps to avoid
unnecessary loss of life through the winter and in the
months to come. The United Nations must stand ready
to assist Afghanistan to rebuild itself once the conflict
is over, working with as broad a coalition of Afghan
groups as is possible to create a viable political,
economic and social infrastructure.
Resolving the problems that have forced so many
millions of people from their homes is fundamental to
solving the growing refugee crisis. In Afghanistan and
elsewhere, people flee their homelands through fear of
death or persecution, or because of poverty and lack of
opportunity.
In a world made smaller by advances in
communication and transport, no State can ignore the
plight in other countries or expect not to face
consequences from unacceptable discrepancies in
wealth, opportunity and human rights standards.
Suppression of criminal organizations responsible
for people trafficking is a challenge which demands
increased international cooperation. Those who profit
from people's desperation and who, once paid, are
careless as to whether or not their human cargo
survives must be stamped out. However, removing the
causes of people fleeing from their countries remains
fundamental.
New Zealand's own region of the Pacific has not
been immune from violence and instability. In recent
years, we have seen conflict in East Timor, violence
between Government and separatist movements within
Indonesia and in Bougainville, ethnic conflict in the
Solomon Islands and a coup that overthrew a legitimate
Government in Fiji.
Problems remain in the region, but there have
been notable areas of improvement. A peace settlement
has been signed in Bougainville. Fiji has held
democratic elections. Indonesia is seeking to resolve
separatist conflict by offering greater autonomy. In
East Timor, there have been free elections, and that
country will gain independence as the first new nation
of the twenty-first century in May 2002. International
cooperation and a capable transitional administration
by the United Nations have achieved a remarkable
transformation in a poor and devastated country. I
congratulate the Security Council on its endorsement of
the Secretary-General's concept for a post-
independence United Nations presence in East Timor to
consolidate what has been achieved.
In acknowledging the role of United Nations
personnel, I would also stress the need to ensure their
proper protection in situations which are often
dangerous. The murder of United Nations relief
workers in Atambua, West Timor, and the failure to
bring to account those fully responsible are a reminder
that more must be done to protect our United Nations
personnel. We endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendations on extending the legal protection for
United Nations and other personnel involved in
humanitarian operations.
It is timely at this General Assembly to stress the
importance of the role of the United Nations. The
16

critical wars of the twenty-first century will not be won
by single nations, however powerful, or even by
coalitions. It is the United Nations acting collectively
which will win the wars against terrorism, poverty and
disease; threats to the environment; and the threats
posed by conflict and weapons of mass destruction.
The commitments made by heads of State and
Government in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration last year take on even greater relevance
following the events of 11 September.
However, for the United Nations to achieve its
potential, it must undergo reform. To prevent the
General Assembly and the Secretariat from becoming
overwhelmed by so many tasks that they fail to be
effective in tackling any of them, we need to prioritize
our agenda and to be more selective.
The Security Council needs reform. Its
membership should be expanded to reflect
contemporary realities, but without maintaining or
extending the veto. Countries contributing to
peacekeeping operations should be afforded greater
involvement in the Council's decision-making with
respect to those operations. Peacekeeping operations
must be sufficiently resourced.
The capacity of the United Nations for rapid
reaction must be strengthened. New Zealand is ready to
enter into discussions on a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations on its
participation in the standby arrangements system. This
is consistent with New Zealand's long-standing
readiness to contribute to peacekeeping operations and
its current involvement in more than 12 such
operations, including its commitment since 1999 of a
battalion to help ensure the success of the United
Nations operation in East Timor.
The United Nations was founded after the Second
World War to build a world free from poverty, violence
and the violation of human rights. Nations committed
themselves to a collective response to problems that
could not be solved by countries individually.
Countries agreed on rules of international behaviour.
No one would claim that the United Nations has
an unblemished record of success. But without it, the
world would be a much less secure place, much less
able to confront the difficulties which we face. Let this
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly reaffirm
our commitment to work collectively to defeat
terrorism, conflict, poverty and disease, and set the
agenda for peace, development and respect for human
rights for all.







﻿This session of the General Assembly is
taking place in the shadow of an unprecedented
challenge to humanity posed by international terrorism.
We all must seriously analyse how this could have
happened. However, it has already become perfectly
clear today that the period of globalization and the
threats and challenges to international and regional
security that it brings with it make it urgent for of all of
us to take fundamentally new approaches to
international affairs.
We face a tough dilemma, whose solution will
truly be of paramount importance. Either we work
together to responsibly construct a genuinely just and
democratic world order that can guarantee equal
security and sustainable development for all States in
the world, or we show ourselves to be unable to
counter real threats to global stability and security.
The most important task of the international
community today is to create a global system to
counteract new threats and challenges, first and
foremost among which is international terrorism. This
topic was the focus of negotiations between the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir V.
Putin, and the President of the United States of
America, Mr. George W. Bush, which recently took
place in Washington, D.C. and Crawford, Texas.
A universal anti-terrorist coalition has been
formed. The Russian Federation is a responsible
participant in this coalition. The creation of this
coalition has involved the United Nations playing a
very important role in consolidating and coordinating
activities. It is precisely the United Nations that has the
necessary universal character and authority to organize
a response to the threats and challenges that confront
mankind today.
The broad decisions taken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly create a solid
political and legal framework for efforts to neutralize
the threat of terrorism. It is now important for these
decisions to be implemented by all States.
If necessary, the use of the most decisive means
against terrorists may be permissible, including the use
of military force. The Charter grants that right. At the
same time, this threat cannot be overcome by force
alone. A comprehensive approach to eradicating
terrorism would imply the use of the whole range of
political, economic, financial and humanitarian
measures.
The consolidation of the international legal
framework for combating terrorism is now on our
agenda. It is extremely important to rapidly complete
and adopt the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and a convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism.
It would be of great importance to establish
within the United Nations a mechanism to monitor the
fulfilment by States of their treaty obligations
concerning the suppression of terrorism.
We consider promising the idea to establish,
under the aegis of the United Nations, a centre for
coordinating assistance to States to resolve crises
caused by terrorist acts. Such a structure could focus on
providing consultative and material and technical
support in managing the consequences of terrorist acts.
The Russian Federation also proposes studying
the possibility of including in international law the
5

principle of the responsibility of States for their failure
to take measures against terrorists in their territory or
under their jurisdiction.
Of key importance in the success of the
comprehensive fight against international terrorism is
the maintenance and strengthening of strategic stability
at both global and regional levels and strengthening the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The focus of the international community should
continue to be on the interdependence and merging of
international terrorism, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. The Russian Federation
favours the rapid entry into force of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its additional
protocols.
It is perfectly clear that the fight against terrorism
is not aimed at any particular religion, civilization or
culture. This was clearly demonstrated by the
discussions on the dialogue among civilizations during
the current session of the General Assembly. We also
hope that a practical contribution in this area can be
made by the implementation of the initiative put
forward by Islamic religious leaders from the Russian
Federation to organize an international conference
entitled “Islam against terrorism” in Moscow.
Terrorism is rooted in the gap between affluence
and poverty, both within States and in the international
arena. Thus, the task now, as never before, is to ensure
sustainable development throughout the world and to
ensure that the social aspects of the globalization
process are addressed.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
can do a lot to ensure effective rejection of extremism
of all forms. We suggest that thought should be given
to organizing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
world forum that would discuss what contribution civil
society and, particularly, the mass media could make to
combating terrorism.
International experience has shown that
successful prevention and settlement of regional
conflicts are an integral part of the counter-terrorist
efforts of the international community. This is yet
another compelling argument in favour of further
developing and ensuring greater effectiveness of
United Nations preventive and peacekeeping activities.
In particular, the Russian Federation advocates the
development within the United Nations of a
comprehensive strategy aimed at reliably blocking
channels for outside fuelling of the conflicts.
We need to ensure that there is regional
cooperation in fighting these new threats. An example
of such successful cooperation is that of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, under the
auspices of which a CIS anti-terrorist centre has been
set up and is working effectively.
Today, the moment of truth has arrived for each
of us. The Russian Federation is in favour of the
international community taking decisions that can
provide for strategic stability and equal security for all
States, sustainable development and prosperity for all
the peoples of the planet and peace and tranquillity for
each family and each individual.
These noble aims can only be achieved jointly, by
working cooperatively and uniting the efforts of the
entire international community. The United Nations has
a vital role to play in this regard. Our Organization
was, and indeed remains, the most important
instrument available to the international community,
whose effective and responsible use will allow us to
create a new democratic and just world order for the
twenty-first century.



﻿We meet in a Hall devoted to
peace; in a city scarred by violence; in a nation
awakened to danger; in a world uniting for a long
struggle. Every civilized nation here today is resolved
to keep the most basic commitment of civilization. We
will defend ourselves and our future against terror and
lawless violence.
The United Nations was founded in this cause. In
the Second World War, we learned that there is no
isolation from evil. We affirmed that some crimes are
so terrible they offend humanity itself, and we resolved
that the aggressions and ambitions of the wicked must
be opposed early, decisively and collectively, before
they threaten us all.
That evil has returned, and that cause is renewed.
A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a
tomb of rubble. Tomorrow, the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and I will visit that
site, where the names of every nation and region that
lost citizens will be read aloud. If we were to read out
the names of every person who died, it would take
more than three hours.
Those names include a citizen of the Gambia,
whose wife spent their fourth wedding anniversary, 12
September, searching in vain for her husband. Those
names include a man who supported his wife in
Mexico, sending home money every week. Those
names include a young Pakistani who prayed towards
Mecca five times a day and who died that day trying to
save others.
The suffering of 11 September was inflicted on
people of many faiths and many nations. All of the
victims, including Muslims, were killed with equal
indifference and equal satisfaction by the terrorist
leaders.
The terrorists are violating the tenets of every
religion, including the one they invoke. Last week, the
sheikh of Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest
Islamic institution of higher learning, declared that
terrorism is a disease and that Islam prohibits killing
innocent civilians. The terrorists call their cause holy,
yet they fund it with drug dealing. They encourage
murder and suicide in the name of a great faith that
forbids both. They dare to ask God’s blessing as they
set out to kill innocent men, women and children. But
8

the God of Isaac and Ishmael would never answer such
a prayer. And a murderer is not a martyr; he is just a
murderer.
Time is passing. Yet for the United States of
America, there will be no forgetting 11 September. We
will remember every rescuer who died in honour. We
will remember every family that lives in grief. We will
remember the fire and ash, the last phone calls, the
funerals of the children.
And the people of my country will remember
those who have plotted against us. We are learning
their names. We are coming to know their faces. There
is no corner of the Earth distant or dark enough to
protect them. However long it takes, their hour of
justice will come.
Every nation has a stake in this cause. As we
meet, the terrorists are planning more murder —
perhaps in my country, or perhaps, fellow members, in
yours. They kill because they aspire to dominate. They
seek to overthrow Governments and to destabilize
entire regions. Last week, anticipating this meeting of
the General Assembly, they denounced the United
Nations; they called our Secretary-General a criminal
and they condemned all Arab nations here as traitors to
Islam. Few countries meet their exacting standards of
brutality and oppression. Every other country is a
potential target.
And all the world faces the most horrifying
prospect of all: those same terrorists are searching for
weapons of mass destruction, the tools to turn their
hatred into holocaust. They can be expected to use
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons the moment
they are capable of doing so. No hint of conscience
would prevent it. That threat cannot be ignored; that
threat cannot be appeased. Civilization itself — the
civilization we share — is threatened. History will
record our response and will judge or justify every
nation in this Hall.
The civilized world is now responding. We act to
defend ourselves and to deliver our children from a
future of fear. We choose the dignity of life over a
culture of death. We choose lawful change and civil
disagreement over coercion, subversion and chaos.
Those commitments — hope and order, law and life —
unite people across cultures and continents. Upon those
commitments depend all peace and progress. For those
commitments, we are determined to fight.
The United Nations has risen to this
responsibility: on 12 September, these buildings
opened for emergency meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. Before the sun
had set, these attacks on the world stood condemned by
the world, and I want to thank you, fellow members,
for that strong and principled stand.
I also thank the Arab and Islamic countries that
have condemned terrorist murder. Many of you have
seen the destruction of terror in your own lands. The
terrorists are increasingly isolated by their own hatred
and extremism. They cannot hide behind Islam. The
authors of mass murder and their allies have no place
in any culture, and no home in any faith.
The conspiracies of terror are being answered by
an expanding global coalition. Not every nation will be
part of every action against the enemy. But every
nation in our coalition has duties. Those duties can be
demanding, as we in America are learning. We have
already made adjustments in our laws and in our daily
lives. We are taking new measures to investigate terror
and to protect against threats.
The leaders of all nations must now carefully
consider their responsibilities and their future. Terrorist
groups such as Al Qaeda depend upon the aid or
indifference of Governments. They need the support of
a financial infrastructure and safe havens to train and
plan and hide.
Some nations want to play their part in the fight
against terror but tell us they lack the means to enforce
their laws and control their borders. We stand ready to
help.
Some Governments still turn a blind eye to the
terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by. They are
mistaken.
And some Governments, while pledging to
uphold the principles of the United Nations, have cast
their lot with the terrorists. They support them and
harbour them. And they will find that their welcomed
guests are parasites that will weaken them and
eventually consume them. For every regime that
sponsors terror there is a price to be paid, and it will be
paid. The allies of terror are equally guilty of murder
and equally accountable to justice.
The Taliban are now learning that lesson. That
regime and the terrorists who support it are now
virtually indistinguishable. Together they promote
9

terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on the
Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabul’s soccer
stadium. They can be beaten for wearing socks that are
too thin. Men are jailed for missing prayer meetings.
The United States, supported by many nations, is
bringing justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We are
making progress against military targets — and that is
our objective. Unlike the enemy, we seek to minimize,
not maximize, the loss of innocent life. I am proud of
the honourable conduct of the American military. And
my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban
have brought upon Afghanistan, including the terrible
burden of war.
The Afghan people do not deserve their present
rulers. Years of Taliban misrule have brought nothing
but misery and starvation. Even before this current
crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the
United States and other nations, and millions of
Afghans were refugees from Taliban oppression.
I make this promise to all the victims of that
regime: the Taliban’s days of harbouring terrorists, and
dealing in heroin, and brutalizing women are drawing
to a close. When that regime is gone, the people of
Afghanistan will say, with the rest of the world, good
riddance.
I can promise, too, that America will join the
world in helping the people of Afghanistan rebuild
their country.
Many nations, including mine, are sending food
and medicine to help Afghans through the winter.
America has airdropped over 1.3 million packages of
rations in Afghanistan. Just this week, we airlifted
20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into
the region. We continue to provide humanitarian aid,
even while the Taliban try to steal the food we send.
More help, eventually, will be needed. The
United States will work closely with the United
Nations and development banks to reconstruct
Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the
Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States
will work with the United Nations to support a post-
Taliban Government that represents all of the Afghan
people.
In this war of terror, each of us must answer for
what we have done or what we have left undone. After
tragedy, there is a time for sympathy and condolence.
My country has been very grateful for both.
The memorials and vigils around the world will
not be forgotten. But the time for sympathy has now
passed. The time for action has now arrived.
The most basic obligations in this new conflict
have already been defined by the United Nations. On
28 September, the Security Council adopted resolution
1373 (2001). Its requirements are clear: every
United Nations Member has a responsibility to crack
down on terrorist financing. We must pass all necessary
laws in our own countries to allow the confiscation of
terrorist assets. We must apply those laws to every
financial institution in every nation.
We have a responsibility to share intelligence and
coordinate the efforts of law enforcement. If you know
something, tell us. If we know something, we will tell
you. And when we find the terrorists, we must work
together to bring them to justice.
We have a responsibility to deny any sanctuary,
safe haven, or transit to terrorists. Every known
terrorist camp must be shut down, its operators
apprehended, and evidence of their arrest presented to
the United Nations.
We have a responsibility to deny weapons to
terrorists — and to actively prevent private citizens
from providing them.
These obligations are urgent, and they are binding
on every nation with a place in this Hall. Many
Governments are taking these obligations seriously,
and my country appreciates it. Yet even beyond
resolution 1373 (2001), more is required — and more
is expected — of our coalition against terror. We are
asking for a comprehensive commitment to this fight.
We must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just
some of them. In this world, there are good causes and
bad causes, and we may disagree on where that line is
drawn. Yet there is no such thing as a good terrorist.
No national aspiration, no remembered wrong, can ever
justify the deliberate murder of the innocent. Any
Government that rejects this principle — trying to pick
and choose its terrorist friends — will know the
consequences.
We must speak the truth about terror. Let us never
tolerate outrageous conspiracy theories concerning the
attacks of 11 September — malicious lies that attempt
to shift the blame away from the terrorists themselves,
away from the guilty. To inflame ethnic hatred is to
advance the cause of terror.
10

The war against terror must not serve as an
excuse to persecute ethnic and religious minorities in
any country. Innocent people must be allowed to live
their own lives, by their own customs, under their own
religion. And every nation must have avenues for the
peaceful expression of opinion and dissent. When these
avenues are closed, the temptation to speak through
violence grows.
We must press on with our agenda for peace and
prosperity in every land. My country is pledged to
encouraging development and expanding trade. My
country is pledged to investing in education and
combating AIDS and other infectious diseases around
the world. Following 11 September, these pledges are
even more important. In our struggle against hateful
groups that exploit poverty and despair, we must offer
an alternative of opportunity and hope.
The American Government also stands by its
commitment to a just peace in the Middle East. We are
working towards a day when two States — Israel and
Palestine — live peacefully together, within secure and
recognized borders, as called for by the Security
Council resolutions. We will do all in our power to
bring both parties back into negotiations. But peace
will come only when all have sworn off — forever —
incitement, violence and terror.
Finally, this struggle is a defining moment for the
United Nations itself — and the world needs its
principled leadership. It undermines the credibility of
this great institution, for example, when the
Commission on Human Rights offers seats to some of
the world’s most persistent violators of human rights.
The United Nations depends, above all, on its moral
authority — and that authority must be preserved.
The steps I have described will not be easy. For
all nations, they will require effort. For some nations,
they will require great courage. Yet the cost of inaction
is far greater. The only alternative to victory is a
nightmare world where every city is a potential killing
field.
As I told the American people, freedom and fear
are at war. We face enemies that hate not our policies,
but our existence — the tolerance of openness and the
creative culture that define us. But the outcome of this
conflict is certain.
There is a current in history, and it runs towards
freedom. Our enemies resent it and dismiss it, but the
dreams of mankind are defined by liberty — the natural
right to create, and build, and worship, and live in
dignity. When men and women are released from
oppression and isolation, they find fulfilment and hope,
and they leave poverty by the millions. These
aspirations are lifting up the peoples of Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas, and they can lift up all of the
Islamic world. We stand for the permanent hopes of
humanity, and those hopes will not be denied.
We are confident, too, that history has an author,
who fills time and eternity with his purpose. We know
that evil is real, but good will prevail against it. This is
the teaching of many faiths. And in that assurance, we
gain strength for a long journey.
It is our task — the task of this generation — to
provide the response to aggression and terror. We have
no other choice, because there is no other peace. We
did not ask for this mission, yet there is honour in
history’s call. We have a chance to write the story of
our times — a story of courage defeating cruelty, and
light overcoming darkness. This calling is worthy of
any life, and worthy of every nation. So let us go
forward — confident, determined and unafraid.



﻿Please accept my
congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this important Assembly.
11

We also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for the skilful manner in which he
guided the work of the Millennium Assembly of the
United Nations.
Allow me also to salute the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, on being elected to a second term and,
together with the United Nations, being awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize for 2001. This is because of the
tireless work of both the Secretary-General and the
United Nations to realize the ideal that we all cherish: a
world in which all people can live in peace, security,
freedom, equality and justice.
As has already been noted and as we all know,
this general debate has begun later than usual. The
reason for this is that two months ago, the forces of
terror struck at this city, New York — the Headquarters
of this Organization — and Washington, D.C., the
capital city of the United States of America.
It is proper that we take advantage of this
occasion once more to convey our condolences and
deepest sympathy to the people and the Government of
the United States for the immense loss of life and
property imposed on them through a callous act of
murder. We extend the same sympathy to all other
peoples who lost citizens as a result of the colossal
outrage of 11 September. We speak here about the
terrible tragedy of 11 September on behalf of our
Government and the people of South Africa. We speak
also on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Commonwealth.
There can be no doubt but that the peoples of the
world have to unite in action to defeat terrorism. There
can be no hesitation among any of us in the resolve to
work together to ensure that those responsible for the
heinous actions of September 11 are brought to justice.
This is so not only because many nations lost
their citizens on that terrible day, important as that is. It
is so, because terrorism has demonstrated that it has no
respect for borders. It has shown in a very graphic,
tragic and painful manner, as it did also in Kenya and
Tanzania, that our very humanity renders all of us,
without exception, potential targets of cold-blooded
murder.
Where we might have used the concept of a
global village loosely in the past, on 11 September
terrorism taught us the abiding lesson that we do
indeed belong to a global village. None within this
village will be safe unless all the villagers act together
to secure and guarantee that safety. All must act to
promote the safety and security of one and all, on the
basis of a shared responsibility born of a shared danger.
Accordingly, we have no choice but to get
together in the village square to agree on the threat that
confronts us. Together, in that village square, we have
to determine what we do about this commonly defined
threat. This is the ineluctable conclusion we must draw
from the terrorist attacks of 11 September.
To guarantee world peace and security in the light
of the threat posed by terrorism requires that this
Organization, the United Nations, must discharge its
responsibility to unite the peoples of the world to adopt
an international convention against terrorism.
Necessarily, all of us must experience a shared
sense of ownership of this convention, precisely
because it would not be merely a statement of
principles, but a set of injunctions and prescriptions
that will be binding on all of us as States. Thus should
each one of us be ready to integrate our respective
sovereignties within a global human sovereignty,
defined and governed by all of us, with none treated as
superior or inferior.
The challenge to unite the peoples of the world to
fight the common threat of terrorism brings to the fore
the need to speed up the transformation of the United
Nations so that it is able to respond to the global
challenges we face together, in an equitable manner.
This means that it needs to be efficient, effective and
responsive to the needs of humanity as a whole.
11 September emphasized the point that, even as
the democratic system of government is being
consolidated throughout the world, even as we all work
to sustain the possibility of a serious and meaningful
global dialogue, there are some who are prepared to
resort to force in pursuit of their goals. Clearly, there
must be a response. But what should that response be?
Immediately, it is correct that we must achieve
global security cooperation so that the perpetrators of
the 11 September acts of terrorism are apprehended and
punished. Correctly, the Government of the United
States has emphasized that all action that is carried out
must be clearly targeted against the terrorists. It has
stated that such actions, including military actions,
should not degenerate into collective punishment
against any people on any grounds whatsoever,
12

including those of religion, race or ethnicity.
Accordingly, it is indeed necessary that humanitarian
assistance be extended to the people of Afghanistan.
We fully agree with that approach. The United States
Government has also said that these actions should be
of the shortest duration possible, consistent with the
objective that must be achieved. Again, we agree with
this without reservation.
The call has gone out that all Governments and
countries should contribute whatever they can to ensure
that the common efforts to find and punish the
terrorists responsible for 11 September are met with
their just results. We have responded positively to this
call because it is timely, correct and just.
All these are important elements of what has to
be done to respond to those who committed the mass
murders of 11 September. But they also indicate the
way forward as we consider the rules that should guide
us as we confront the threat of terrorism over the
longer term and beyond the critically important
operations and activities focused on the events of 11
September. They put the matter firmly on our common
agenda: We must also achieve global cooperation for
the speedy resolution of conflict situations everywhere
in the world.
In this regard, it is clear that the situation in the
Middle East cries out for an urgent and lasting solution.
In this context, we might recall the words of the Irish
poet, William Butler Yeats, when he said “too long a
sacrifice can make a stone of the heart”. The sacrifice
of the Palestinian people should not be allowed to drag
on any longer. Whatever these long-suffering people
might themselves think and feel, it is clear that there
are some in the world who will justify their destructive
rage by claiming to be front-line fighters for the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
Beyond this, we must act together to determine
the issues that drive people to resort to force and agree
on what we should do to eliminate those issues. At the
same time, we must make the point patently clear that
such determination does not in any way constitute an
attempt to justify terrorism. Together, we must take the
firm position that no circumstances whatsoever can
ever justify resort to terrorism.
The need to realize together the goal of
determining the matters that make for peace once again
underlines the need for properly representative
international institutions to build the necessary global
consensus. It would seem obvious that the fundamental
source of conflict in the world today is the socio-
economic deprivation of billions of people across the
globe, coexisting side by side with islands of enormous
wealth and prosperity within and among countries. This
necessarily breeds a deep sense of injustice, social
alienation and despair and a willingness to sacrifice
their lives among those who feel they have nothing to
lose and everything to gain, regardless of the form of
action to which they resort.
As the Durban World Conference concluded,
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance remain a critical part of the practices that
serve to alienate billions of people and contribute to
mutual antagonisms among human beings. The
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that this affront to human dignity is totally
eradicated.
Last year, we convened in this very Hall in the
historic Millennium Summit. Solemnly, and with
serious intent, we adopted the Millennium Declaration.
The heavy and urgent obligation we now face is to
implement the programme of action spelt out in that
Declaration. This constitutes and must constitute the
decisive front of struggle against terrorism.
Africa, for its part, has developed a New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, which is a
product of the consciousness among the African people
that they themselves hold the key to the continent’s
development, security and stability. Africans across the
continent have arrived at the correct determination that
human rights, democracy, peace, stability and justice
are the fundamental building blocks for a prosperous
continent. Concomitantly, African countries are taking
measures, jointly and severally, to improve the
conditions for much-needed investment, economic
renewal and development. Naturally, the United
Nations has a pivotal role to play in this regard.
As we meet here, members of the World Trade
Organization are engaged in critical negotiations in
Doha, Qatar, hopefully to agree to a new equitable
trading relationship that is fair and just. It is imperative
that there be a non-discriminatory and equitable trading
system that promotes sustainable development.
Soon, ministers of health, the World Health
Organization and others concerned will be finalizing
the details relating to the global health fund to deal
13

with the major communicable diseases, including
malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS.
The International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held next March in Mexico, will
cover a range of pertinent issues, such as debt relief,
official development assistance and foreign direct
investment. As we all know, substantial capital flows
into the developing countries are critical in the struggle
to defeat poverty and underdevelopment.
All these constitute vital component parts of what
must inform the outcome of the Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development in September
next year. We are confident that the Summit will reach
positive conclusions that will include firm global,
regional and national commitments to the elaboration,
integration and implementation of economically
efficient, socially responsible and environmentally
sound development policies.
There is no doubt that our global village has the
resources and capacity to meet the needs of all its
citizens. What is needed is the collective will of the
international community to act decisively to meet this
challenge, inspired by a sense of human solidarity.
Peace and security for all, freedom and democracy for
all, prosperity for all and genuine equality in conditions
of diversity must surely be the outcomes towards which
the United Nations and all of us must strive. Our
actions must affirm the seriousness of our intent.




﻿Mr. President, first of all, please allow me to warmly
congratulate you on your election as President of the
fifty-sixth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. I am confident that under your able
guidance and with the close cooperation of all
delegates, this session will be crowned with success. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere thanks to Mr. Holkeri for what he did as
President of the last session of the General Assembly.
A year ago, the United Nations convened the
historic Millennium Summit. The United Nations
Millennium Declaration issued by the Summit
identifies the objectives for promoting world peace and
development in the new century.
International developments over the past year
demonstrate that more and more countries have opted
for increasing dialogue and cooperation, preserving
world peace and seeking common development. To be
sure, the cause of human progress still involves a long
and arduous effort. Factors of uncertainty in the
international situation are on the rise. More efforts
should be made to democratize international relations,
and there has been no marked change in the irrational
international economic order.
Terrorism is a widespread scourge that threatens
world peace and stability. We strongly condemn the
terrorist attacks on the United States on 11 September,
and extend our deepest sympathy and condolences to
the families of the innocent victims, as well as to the
Government and the people of the United States. China
has always opposed all forms of terrorism. No matter
when, where or in what form terrorism strikes, and no
matter whom it is directed against, it should be met
with condemnation and responded to with counter-
strikes by the international community, which should
adopt a unified position on the matter.
China has taken an active part in international
cooperation against terrorism. In addition to joining
most of the international conventions against terrorism,
China has ratified the Shanghai Convention on
Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism,
concluded by the member States of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
China is in favour of a primary role for the United
Nations and the Security Council in the international
effort against terrorism. China supports the relevant
resolutions that have been adopted and is in favour of
closer cooperation and coordination among the various
countries concerned to this end.
China strongly believes that any military action
against terrorism should have a clearly defined target
and avoid harming innocent people. All such actions
should be consistent with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and other
universally recognized norms of international law, and
should serve the long-term interests of peace in the
region and the world at large.
China believes that terrorism is a tiny fringe of
extreme evil, representing neither one particular ethnic
group nor one particular religion. They must not,
therefore, be lumped together. China, too, is threatened
by terrorism. The “Eastern Turkestan” terrorist forces
are trained, equipped and financed by international
terrorist organizations. The fight against the “Eastern
Turkestan” group is an important aspect of the
international fight against terrorism.
19

In today’s world, the question of security is
becoming increasingly multifaceted and globalized.
Only enhanced international cooperation can help us
effectively cope with global security challenges and
bring about universal and lasting security. Countries
should endeavour to foster a new security concept,
based on mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and
collaboration. They should seek security through
mutual trust and pursue cooperation to their mutual
benefit so as to effectively reduce factors of insecurity.
The issue of arms control has always been closely
interrelated with that of security. In the face of the new
situation, we should go on working for the preservation
of the existing legal regime for international arms
control and disarmament and for the maintenance of
global strategic stability, without jeopardizing the
security of any country.
Tackling regional hot spots is vital to regional
and global security. We are following with deep
concern the current developments in the Middle East.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict that broke out in
September last year is continuing unabated. It poses a
grave threat to the Middle East peace process and to
regional stability. China supports the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principle of land for peace.
It also supports the Palestinian people in their just
struggle to regain their legitimate national rights and
interests. We hope that the Israeli and Palestinian sides
will take constructive measures and closely coordinate
with the international community in its mediating
efforts so as to create conditions for easing the tension
and reactivating the peace process. China supports a
greater role for the Security Council in this respect.
We are concerned about the situation in South
Asia. Given the current complex situation, we hope
that the countries in the region will strengthen mutual
understanding and mutual trust and coexist in peace
and amity. As a neighbour of Afghanistan, we have
been following the changing Afghan situation closely.
We believe that, in order to find a solution to the
Afghan issue, the following principles should be
observed. First, the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan should be ensured.
Secondly, the Afghan people should be allowed to
decide on a solution independently. Thirdly, the future
government in Afghanistan should be broad-based and
embody the interests of all ethnic groups in the
country; Afghanistan should live in amity with all
countries, particularly its neighbours. Fourthly, the
solution should serve peace and stability in the region.
Fifthly, the United Nations should play a more active
role.
Since the beginning of this year, the world
economy has clearly slowed down, and the situation
has been further aggravated by the incidents of 11
September. Developing countries are finding
themselves in increasingly dire straits. The
international community must act with a greater sense
of urgency and accord higher priority to development.
Developed countries should act more vigorously
to promote development. They should adopt effective
measures and make greater efforts to revitalize the
global economy. We hope that the developed countries
will demonstrate a broader vision and a cooperative
spirit in providing assistance to developing countries.
In recent years, anti-globalization activities in
many parts of the world have increased. In fact,
globalization is neither a panacea for development nor
a monster causing disaster. The appropriate response to
globalization should maximize its advantages and
minimize its disadvantages so that all countries can
come out winners and prosper side by side.
Globalization should benefit all people from all social
strata in all countries.
The United Nations has an irreplaceable role to
play in international cooperation in response to
globalization. It should increase its input in
development and work more effectively to fulfil the
development objectives set forth in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration.
China is supportive of the World Trade
Organization’s plans to launch a new round of
multilateral trade talks. It is our hope that the new
round will give full consideration to the concerns and
interests of the developing countries.
The Ninth Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) Economic Leaders Meeting was held
successfully in October in Shanghai, China. The
meeting was convened at a critical moment, soon after
the incidents of 11 September, when prospects for the
global economy seemed grim. Focusing on the theme
“Meeting new challenges in the new century:
promoting common prosperity through participation
and cooperation”, the leaders conducted an in-depth
exchange of views and reached broad consensus.
Having boosted intra-APEC cooperation among the
20

members and reinforced their resolve to restore
economic growth, the meeting sent out a clear, positive
signal to markets throughout the world and took a
resolute step forward in advancing cooperation in the
Asia-Pacific region. The meeting will have a positive
and far-reaching impact on Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation.
President Jiang Zemin made clear to the world
China’s future objectives, guiding principles and
domestic and foreign policies in the important speech
that he delivered on 1 July this year. The principal task
for the Chinese people in the new century is to press
ahead with the modernization programme, work
towards the grand cause of national reunification,
safeguard world peace and promote common
development.
Indeed, the purpose of China’s foreign policy is
to safeguard world peace and promote common
development. China needs an environment of
friendship and good-neighbourliness and external
conditions of stability and prosperity. To achieve, and
safeguard, such an international environment serves
China’s national interests. It is also China’s duty as a
member of the international community.
We believe that all civilizations and social
systems in the world can, and should, exist side by side
on a long-term basis, complementing one another and
making progress together, in a spirit of seeking
common ground while putting aside differences.
We stand ready to engage in mutually beneficial
cooperation with all countries in the world on an equal
footing towards world peace and development, with the
aim of achieving common development. Our entry into
the World Trade Organization will usher in a
completely new phase of our opening-up process.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
restoration of China’s lawful seat in the United
Nations. Tremendous changes have since taken place in
the world, in China and in the United Nations. China’s
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
however, remains unchanged. In the new century,
China will, as always, vigorously support the work of
the United Nations and continue to work together with
other Member States for a better world.




﻿Only a few moments ago, we were informed of the
crash of a commercial airliner not far from here, in
Queens. At the moment, we do not know the cause of
this disaster, but we are shocked and horrified. I would
express to the bereaved families and to the American
people our sincere condolences and sympathy.
It has been only two months since thousands of
innocent persons lost their lives in the World Trade
Center here in New York. Today, we are seeing the
extent to which the people here have been affected. In
the entire history of the United Nations, there has never
been a situation like this one.
Throughout the world, people have expressed
their sincere solidarity with and commiseration for the
victims and their families. These horrific terrorist
attacks struck not just Americans, but also innocent
people from over 80 countries, members of all the
major world religions and cultures. They targeted us
all. It must therefore be a common concern of humanity
to prevent a recurrence of this tragedy or indeed
something even worse.
The events of 11 September thrust a dangerous
future upon the world. We now live in the terrible
knowledge that no country in the globalized world is
invulnerable and that enemies within, who are
determined to kill and to die, can perpetrate mass
murder at any time. This eerie, awful danger has at a
stroke dramatically altered the foundations of security
policy as we know it. The fight against internationally
operative terrorist networks will require new responses
from the community of States. International terrorism
is a challenge above all for politics, the military, the
police and the judiciary, as well as for the economy
and — very importantly — for culture. At the dawn of
the twenty-first century, the issue of peace and security
has thus taken on an entirely new perspective.
Humanity has rarely been as united as it was on
that terrible day two months ago. This unity was born
not only of horror and compassion, but also of the
realization that we can successfully counter this new
deadly threat only if we combine our full force and
energy. The day of 11 September was a defining
moment that altered the direction of world politics. A
new alliance was created. It must now be strengthened
and developed into a genuine partnership. If this is
achieved, 11 September could go down in history not
only as a horrific day for humanity, but also as the
beginning of a new era of cooperation and
multilateralism.
What drives people to commit these
inconceivable crimes and to blow up themselves and
thousands of innocents? From where does such
uncontrollable hatred come? How can it be curbed?
How can it be conquered? It is certain that in any
attempt to develop an effective counter-strategy we
must, while waging the war on terrorism, analyse the
full range of causes and circumstances that permit such
hatred and violence to grow.
The United Nations is uniquely suited to the task
ahead. It provides the forum required for the creation
12

of a universal coalition. Only it can give international
legitimacy to the response to terrorism. It has at its
disposal the instruments to manage political conflicts
and the underlying development problems that nurture
hatred and despair.
A comprehensive strategy against terrorism must
concentrate primarily on prevention. Developing such a
strategy means nothing less than drafting a policy for a
cooperative world order for the twenty-first century, a
policy that no longer tolerates areas characterized by a
breakdown of order, a policy that has as its goal a
world order under which all peoples can claim their
full and equitable share. This includes making
economic globalization more socially just for more
people and supplementing it with the political
globalization so urgently needed.
The Security Council responded to 11 September
with rare solidarity and, with resolutions 1368 (2001)
and 1373 (2001), took decisions on concrete,
internationally binding anti-terrorism measures that
point the way ahead. The General Assembly, too,
severely condemned the terrorist attacks and called for
joint action against international terrorism.
This path must now be rigorously pursued with
the rapid and universal ratification and implementation
of the 12 United Nations anti-terrorism conventions
and the adoption of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. We must endeavour anew to
bring this project, on which we all place so much hope,
to a successful conclusion. I therefore call upon all
States that have not yet approved the present
compromise to reconsider their position.
The International Criminal Court can also become
a valuable instrument in the fight against terrorism.
Under article 7, paragraph 1, of its statute, it will have
jurisdiction to try cases of murder “when committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack directed
against any civilian population”. There can be no doubt
that the attacks on New York, Washington and
Pennsylvania fulfil this requirement. For this reason, I
would like to ask you all once again to ratify the Rome
Statute as quickly as possible.
The attack on the World Trade Center was a
wake-up call to the profound threat to world peace that
can be posed by failing States. Areas where political
and social order has collapsed offer terrorists a safe
haven from which they can organize their murderous
networks worldwide. The community of States urgently
needs to take a closer and preventive look at the
problem of failing States — but not just in
Afghanistan, and not only after a catastrophe has
occurred.
No conflict prevention measures have ever been
undertaken in Afghanistan. Far from it. This has
proved to be a fatal error. For more than 20 years, a
humanitarian catastrophe has been playing itself out
before the eyes of the world, in which women and
children, in particular, have suffered. Civil war, human
rights violations and abject misery have also been the
nourishing ground for the unprecedented symbiosis
between the terrorists of the Al Qaeda group and the
Taliban regime.
From there the trail leads directly to the horrific
attacks in the United States. As hard as this decision
may be, without the use of military means, this threat
cannot be averted. We must not forget that the suffering
of the people in Afghanistan is above all the work of
the Taliban. It was the Taliban that, long before 11
September, increasingly impeded effective
humanitarian relief, robbed women and girls of all their
rights and actively supported terrorism, also with the
goal of destabilizing Arab and Muslim States.
Not to react would indeed be to invite further
terror and oppression and would be extremely
dangerous for world peace. The dramatic nature of this
threat is illustrated by Osama bin Laden’s statement
that he will not shrink from using even nuclear
weapons. Civilian means alone are unfortunately not
always enough to put an end to violence and terror.
This was the case in the Balkans.
In Afghanistan, too, the root of the tragic conflict
is profoundly political, and so the solution, too, can
ultimately only be a political one. It must come from
within, must reflect the diversity of peoples in Afghan
society and must be accepted by the Afghan people.
But a peaceful solution also requires assistance from
the international community. Afghanistan must not be
left alone with its problems yet again.
A clear political and humanitarian perspective for
Afghanistan is now crucial. The United Nations should
be the coordinating agency for all peace efforts. It is
indispensable as the framework for the political
process and as the guarantor of internal agreements
within Afghanistan. Only a peace process under the
auspices of the United Nations will succeed in
excluding external involvement in the future and
13

ensuring a peaceful future for the country in harmony
with its neighbours. Germany and the European Union
are willing to play their part towards a political
solution for Afghanistan and to participate in the long
term in the economic and social reconstruction of
Afghanistan.
More than anything, the refugees and the civilian
population must be helped. We cannot tolerate the fact
that the Taliban is hindering humanitarian access and is
using the civilian population as a shield. Especially
because of the approaching winter, we must do
everything in our power to provide the people with at
least the most basic necessities and to alleviate their
despair and hardship. Is it possible to establish
humanitarian protected areas, to use the expulsion of
the Taliban from Mazar-e-Sharif and other towns to
improve the humanitarian situation, and to make a
town like Kabul an open city? Of course this will be
very difficult, but let us nevertheless think without
taboos about absolutely all ways in which we could
help the people. As chair of the Afghanistan Support
Group, Germany has issued an invitation to a meeting
in Berlin at the beginning of December. I appeal to all
States to make a great humanitarian effort now and to
come to the aid of the downtrodden Afghan people.
Solving regional conflicts will be of critical
importance in the fight against terrorism. The Middle
East conflict is a top priority. Our hearts go out to the
many innocent victims on all sides. Both the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples have a right to live free of fear, in
dignity and in peace. This is indivisible not only from
Israel’s right of statehood, as recognized in Madrid —
which is, in our view, inviolable — but also from its
security. Germany bears a special responsibility
towards Israel stemming from its past. Any policy that
aims at destroying Israel by means of terrorism or
otherwise will face determined opposition from
Germany. However, we equally advocate the
Palestinians’ right to self-determination and their right
to their own State, Palestine. In the European Union
Berlin Declaration of March 1999 we stated that “the
creation of a democratic, viable and peaceful sovereign
Palestinian State on the basis of existing agreements
and through negotiations would be the best guarantee
of Israel’s security”. This is truer today than ever
before.
Never before has there been broader international
backing for a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Mitchell recommendations still form the
basis for the timetable accepted by all sides, and in
their spirit we call on Israelis and Palestinians alike to
put an immediate and lasting end to violence and
confrontation, to resume the agreed direct talks without
delay and to seriously implement the negotiated
ceasefires. These talks must lead to genuine
negotiations on a viable political solution.
The real aim of the terrorists is to trigger a clash
of civilizations and to inflame the situation in the Near
and Middle East. Under no circumstances can we allow
ourselves to be drawn into such a conflict. We are
fighting international terrorism, not Islam.
We must counter the terrorist strategy designed to
bring about the clash of civilizations with a dialogue of
cultures and religions. We need a spiritual debate based
on mutual understanding that attempts to reach genuine
agreement on the fundamental values that unite us.
Such a dialogue presupposes the existence of shared
values, but also respect for other traditions and
differences between peoples. However, one thing must
be clear: human rights are universal, not Western
values. Consensus was reached on them by the
international community of States in the Charter of the
United Nations and the human rights conventions.
Any dialogue must build on the universality of
human rights. It must be conducted with respect for the
dignity of all involved, in tolerance and openness. It
must start at home, within cultures themselves. It can
bear fruit only if it is pursued free of all constraint.
And it has a purpose only if all participants are also
ready to offer self-criticism.
The insidious anthrax attacks since 11 September
show that the threat from weapons of mass destruction
in terrorist hands, which yesterday seemed abstract, is
today a real and deadly danger. The community of
States must do everything in its power to counter it
with a new push for non-proliferation and global
disarmament.
The dangers of the dissemination of weapons to
non-State groups and of regional arms races require
new answers and effective, internationally enforceable
criminal sanctions. In the nuclear field, the
commitment contained in the Non-Proliferation Treaty
to complete nuclear disarmament remains crucial. As
regards biological weapons, in view of the acute threat,
effective global control mechanisms must finally be
created. The Chemical Weapons Convention must be
more rigorously implemented. All States are called
14

upon to participate in the negotiation of an
international code of conduct on ballistic missile
proliferation.
The fight now beginning against terrorism must
build on the awareness that the first world cannot in the
long term live secure and safe from the tensions and
conflicts of the third world. Almost one quarter of the
world population is starving. Ninety-five per cent of
those infected with AIDS live in developing countries.
Africa is particularly hard hit. At present only a
minority of the world’s citizens profit from the
opportunities for growth offered by globalization and
from the use of the new information technologies. This
state of affairs cannot be accepted, even by the rich
countries — for moral reasons, but also because
tensions and conflicts today spread much more quickly
and widely than ever before.
The battle against poverty cannot be won unless
we take equally determined steps to preserve the
natural resources on which life depends. At the coming
World Summit in Johannesburg we must make a
quantum leap forward towards sustainable
development, improved poverty eradication and better
management of our natural resources. The Kyoto
Protocol must enter into force next year. And we must
strengthen the sole advocate of the global environment,
the United Nations Environment Programme,
institutionally, operationally and financially.
11 September made it horrifyingly clear that the
human race will not be able to live in peace and
security in the absence of political order at the global
and regional levels.
Germany will continue to do its utmost to bring
about the strengthening of the United Nations and its
capacity to act, so that the world will be a more
peaceful, just and humane place in the twenty-first
century than it was in the twentieth century. The future
belongs to responsible governance for one world,
governance based not on hegemonic claims, but on
cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. If together
we succeed in implementing such a policy, we will not
just ultimately win the war against terrorism but will
also be able to eradicate its roots forever.




﻿At the
outset, it is a great pleasure for me to congratulate the
President on his election, which is a sign of the esteem
in which he and his country are held.
Coming after his re-election to a second term ─
which is a sign of the general confidence he has
earned ─ the Nobel Peace Prize that has been awarded
to the Secretary-General is a well-deserved tribute to
his work and, through him, to the United Nations
Organization as a whole, thereby inspiring greater hope
than ever before.
On this my third visit to New York since the
tragedy of 11 September, I also want to express once
again my profound emotion and pay homage to the
people of New York, who are being so severely tested,
and to their courageous mayor, who is now finishing
his term.
The unprecedented magnitude and gravity of the
terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11
September warrant our unfailing solidarity and an
exceptional response. In its resolution 1368 (2001),
which was adopted unanimously, the Security Council
rightly qualified those acts as attacks and, hence, as
legitimately meriting a defensive response under
Article 51 of the Charter. The United States is thus
entirely within its legal and political rights in carrying
out its targeted military response against the terrorist
organizations responsible for those acts. The military
action under way was therefore inevitable, and must be
pursued until all its objectives have been achieved.
Given the preliminary results achieved yesterday, I
hope that those objectives will be met as soon as
possible. The leaders of these terrorist networks and
those who support them must be decisively prevented
from committing further harm.
But that military action should, as a matter of
course, form part of an overarching strategy that
includes immediate, broad-scale humanitarian action
that is better adapted to the needs of people in distress.
France has put forward several proposals in this regard
and supports the current initiatives for better
coordination. That overarching strategy should also
include a political solution — something that has now
become urgent — and strive to ensure that the demise
of the Taliban regime does not lead to factional
infighting and chaos; and it must once again make the
Afghan people masters of their own future. That is the
aim of the action plan for Afghanistan that France
proposed back on 1 October, and of the other
contributions it has made with the same goals in mind.
We await Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi’s proposals with
interest; they should set forth broad outlines of action
for the United Nations. On these bases, the Security
Council should be able to adopt a framework resolution
within a few days, endorsing Mr. Brahimi’s proposals
and spelling out the modalities of United Nations
support for the establishment of an Afghan
26

Government representative of the various constituents
of the population. There is no question of imposing on
Afghanistan some ready-made solution concocted by
outsiders. I call on all the constituents of the Afghan
nation and all neighbouring countries to heed the
general interest of Afghanistan and its people. This is
compatible with respect for the legitimate interests of
the various parties concerned and it is the only way to
turn our backs on the past.
Beyond immediate military, diplomatic and
humanitarian action, our common fight against
terrorism needs to be pursued in all its forms, including
police, judicial and others. The United Nations will
have a crucial role to play in this difficult struggle,
laying down universal obligations for each State and
the framework for our action. A series of conventions
has already been concluded, particularly the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, which I proposed in this very
place in 1999. We must speed up the signature and
ratification of those conventions. The General
Assembly must quickly conclude the negotiations on
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. For its part, the Security Council should
oversee the coordinated implementation by States of its
resolution 1373 (2001).
Action against terrorism also needs to be carried
out through other organizations, in conjunction with
the United Nations and consistent with its policies. For
its part, the European Union (EU) has just taken
unprecedented steps to strengthen police and judicial
cooperation among its member States, including the
creation of a European arrest warrant. An ambitious
action plan has been agreed. The 29 members of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have decided to
extend the fight against money-laundering to the fight
against the financing of terrorism. Beyond that, I
propose the creation of a dialogue forum to move us in
this direction. Several other organizations, too, will
have a role to play, so that at the end of the day every
country will be making a contribution.
Leaving aside the hoped-for short-term results,
the obstacles notwithstanding, we will not achieve
lasting victory against all forms of terrorism unless we
succeed in depriving terrorists of their breeding ground
and eliminating the pretexts from which they
fallaciously draw their justification, and unless we
eradicate them in the true sense of the term. That
implies nothing short of changing our world. And let
no one claim that this would be tantamount to
justifying the terrorists. For neither my country, nor
Europe, nor the United Nations — in other words, none
of us — waited for 11 September to discover, condemn
and seek to remedy the ills of the world. Yet how many
good intentions have come to naught? How many
resolutions have gone unimplemented? How many
announcements have failed to materialize, which now
feed a sense of bitterness and incomprehension? It is
pointless to condemn or deny the theory of a clash of
civilizations. Rather, we must fight against such a risk,
which is by no means wholly imaginary, and against
those who would make it a reality.
This should be one more pressing reason for us
all to find a solution to regional crises, particularly in
the Middle East. Since 1982, France has called for the
creation of a Palestinian State. Naturally, it would have
to be viable, democratic and peaceful, and it should
give credible undertakings as regards Israel’s security.
Guarantees will be needed, yet the Palestinian State is
not the problem; it is the solution for reasons based on
rights, humanity and security. Such is the EU’s
common stance today. This morning, before the
Assembly, President Bush himself has made this his
objective. It is the path of reason — the only path that
can halt the murderous spiral of conflict between the
two peoples.
Admittedly, responsibility for a lasting peace
agreement lies first and foremost with the protagonists.
Unless they make the move, no one else will be able to
overcome their fears and resentment and put an end to
the suffering of these two peoples. Yet, the increasing
threat that this conflict poses to international peace and
security requires that those who have the will and the
means join forces in a push for peace, given that the
main players are evidently unable to do so unaided.
The urgency of the situation in the Near East
obviously should not make us forget Iraq. Regional
security still needs to be secured by restoring an
international monitoring capability and by alleviating
the suffering of the Iraqi people through the lifting of
the embargo on civilian goods. I hope the discussions
now in progress in the Security Council will finally
bring this about.
Nor should we forget the Caucasus, where ancient
quarrels live on and where new ones are rising to the
fore. Yet, here again there is no other way than to seek
negotiated political solutions.
27

In the Balkans, we realized that international
involvement must be sustainable. Thanks to it, and
thanks to new leaders, noteworthy progress has been
achieved towards democracy, reconciliation and
regional cooperation over the last two years. We must
make sure these positive changes are not challenged by
outmoded patterns of behaviour. We must maintain and
pursue the Europeanization of the Balkans.
Turning to the Great Lakes region, we know that
the lasting resolution of the conflict, which involves
more than eight countries, will be a negotiated solution
that will ensure the restoration of the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and include as well
safeguard clauses to protect the security of each of the
States. The Lusaka Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions provide the framework for
ending this crisis, but they should be applied as quickly
as possible. To halt the illegal use of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which often
occurs in association with forced child labour, should
be an immediate priority.
In all the cases I have just referred to briefly —
and there are others — the problem we have to resolve
is the coexistence of peoples who are at once close and
antagonistic, deeply affected and divided by history
and separated by fear and the spirit of revenge. We will
achieve this only through perseverance and a clear
understanding of each particular situation, guided by
the principles of the United Nations.
Even if we managed to resolve all these regional
crises and others as well, our task would still not be
over because, at the global level, the gulf between
intentions for the world as stated at international
meetings and actual realities is becoming intolerable
for many peoples. We must redouble our efforts to
create humane globalization. We saw this in Seattle, we
saw it in Genoa, and even more so in Durban. We can
see it in the reactions to the Afghan crisis and to many
other issues. Despite the United Nations and our good
resolutions, there is still no real universal consensus.
What we call “the international community” has yet to
be built. Is this a reason to throw in the towel? To the
contrary – absolutely not. France has long been
determined to add its stone to this edifice. We have
already put forward numerous proposals to that end and
will continue to do so, with increased conviction.
Need I recall our well-known major objectives for
the world?
First, we must achieve a fairer distribution of
wealth; 3 billion people currently live on less than 2
dollars per day, and the global income gap between the
richest and the poorest has doubled over the last 40
years.
Second, we must end impunity.
Third, we must guarantee sustainable
development everywhere — “sustainable”, that little
word that makes all the difference, or which should
make all the difference. The World Summit in
Johannesburg in September 2002 will provide an
opportunity to affirm a vision and a benchmark of
development based on three intimately linked pillars:
economic, social and environmental.
Fourth, we must help refugees and fully respect
the right of asylum.
Fifth, we must manage population movements in
a humanitarian manner.
Sixth, we must draft international standards in a
democratic way to ensure that they are entirely
legitimate and that everyone will consequently be
bound to comply with them.
Seventh, we must no longer tolerate situations of
human distress. State sovereignty, which remains an
essential feature of the international system, cannot, in
extreme emergencies, be regarded as an absolute
principle serving as a pretext for inaction. The Security
Council must be able to fully assume its
responsibilities in cases of gross human rights
violations, for these also pose threats to international
peace and security.
Eighth, we must aim at promoting balanced and
negotiated disarmament, which strengthens security
and strategic stability.
Ninth, we must strive to allow all languages,
cultures and civilizations to exist while maintaining a
dialogue with one another.
Tenth, we must seek to improve the state of
health worldwide, which for one thing means devoting
more resources to combating HIV/AIDS. I would hope
that the new Global AIDS and Health Fund will be
made operational by the beginning of 2002.
But we are undoubtedly now more aware than in
recent years that the attainment of these objectives,
which are both indispensable, and very ambitious, calls
28

different rules and different mechanisms, starting with
the reform and enlargement of the Security Council,
which we have waited for all too long; with respect for
the role of the General Assembly; with the ratification
of the major multilateral instruments — I am thinking
of the Statute of the International Criminal Court and
the Kyoto Protocol, among others; with a more
appropriate and less indiscriminate use of sanctions
when they are needed; with a clarification of the
respective and legitimate roles of Governments and
civil society; with an agreement on the modalities of
interference to deal with large-scale and extreme
emergency situations; with a regulation and
development round at the World Trade Organization
(WTO), which is starting today in Doha; with closer
cooperation and greater consistency between the WTO
and the International Labour Organization; with the
creation of a world environmental organization; and
with reform of the international financial institutions. I
shall stop this list here. I could go on, for there is so
much that remains to be done.
All of us, as Members of the United Nations, are
faced with this challenge. But I do not hesitate to say
here that the rich countries — in other words, the West
and a handful of other countries from the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, where
some 1.135 billion men and women live, have even
more responsibility than others. Now that the illusions
of the last 10 years have been dispelled, the choice
before us is harsh, but clear: either a world so unjust
that we have conflict with no foreseeable end, or, on
the contrary, an international community of the United
Nations, at last worthy of the name, to solve together
humanity’s common problems and ensure its future.
But building this community, instead of just talking
about it or yearning for it, will mean for some of us
giving up privileges, sharing wealth and power in new
ways, and rewriting certain rules hitherto held to be
inviolable. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist
Joseph Stiglitz has written, free trade was designed by
Western countries for the Western countries. This is
debatable, of course, but none of this will happen
without sacrifices, above all on the part of the rich and
powerful countries.
At this very moment, a reshuffling of diplomatic
cards on a grand scale is under way between the United
States, Russia, China, Europe, the Arab or Muslim
world, the other coalition partners, the rest of the world
and the United Nations. I hope — I truly hope — that
this will help to bring about a vital awakening and that
my country, Europe and the United Nations will follow
new avenues, in deeds and not just words, and that all
of us, together, will successfully extend the needed
coalition against terrorism to turn it into a coalition for
an equitable world, and that this will lay the
groundwork for a renewal of the international system.






﻿Please allow me
warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
This day, 11 November, is the anniversary of the
Armistice which ended the slaughter of the First World
War and is a day of remembrance here in the United
States, in the United Kingdom and across much of the
world. It is a day when all of us remember the sacrifice
of those who, over the last century, gave their lives that
others might live in freedom.
For our parents and grandparents, the end of the
Second World War stood as a turning point, a moment
to establish a new world order. Their vision was
inscribed at the very beginning of the Charter of the
United Nations:
“We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”.
With these words, they founded the international
community.
For some of us, the subsequent half-century has
been the most peaceful era of our history. Yet we know
that no one’s freedom can be secure while others suffer.
On this Remembrance Day, we remember
something else — the thousands who died just two
months ago, on 11 September. A third of the nations
represented here in the General Assembly lost citizens
at the World Trade Center. But just as our predecessors
saw hope in the midst of despair, so we now face the
task of building a new and better world.
It is fitting that it was here at the United Nations,
on 12 September, that the world began to fight back
against the terrorist threat. We showed our joint
resolve, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly, when we adopted resolutions demanding
that terrorists and those who harbour them be held to
account for their evil actions.
I applaud Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), which established the Counter-terrorism
Committee and which requires all Member States to
respond to the global terrorist threat.
21

We do surely have to take every effective
measure against international terrorist networks, whose
malign influence is felt in every part of the globe, not
least by adopting a comprehensive convention on
terrorism and the draft Nuclear Terrorism Convention.
We also have to confront an unpalatable truth:
that we still face a real and immediate danger. The
murderous groups who plotted the terrible events of 11
September could strike again at any time. Thus our first
duty, to our citizens and to each other, is to defend
ourselves against that threat.
When the nations of the world agreed the United
Nations Charter, they recognized the right of self-
defence in Article 51. It is in exercise of this right that
the military coalition is now engaged in action against
Al Qaeda and the Taliban regime which harbours them.
Taking military action is always a tough decision.
But here it truly was unavoidable, and we all owe a
debt of gratitude to President Bush for the steadfast and
careful manner in which the United States proceeded.
But in defending the world from terror, we have
to do our utmost to spare innocent Afghan people
further suffering. For decades, the Afghans have seen
their country exploited by outside powers and riven by
conflict. In five years, their society has been
systematically destroyed by one of the most brutal
regimes the world has ever known.
But at last today, the international community is
united in its efforts to feed and shelter the millions of
refugees through this harsh winter, and it is determined
to help build a new Afghanistan.
For the first time in decades, there is consensus in
the Security Council as a whole, and among
Afghanistan’s neighbours, that there should be a broad-
based government in Kabul, reflecting Afghanistan’s
rich ethnic diversity, and that the future of Afghanistan
must be put into the hands of the Afghan people. There
must be no more Great Games with Afghan people as
the pawns, and no more regional rivalries, with Afghan
people as the victims.
We know that the one institution in the world
which can deliver this better future is here now: the
United Nations. We should all give Ambassador
Brahimi every support in planning a future that leads to
Afghanistan retaking its place as a fully fledged
member of the international community, able to protect
and promote the interests of all of its people.
That nations have come so closely together to
fight terrorism shows how the world is changing.
However, we have to build a deeper and wider
consensus to tackle the other great issues which we
face. It is not just the Afghan people who have been
excluded from the values on which the United Nations
was founded.
Conflict, poverty, discrimination and injustice
still blight the lives of millions in every part of the
globe. Individuals’ rights, especially women’s rights,
are ignored with impunity, and then the very structure
of communities collapses. Where this happens, where
societies disintegrate or States fail, we put at risk the
basis of global society itself.
If 11 September teaches us anything, it is surely
this: that if we ignore our moral responsibilities to each
other, we will be forced later to face painful
consequences.
Nowhere is the need for action now more obvious
than in Africa. Yes, there has been some progress there.
International work on the ground to resolve conflict has
brought hope to Sierra Leone and to the Great Lakes
region. Responsible Governments working across the
continent in partnership with effective international
donors have succeeded in reducing poverty. But we
should not delude ourselves about the scale of the task
that remains in Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa average
income today is much lower than it was 30 years ago.
The New Partnership for African Development
therefore requires the support of the whole community
of nations. Africa deserves the same opportunities that
we in the West take for granted. We in the West must
acknowledge that while removing barriers to global
trade and to finance, we have not always dismantled
barriers to dignity and equality. In theory, global free
trade should have created the conditions for every
economy to exploit its comparative advantage in the
world marketplace. In practice, protectionist barriers
still survive, especially against trade in agriculture,
damaging Africa’s interests today, and all our interests
tomorrow.
As we meet here in New York, our colleagues at
the World Trade Organization meeting in Doha have
the opportunity to begin to put these injustices right.
Launching a new trade round would be the clearest
possible signal of the world’s determination to spread
the benefits of wealth and of prosperity more fairly.
22

Our predecessors gave us the United Nations. In
the succeeding years, it developed expertise in
peacekeeping, in conflict prevention, in human rights
and in reconstruction, to consolidate the gains of 1945.
My message today is that our generation faces as
daunting a task, but a different one. That task is to
defeat international terrorism. But to do that we have to
combine the agenda of 10 September with the agenda
of 11 September, as the Secretary-General emphasized
in his powerful speech yesterday. And we must take not
only military action, but also diplomatic action to
reduce tensions that terrorists exploit.
Nowhere are those tensions greater than in the
Middle East. The path to a settlement there is plain. It
has to be based on a political process that implements
United Nations resolutions. It must deliver security for
Israel within recognized borders while at the same time
creating a viable Palestinian State. We should give the
parties every help to reach a settlement. But our efforts
will be wasted unless the parties themselves show the
political will to bring violence to a halt, and the
political courage to make a deal.
We have seen, in the most graphic and brutal way
possible, that chaos in one part of the world can
undermine security in all parts of the world. Against
that chaos we must set our vision of peaceful
cooperation among stable nations. Achieving that
vision has now taken on a new urgency. Indeed, we are
at a moment of strategic opportunity, which comes no
more than once to any generation. We owe it to those
who founded the international community to seize this
moment. Most of all, we owe it to those who will come
after us.
Today we remember with sorrow the sacrifices
that earlier generations made. We remember with pride
the brave decisions that they took to build a better
world for us, and we salute the reconciliation and
recovery that followed. My hope is that our children
and our grandchildren will look back on this period
with no less pride, and that future generations will be
able to say that we here faced up to a great evil; we did
not duck the decisions we had to take; we established
peace in Afghanistan, constructive coexistence in the
Middle East and sustained development in Africa. We
made the necessary endeavour in the finest tradition of
the United Nations.
The United Nations stands for everything the
terrorist seeks to destroy. My hope is that our
successors will look back on this era and say that we
saved succeeding generations from the scourge of
terrorism as well as from the scourge of war.





﻿I congratulate the President on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session. I also take this opportunity to warmly
congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and the United Nations on being honoured with the
Nobel Peace Prize.
This session of the General Assembly is being
held in the shadow of the barbaric terrorist acts of 11
September, which dramatically reminded us that
neither distance nor power insulates a State from
terrorism. Such acts represent an arrogant rejection of
the values of freedom and tolerance, which democratic
and pluralistic societies cherish.
Even while uniting the nations of the world in
their grief, this terrible tragedy has created the
opportunity to fashion a determined global response to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
it exists and under whatever name.
We in India know from our own bitter experience
that terrorists develop global networks driven by
religious extremism. Their operations are supported by
drug trafficking, money laundering and arms
smuggling. Some States follow a policy of sponsoring
and sheltering them. Terrorists can only be countered
through closely coordinated efforts of the international
community.
Security Council resolutions 1368 (2001) and
1373 (2001) are steps in the right direction, but it
requires the firm political will of the freedom-loving
world to implement them rigorously. The two crucial
elements in this would be strict curbs on sources of
financing for terrorists and denying them safe havens
for training, arming and operation.
We must firmly rebuff any ideological, political
or religious justification for terrorism. We should reject
self-serving arguments seeking to classify terrorism
according to its root causes, and therefore justifying
32

terrorist action somewhere while condemning it
elsewhere. Those that advance these arguments should
explain what the root causes of the brutal acts of 11
September were.
India supports the current campaign against the
terrorist networks in Afghanistan. We hope that it
reaches an early and successful conclusion. That
country’s current travails can only end with the
establishment of a broad-based, representative and
neutral Government, which would stop the export of
terrorism and extremism. The international community
should work towards this goal, even while the military
campaign continues, so that we avoid a political
vacuum at the end of the campaign.
We must recognize that current structures to
facilitate a post-Taliban political settlement are
unrepresentative and therefore ineffective. Located as
it is in Afghanistan’s neighbourhood, India’s vital
national interests are affected by developments in it.
We also have traditionally close links with
Afghanistan. This is the basis for our belief that India
can play a useful role in this process.
The task of reconstruction in post-conflict
Afghanistan also merits the urgent attention of the
international community. It would require massive
external assistance to create an economic situation
conducive to the speedy return and rehabilitation of the
millions of Afghans who have taken refuge in other
countries of this region. Again India stands ready to
join international efforts for this.
We have already announced relief assistance of a
million tons of wheat, medicines and medical
assistance for needy Afghans within, and outside, the
country. We have also pledged $100 million to post-
conflict Afghanistan for reconstruction. We are
prepared to do more.
Nearly 6,000 lives were lost on 11 September, but
the global economic downturn in its aftermath will take
a far larger human toll, mainly in the developing world.
The World Bank has estimated that tens of thousands
more children will die worldwide and some 10 million
more people are likely to go below the poverty line of
$1 a day. It is pertinent to reflect on these chilling
statistics even as the Ministerial Conference gets under
way in Doha to consider World Trade Organization
(WTO) issues. Before we embark on any new
initiatives for globalization and sustainable
development, we should recognize that political
support for them will be determined primarily by the
impact of these regimes on poverty.
For most developing countries, the Uruguay
Round has done little for economic growth, while
poverty levels and income gaps have worsened.
Globalization has constrained developing countries in
mobilizing public resources for poverty alleviation.
That is why public support for the globalization regime
has vanished in developing countries. This is also why
we have argued strongly that implementation issues
should first be resolved before we try to widen the
WTO agenda further. Our public is unwilling to accept
another post-dated cheque, when an earlier one has
bounced.
Similarly, the movement towards sustainable
development has proved a disappointment. Developing
countries are unable to realize fair payments for their
sovereign biodiversity resources and traditional
knowledge. The treaties on climate change and
biodiversity have also failed to activate the anticipated
investment and technology transfers to developing
countries. Industrialized countries have not shown the
political will to enhance their overseas development
budgets. Multilateral development agencies are also
constrained in their resources, of which, in any case,
very little is available on concessional terms.
The inevitable conclusion is that for current
regimes of globalization and sustainable development
to be strengthened, or even to survive, they must be re-
engineered to generate large-scale finances for poverty
alleviation. The passion for globalization has to be
tempered by compassion for its victims. Sadly, this
thought has not penetrated into the thinking of the
developed economies. Their actions also do not reflect
the realization that there cannot be a sustainable revival
of their own sluggish economies unless the
globalization and sustainable development priorities
are re-oriented and anchored in the developmental
needs of two-thirds of the global population.
A year ago, I suggested in my speech to the
United States Congress a comprehensive global
dialogue on development. The aim of such a dialogue
would be to address the highly unstable situation in
which one-third of the world’s population lives in
luxury and condemns the remaining two-thirds to
poverty and want. It is a fertile breeding ground for
political unrest, economic chaos and social fractures.
33

India would be happy to coordinate this dialogue,
with the immediate objective of mobilizing resources
for poverty alleviation programmes in developing
countries. A preliminary agenda for the dialogue could
include the accelerated liquidation of external debts of
low-income and highly indebted countries; poverty
alleviation programmes specifically aimed at
developing countries facing financial crises;
stabilization of international prices of primary
commodity exports; and, most importantly, welfare and
development programmes for all the world’s needy
children — for their nutrition, health, education and
protection from degrading and hazardous employment.
The struggle for equitable development and the
war against poverty are as important as our campaign
against terrorism and our collective search for security.
At a time when an external stimulus has motivated us
to unite against terrorism and for security, let us
summon an equally strong inner resolve for
development and poverty alleviation. They are just as
crucial for a global order at peace with itself.
This fundamental and seamless linkage between
peace, security and development can be recalled in the
sage words of the great Indian poet Rabindranath
Tagore:
“From now onward, any nation that takes an
isolated view of its own interests will run
contrary to the spirit of the New Age, and will
know no peace. From now onward, the anxiety
that each country has for its own safety must
embrace the welfare of the whole world.”


﻿First of all, I would really like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President
of the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly. I
know that you bring with you a wealth of experience, a
breadth of understanding and hope for many people. I
would also like to express my highest regard for
9

Secretary-General Kofi Annan on his well-deserved
recognition as Nobel Prize Laureate for his fresh ideas
and great vision on how to meet a new world with an
open mind, a sense of unity and hope.
There is hidden light and needed hope in this
gathering to overturn the darkness that has descended
upon us. There is enough strength and resolve in the
midst of civilized nations to deflect evil.
Humanity woke up happy to welcome the twenty-
first century. We turned around and looked, and there
was brightness and freshness in the air. We had
departed from a traditional history that was written
with red ink — wars, skirmishes, conflicts and
murders — many of which arose because human
existence was dependent upon land and natural
resources. We have had to protect our own lands.
Modern science emerged to supersede land,
opening new horizons of limitless opportunities.
Science rendered borders marginal, and old prejudices
and distances began to dissipate from our minds.
Technology created a new interdependence. No longer
were our connections dependent upon land or sea —
upon distance. Air became the new means of
communication for nations, peoples, businesses and
development. High technology introduced new
promises and recalled the importance of old values.
The perception was that every person,
irrespective of location, race, religion or sex, could
reach new heights. And then we learned that high
technology is not just a technical matter. We cannot
separate technology from values; it is impossible.
For example, you cannot combine lies and
science. You cannot lie scientifically. To have a
science-based economy, you have to pursue peace
uncompromisingly and openness uninterruptedly.
Science requires an open society; it demands constant
dialogue. You cannot have new innovations without
unrestricted research. You cannot have unrestricted
research without being a free society. You cannot
develop a scientific economy without making
education a top priority, available and accessible to all
people. You cannot attract investment unless you have
transparency.
In a competitive world, to keep young scientists
your land and water should be free from pollution, your
financial system free from corruption, your government
without arbitrariness. Truth, freedom and openness
became conditions for science and high technology
and, consequently, for the advancement of any society.
It is true that the world is still divided between
the haves and the have nots. But for the have nots, a
new option is that of becoming connected to the new
age and the more developed aspects of our times.
There had been a new beginning, but like many
beginnings, one mixed with shadows and revolt. The
shadows were not yet heavy; at the beginning they
looked pale and distant. So we felt like one promised
world, like one assembly. The economy was no longer
national; it became global — open to every nation. And
since we could not form a global government, the
national Governments agreed that the global economy
would be managed by private enterprises — hence,
privatization. Globalization decreased the importance
of traditional States and increased the importance of
non-governmental organizations and worldwide
connections. It looked as if borderless progress was
evolving. And then ambushing clouds, global in nature,
moved in as a new horror.
The horrific events of 11 September — the
savage attack on innocent American people —
signalled a new warning to world history. On 11
September, we learned that the very same technology I
mentioned earlier — openness and a frontier-less,
connected world — could also spread viciousness. This
attack was brutal, because it was directed at everything
we stand for, against everything for which nations, and
the United Nations, have toiled.
The emerging terror, like the emerging economy,
is no longer national or delineated by boundaries.
Rather, it is borderless, and it contains unlimited,
awesome potential. It can begin with knives, and it may
wind up with germs. Terror does not have a visible
address, a merciful lord in heaven, a court or an elected
government. Nor does it need the approval of the many.
It is built on the fanaticism of a small group of
murderers, lacking the checks and balances of an
accountable society. It may arrive unexpectedly,
uninvited, spreading fear in every corner of the globe,
paralysing us at work and home, grounding flights,
impeding movement, disrupting commerce and
production. Eventually, it can endanger the freshness of
air, the purity of water.
Global economy arrived as an historic surprise;
global terrorism also arrived without prior warning.
But, whereas a solution was found to regulate the
10

global economy, through privatization, there is no
private answer to meet global terrorism. Many nations
have armies, without necessarily having enemies. Yet,
for the time being, global dangers remain without
global answers or global armies.
The United States played the pivotal role in
introducing the new economy. Now again, it falls upon
the United States, as the first target of global terrorism,
to offer a strategy, to take the lead and to bring back
the promise of freedom and security to many of us.
We pay tribute to the United States, a nation that
had the capacity to welcome new modes of creativity,
planning, production and innovation at home and
abroad. And while becoming mighty, it did not stop
caring for the rest of the world. The United States has
helped nations in Europe and Asia and elsewhere
regain freedom and security in times of danger.
American boys fought, and many of them lost
their lives, in European and Asian wars. They won
wars and gained land, but they did not keep those
assets for themselves. They returned to Japan an
improved Japan. They returned to Germany an
improved Germany. The Marshall Plan helped to
rebuild Europe. Needy countries were offered food and
assistance, industries were restored, economies were
rehabilitated. There was generosity in their victory.
Indeed, America has emerged as the “indispensable
nation”.
Now America has become a target for reasons
which are not necessarily its own. Terrorism was
directed at America to frustrate its democracy, weaken
its respect for human rights, reduce its enterprise and
threaten its individualism so that it would not be able
to help others. This was an assault on the very
existence of humanity.
The bin Laden group are afraid of progress. They
are proponents of backwardness. They want us to
return to living in caves. They represent the darkest
ages in the annals of human history. They are self-
appointed killers of any persons who think differently
from them. They are not just evil — they are an agency
of death.
America is not just a new world or continent — it
is a great constitution, a shining city on the hill of
freedom. It is not just a concrete structure — it is a
solid idea. You can attack America, hurt it, but
America cannot be destroyed.
America’s war on terrorism is the war of all of us.
By “us”, I mean every country in this Assembly and
every human being on this planet. Bin Laden claims
that he fights crusaders, who no longer exist. Bin
Laden claims that he wants to help the Palestinians, but
in the eyes of the Palestinians, he is an obstacle, not an
aid.
Israel made peace with Egypt and returned all the
land and water without bin Ladens, without terror. We
did likewise with the Jordanians — not because of
terror, but because terror came to an end. At Camp
David in July 2000, we offered the Palestinians
practically all the land without bin Ladens, without
terror. And if there remained a difference of 1 or 2 per
cent, that does not justify the killing of thousands of
men and women in America. Political differences do
not justify murdering even a single child, no matter of
which nation.
Bin Laden and his abhorrent ideas can never
contribute to peace. They offer no solution and no hope
to any nation, religion or person. They spread hatred,
disseminate fear and plant mines. They are a
catastrophe at large.
The new world economy enabled two of the most
populous countries — China and India — to move
forward and offer new life and opportunity to hundreds
of millions of people. It has changed the face of
Europe. It has reversed the fortunes of Latin America.
It has extended an open invitation to every country to
acquire computers, widen education, open its gates and
join a new age without giving up its old values and
traditions. The new world economy called for an
assembly of responsible nations to build a dam against
terror, knowing perfectly well that the fight against
terror cannot be postponed, cannot be forgiven, cannot
be compromised. It is a matter of life and death for
humanity in the new chapter of our existence.
All of us, nations and individuals, will either
contribute to safety and freedom or become targets of
death and backwardness. Every country must choose its
place in the new world, either in the realm of science
and technology or in the wastebasket of the old land
economy, dependent on the whims of nature,
condemned to the poverty of hopelessness. It is the
responsibility of affluent nations to share the wealth of
knowledge so that others can join them. Rich countries
should become a locomotive for the deprived, not a
luxury liner for the privileged.
11

We pray wholeheartedly from the great and united
city of Jerusalem, as we did in the early days of our
existence, that we shall know again how to distinguish
between good and evil, between tohu va’vo-hu —
chaos — and a new tomorrow. Our region gave birth to
the greatest prophets, their moral dictums setting the
moral fabric of our society. They have guided us to
trust and follow reason and realism. But we were
forced to follow funerals more than reason. This has
exacted a heavy price from Jews, Muslims, Christians,
Druze. It is time that we rediscovered the Ten
Commandments, holy to all of us.
Right now it looks as if we are again sinking into
the past. The emotional conflict is greater than the
territorial gap. It is more difficult to muster the strength
and summon the spirit than to divide the land. In spite
of these difficulties, I daresay there is a hidden
opportunity in the vast divide. I feel strongly that while
we cannot recover lost time, we can introduce a new
vista in the Middle East.
Until now, the world related to the Middle East.
Now the Middle East has to relate to the new world.
Our neighbours — Palestinians and Arabs — know that
Israel is committed to contribute whatever it can to
renew a real peace process — not by force, not by
imposition, not by unilateral action, but through a
negotiated agreement, an agreed peace. There is no
peace but an agreed peace. Just as one cannot applaud
with one hand, there cannot be a one-handed peace.
Problems, naturally, have a date of birth.
Solutions must reach their maturity. It may not happen
at once, but it will happen. Yesterday, you would
hardly find, for example, support for a Palestinian State
and, although this is not yet a formal policy of the
Government of Israel, there is now support for
Palestinian independence and for a Palestinian State.
We do not want to dominate the Palestinians; we want
them to breathe freedom, to create a new economy, to
maintain their traditions, to enjoy the highest level of
education and to provide real security to all parties.
As far as Israel is concerned, we are convinced
that good neighbours are better than good guns. In
modern times, you cannot have real security dependent
only on fences, walls, fortifications or trenches; not
even on tanks and guns and missiles. All these
measures have already become anti-measures, making
them incomplete and temporary. The only strategy that
cannot be ignored is neighbourly relations, such as the
common market in Europe, the Rio Group in Latin
America, the North American Free Trade Agreement in
North America, the Association of South-East Asian
Nations in Asia and the New Partnership for African
Development in Africa. All these frameworks have
shown that answers to old historical, military and
political conflicts may reside in the economic domain.
What endangers the new solution is terror. Terror
is again endangering the world. The division is no
longer between East and West, North and South, but
between the union to stop terror and those who refuse
to recognize its menace. The assembly against terror
comprises most of humanity: the United States,
Europe, China, Russia, India, South America, many
countries in Africa and many countries in the Muslim
world.
Democracies must have a non-democratic
institution to defend themselves. Armies are non-
democratic, but without them democracy would not
prevail. You may have many views in a democratic
society, but only one authority that controls the military
and its arms. Armies must be subordinate to the elected
political body, but if you have one political authority
and several armed groups, you can have neither
democracy nor security.
The Palestinian Authority, which is a State in
being, must establish one authority over all arms, all
armies and all use of arms, not for the sake of Israel,
but for the sake of peace and for the sake of its own
destiny, so that bullets will not negate ballots.
As long as terror persists, Israel has no choice but
to defend its people. The word “terror” does not
describe an abstract dilemma for us. It refers to a
reality of between 30 to 40 violent incidents every
day — shootings, bombings, ambushes and killings. It
is perpetrated by suicide bombers who have no respect
for life, either their own or that of others. The only
place they can be intercepted is at the point from which
they depart.
Israel is, by definition, an experienced member of
the anti-terror camp. We know that terror can never win
if people protect and preserve their fundamental
security. Terror is strong as long as anti-terror is weak
and terror is frightening as long as people are afraid of
it. Terror basically represents cowardliness and does
not serve any real purpose. Terror neither follows
justice nor serves goals. It is not a remedy; it is a
malady.
12

We are at a juncture. The world is pursuing new
opportunities and frontiers. No longer will it be a world
divided between developed and underdeveloped
nations, black and white or men and women. It will
become a world where every person will have access to
knowledge and opportunity to participate in the new
genesis. States have become weaker economically and
strategically because economy and strategy have
themselves become global. Yet we do not have
organized world institutions to secure the globe and
distribute wealth more justly.
Two courses are open to every State: either to
join the new economy or to submit to old terror; the
creation of wealth or the threat of death. Each must
make its own choice between the promise of economy
or protest by terror. The Global Compact initiated by
the Secretary-General offers us a road map to the
former. It defines the functions and contributions of the
United Nations and imposes responsibilities on all of
us — nation States, the private sector and civil society.
It provides us with hope that, even as crises exist,
obscuring the opportunities just visible from the corner
of our eyes, the path to progress is clear to all with the
courage to embrace it.
We woke up to the twenty-first century with such
optimism. We must overcome the dangers so that our
children will again be raised in a world of almost
limitless opportunities. It can be done. We have learned
in Jerusalem that we can make a promised land into a
land of promise for all of us.






﻿May I first express my
condolences to the families and friends of those who
died in this morning's air crash. This was a tragedy in a
city that has already seen more than its share of tragedy
in recent times.
We meet in New York at this session of the
General Assembly under the shadow of terrorist attacks
on this city just two months ago. We mourn the lives of
nearly 5,000 people from 79 countries who, having
done nothing to deserve that fate, died in the attack.
The scale, premeditation, coordination and indifference
to mass murder that characterize this attack represent a
new age of terrorism. It is a terrorism that appears to
set no limit to its consequences. Those responsible for
it foreshadow a willingness to use biological, chemical
and nuclear weapons of mass destruction. The
potentially catastrophic effects if they are able to carry
out that threat demand an urgent and comprehensive
response to pre-empt any such action.
We cannot allow the rule of terror to replace the
rule of law. We cannot tolerate the damage that
terrorism has already done to the global economy. We
cannot allow terror to threaten basic human rights to
life and security.
New Zealand welcomes the lead by the United
Nations in coordinating an effective and enduring
response to terrorism. Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), adopted unanimously, sets out a blueprint for
action which every Member State has an obligation to
implement. Its emphasis is on measures to close off
financial support and the provision of refuge for
terrorist groups in every country of the world.
International cooperation in imposing these measures
and bringing the terrorists to justice will, in the longer
term, lie at the heart of the campaign to defeat
terrorism.
Removing the immediate threat posed by
terrorists such as those in Al Qaeda and those who
harbour them will, however, require more than
resolutions. Time and again over the past three years,
the Security Council has called on the Taliban to
prevent the use of Afghanistan by terrorists to launch
strikes against other countries. Those resolutions and
the sanctions that accompanied them have been ignored
by the Taliban. Where groups operate beyond the rule
of law and countries put themselves outside of
international codes of behaviour, the use of force
becomes a necessary part of our response.
Multilateral action and cooperation on a wider
front are also necessary if we are to be successful in
removing the threat of terrorism on an ongoing and
lasting basis. Comprehensive action is needed to
minimize the threat of chemical, biological or nuclear
weapons falling into the hands of extremist groups. No
State should develop, test and hold weapons of this
nature. Such weapons are a threat to humanity. Their
use by States would destroy and otherwise harm
innocent human beings as certainly as did the actions
of the terrorist group that attacked New York.
Nations yet to sign and ratify the United Nations
Conventions on Chemical and Biological Weapons and
treaties to ban mines and inhumane weapons must do
so. Nations must equally commit themselves to the
elimination of nuclear weapons, the early entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
and an immediate start to negotiations on a fissile
material cut-off treaty.
The attack of 11 September should also
encourage all nations to ratify the Rome Statute to
bring into effect the International Criminal Court as a
forum for pursuing action against those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
Suppression of terrorism must also involve action
to deal with its causes. States must consider whether
the suppression of dissident or minority groups rather
than allowing legitimate channels to voice dissent
leaves resort to force as the only option.
The events of 11 September should encourage all
countries and organizations, particularly those directly
involved, to renew efforts to find a just and peaceful
solution to the Middle East crisis. To achieve a
peaceful solution between Palestinians and Israelis
requires good will and flexibility on both sides. There
can be no double standards in how the principles of
15

human rights, freedom and social and economic
opportunity are applied to all peoples.
One consequence of the campaign against
terrorism has been to bring the world's attention to the
situation in Afghanistan. Afghanistan reminds us that
where a vacuum is created by the absence of legitimate
government and the rule of law, it will be filled by
extremist elements, criminal groups dealing in drug
trafficking and terrorist organizations, all of which can
operate with impunity.
The international community has for too long
been indifferent to the situation in Afghanistan and to
the long-standing refugee crisis that has resulted from
22 years of war, from famine and from Taliban
oppression. Pakistan and Iran have carried the burden
of 3.6 million refugees, while much of the world
showed concern only when a handful of those refugees
in desperation sought to enter other countries illegally.
Too little concern has been shown internationally to the
300,000 Afghan children who have died annually from
preventable causes. One in three children in refugee
camps die before they reach the age of five. The groups
now protesting against military intervention were silent
while this human catastrophe was unfolding over the
last few years.
Any loss of innocent life in conflict is tragic, and
extraordinary measures must be taken to avoid it. But a
failure to remove the Taliban regime and a failure to
assist the Afghan people to put in place a broad-based,
moderate and stable Government to replace the Taliban
will mean the ongoing loss of hundreds of thousands of
lives and the continued suffering of the Afghan people.
Renewed efforts are needed through United
Nations agencies to provide emergency relief to people
within Afghanistan and in the refugee camps to avoid
unnecessary loss of life through the winter and in the
months to come. The United Nations must stand ready
to assist Afghanistan to rebuild itself once the conflict
is over, working with as broad a coalition of Afghan
groups as is possible to create a viable political,
economic and social infrastructure.
Resolving the problems that have forced so many
millions of people from their homes is fundamental to
solving the growing refugee crisis. In Afghanistan and
elsewhere, people flee their homelands through fear of
death or persecution, or because of poverty and lack of
opportunity.
In a world made smaller by advances in
communication and transport, no State can ignore the
plight in other countries or expect not to face
consequences from unacceptable discrepancies in
wealth, opportunity and human rights standards.
Suppression of criminal organizations responsible
for people trafficking is a challenge which demands
increased international cooperation. Those who profit
from people's desperation and who, once paid, are
careless as to whether or not their human cargo
survives must be stamped out. However, removing the
causes of people fleeing from their countries remains
fundamental.
New Zealand's own region of the Pacific has not
been immune from violence and instability. In recent
years, we have seen conflict in East Timor, violence
between Government and separatist movements within
Indonesia and in Bougainville, ethnic conflict in the
Solomon Islands and a coup that overthrew a legitimate
Government in Fiji.
Problems remain in the region, but there have
been notable areas of improvement. A peace settlement
has been signed in Bougainville. Fiji has held
democratic elections. Indonesia is seeking to resolve
separatist conflict by offering greater autonomy. In
East Timor, there have been free elections, and that
country will gain independence as the first new nation
of the twenty-first century in May 2002. International
cooperation and a capable transitional administration
by the United Nations have achieved a remarkable
transformation in a poor and devastated country. I
congratulate the Security Council on its endorsement of
the Secretary-General's concept for a post-
independence United Nations presence in East Timor to
consolidate what has been achieved.
In acknowledging the role of United Nations
personnel, I would also stress the need to ensure their
proper protection in situations which are often
dangerous. The murder of United Nations relief
workers in Atambua, West Timor, and the failure to
bring to account those fully responsible are a reminder
that more must be done to protect our United Nations
personnel. We endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendations on extending the legal protection for
United Nations and other personnel involved in
humanitarian operations.
It is timely at this General Assembly to stress the
importance of the role of the United Nations. The
16

critical wars of the twenty-first century will not be won
by single nations, however powerful, or even by
coalitions. It is the United Nations acting collectively
which will win the wars against terrorism, poverty and
disease; threats to the environment; and the threats
posed by conflict and weapons of mass destruction.
The commitments made by heads of State and
Government in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration last year take on even greater relevance
following the events of 11 September.
However, for the United Nations to achieve its
potential, it must undergo reform. To prevent the
General Assembly and the Secretariat from becoming
overwhelmed by so many tasks that they fail to be
effective in tackling any of them, we need to prioritize
our agenda and to be more selective.
The Security Council needs reform. Its
membership should be expanded to reflect
contemporary realities, but without maintaining or
extending the veto. Countries contributing to
peacekeeping operations should be afforded greater
involvement in the Council's decision-making with
respect to those operations. Peacekeeping operations
must be sufficiently resourced.
The capacity of the United Nations for rapid
reaction must be strengthened. New Zealand is ready to
enter into discussions on a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations on its
participation in the standby arrangements system. This
is consistent with New Zealand's long-standing
readiness to contribute to peacekeeping operations and
its current involvement in more than 12 such
operations, including its commitment since 1999 of a
battalion to help ensure the success of the United
Nations operation in East Timor.
The United Nations was founded after the Second
World War to build a world free from poverty, violence
and the violation of human rights. Nations committed
themselves to a collective response to problems that
could not be solved by countries individually.
Countries agreed on rules of international behaviour.
No one would claim that the United Nations has
an unblemished record of success. But without it, the
world would be a much less secure place, much less
able to confront the difficulties which we face. Let this
fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly reaffirm
our commitment to work collectively to defeat
terrorism, conflict, poverty and disease, and set the
agenda for peace, development and respect for human
rights for all.







﻿This session of the General Assembly is
taking place in the shadow of an unprecedented
challenge to humanity posed by international terrorism.
We all must seriously analyse how this could have
happened. However, it has already become perfectly
clear today that the period of globalization and the
threats and challenges to international and regional
security that it brings with it make it urgent for of all of
us to take fundamentally new approaches to
international affairs.
We face a tough dilemma, whose solution will
truly be of paramount importance. Either we work
together to responsibly construct a genuinely just and
democratic world order that can guarantee equal
security and sustainable development for all States in
the world, or we show ourselves to be unable to
counter real threats to global stability and security.
The most important task of the international
community today is to create a global system to
counteract new threats and challenges, first and
foremost among which is international terrorism. This
topic was the focus of negotiations between the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir V.
Putin, and the President of the United States of
America, Mr. George W. Bush, which recently took
place in Washington, D.C. and Crawford, Texas.
A universal anti-terrorist coalition has been
formed. The Russian Federation is a responsible
participant in this coalition. The creation of this
coalition has involved the United Nations playing a
very important role in consolidating and coordinating
activities. It is precisely the United Nations that has the
necessary universal character and authority to organize
a response to the threats and challenges that confront
mankind today.
The broad decisions taken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly create a solid
political and legal framework for efforts to neutralize
the threat of terrorism. It is now important for these
decisions to be implemented by all States.
If necessary, the use of the most decisive means
against terrorists may be permissible, including the use
of military force. The Charter grants that right. At the
same time, this threat cannot be overcome by force
alone. A comprehensive approach to eradicating
terrorism would imply the use of the whole range of
political, economic, financial and humanitarian
measures.
The consolidation of the international legal
framework for combating terrorism is now on our
agenda. It is extremely important to rapidly complete
and adopt the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism and a convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism.
It would be of great importance to establish
within the United Nations a mechanism to monitor the
fulfilment by States of their treaty obligations
concerning the suppression of terrorism.
We consider promising the idea to establish,
under the aegis of the United Nations, a centre for
coordinating assistance to States to resolve crises
caused by terrorist acts. Such a structure could focus on
providing consultative and material and technical
support in managing the consequences of terrorist acts.
The Russian Federation also proposes studying
the possibility of including in international law the
5

principle of the responsibility of States for their failure
to take measures against terrorists in their territory or
under their jurisdiction.
Of key importance in the success of the
comprehensive fight against international terrorism is
the maintenance and strengthening of strategic stability
at both global and regional levels and strengthening the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The focus of the international community should
continue to be on the interdependence and merging of
international terrorism, drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. The Russian Federation
favours the rapid entry into force of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its additional
protocols.
It is perfectly clear that the fight against terrorism
is not aimed at any particular religion, civilization or
culture. This was clearly demonstrated by the
discussions on the dialogue among civilizations during
the current session of the General Assembly. We also
hope that a practical contribution in this area can be
made by the implementation of the initiative put
forward by Islamic religious leaders from the Russian
Federation to organize an international conference
entitled “Islam against terrorism” in Moscow.
Terrorism is rooted in the gap between affluence
and poverty, both within States and in the international
arena. Thus, the task now, as never before, is to ensure
sustainable development throughout the world and to
ensure that the social aspects of the globalization
process are addressed.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
can do a lot to ensure effective rejection of extremism
of all forms. We suggest that thought should be given
to organizing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
world forum that would discuss what contribution civil
society and, particularly, the mass media could make to
combating terrorism.
International experience has shown that
successful prevention and settlement of regional
conflicts are an integral part of the counter-terrorist
efforts of the international community. This is yet
another compelling argument in favour of further
developing and ensuring greater effectiveness of
United Nations preventive and peacekeeping activities.
In particular, the Russian Federation advocates the
development within the United Nations of a
comprehensive strategy aimed at reliably blocking
channels for outside fuelling of the conflicts.
We need to ensure that there is regional
cooperation in fighting these new threats. An example
of such successful cooperation is that of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, under the
auspices of which a CIS anti-terrorist centre has been
set up and is working effectively.
Today, the moment of truth has arrived for each
of us. The Russian Federation is in favour of the
international community taking decisions that can
provide for strategic stability and equal security for all
States, sustainable development and prosperity for all
the peoples of the planet and peace and tranquillity for
each family and each individual.
These noble aims can only be achieved jointly, by
working cooperatively and uniting the efforts of the
entire international community. The United Nations has
a vital role to play in this regard. Our Organization
was, and indeed remains, the most important
instrument available to the international community,
whose effective and responsible use will allow us to
create a new democratic and just world order for the
twenty-first century.



﻿We meet in a Hall devoted to
peace; in a city scarred by violence; in a nation
awakened to danger; in a world uniting for a long
struggle. Every civilized nation here today is resolved
to keep the most basic commitment of civilization. We
will defend ourselves and our future against terror and
lawless violence.
The United Nations was founded in this cause. In
the Second World War, we learned that there is no
isolation from evil. We affirmed that some crimes are
so terrible they offend humanity itself, and we resolved
that the aggressions and ambitions of the wicked must
be opposed early, decisively and collectively, before
they threaten us all.
That evil has returned, and that cause is renewed.
A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a
tomb of rubble. Tomorrow, the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and I will visit that
site, where the names of every nation and region that
lost citizens will be read aloud. If we were to read out
the names of every person who died, it would take
more than three hours.
Those names include a citizen of the Gambia,
whose wife spent their fourth wedding anniversary, 12
September, searching in vain for her husband. Those
names include a man who supported his wife in
Mexico, sending home money every week. Those
names include a young Pakistani who prayed towards
Mecca five times a day and who died that day trying to
save others.
The suffering of 11 September was inflicted on
people of many faiths and many nations. All of the
victims, including Muslims, were killed with equal
indifference and equal satisfaction by the terrorist
leaders.
The terrorists are violating the tenets of every
religion, including the one they invoke. Last week, the
sheikh of Al-Azhar University, the world’s oldest
Islamic institution of higher learning, declared that
terrorism is a disease and that Islam prohibits killing
innocent civilians. The terrorists call their cause holy,
yet they fund it with drug dealing. They encourage
murder and suicide in the name of a great faith that
forbids both. They dare to ask God’s blessing as they
set out to kill innocent men, women and children. But
8

the God of Isaac and Ishmael would never answer such
a prayer. And a murderer is not a martyr; he is just a
murderer.
Time is passing. Yet for the United States of
America, there will be no forgetting 11 September. We
will remember every rescuer who died in honour. We
will remember every family that lives in grief. We will
remember the fire and ash, the last phone calls, the
funerals of the children.
And the people of my country will remember
those who have plotted against us. We are learning
their names. We are coming to know their faces. There
is no corner of the Earth distant or dark enough to
protect them. However long it takes, their hour of
justice will come.
Every nation has a stake in this cause. As we
meet, the terrorists are planning more murder —
perhaps in my country, or perhaps, fellow members, in
yours. They kill because they aspire to dominate. They
seek to overthrow Governments and to destabilize
entire regions. Last week, anticipating this meeting of
the General Assembly, they denounced the United
Nations; they called our Secretary-General a criminal
and they condemned all Arab nations here as traitors to
Islam. Few countries meet their exacting standards of
brutality and oppression. Every other country is a
potential target.
And all the world faces the most horrifying
prospect of all: those same terrorists are searching for
weapons of mass destruction, the tools to turn their
hatred into holocaust. They can be expected to use
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons the moment
they are capable of doing so. No hint of conscience
would prevent it. That threat cannot be ignored; that
threat cannot be appeased. Civilization itself — the
civilization we share — is threatened. History will
record our response and will judge or justify every
nation in this Hall.
The civilized world is now responding. We act to
defend ourselves and to deliver our children from a
future of fear. We choose the dignity of life over a
culture of death. We choose lawful change and civil
disagreement over coercion, subversion and chaos.
Those commitments — hope and order, law and life —
unite people across cultures and continents. Upon those
commitments depend all peace and progress. For those
commitments, we are determined to fight.
The United Nations has risen to this
responsibility: on 12 September, these buildings
opened for emergency meetings of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. Before the sun
had set, these attacks on the world stood condemned by
the world, and I want to thank you, fellow members,
for that strong and principled stand.
I also thank the Arab and Islamic countries that
have condemned terrorist murder. Many of you have
seen the destruction of terror in your own lands. The
terrorists are increasingly isolated by their own hatred
and extremism. They cannot hide behind Islam. The
authors of mass murder and their allies have no place
in any culture, and no home in any faith.
The conspiracies of terror are being answered by
an expanding global coalition. Not every nation will be
part of every action against the enemy. But every
nation in our coalition has duties. Those duties can be
demanding, as we in America are learning. We have
already made adjustments in our laws and in our daily
lives. We are taking new measures to investigate terror
and to protect against threats.
The leaders of all nations must now carefully
consider their responsibilities and their future. Terrorist
groups such as Al Qaeda depend upon the aid or
indifference of Governments. They need the support of
a financial infrastructure and safe havens to train and
plan and hide.
Some nations want to play their part in the fight
against terror but tell us they lack the means to enforce
their laws and control their borders. We stand ready to
help.
Some Governments still turn a blind eye to the
terrorists, hoping the threat will pass them by. They are
mistaken.
And some Governments, while pledging to
uphold the principles of the United Nations, have cast
their lot with the terrorists. They support them and
harbour them. And they will find that their welcomed
guests are parasites that will weaken them and
eventually consume them. For every regime that
sponsors terror there is a price to be paid, and it will be
paid. The allies of terror are equally guilty of murder
and equally accountable to justice.
The Taliban are now learning that lesson. That
regime and the terrorists who support it are now
virtually indistinguishable. Together they promote
9

terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on the
Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabul’s soccer
stadium. They can be beaten for wearing socks that are
too thin. Men are jailed for missing prayer meetings.
The United States, supported by many nations, is
bringing justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We are
making progress against military targets — and that is
our objective. Unlike the enemy, we seek to minimize,
not maximize, the loss of innocent life. I am proud of
the honourable conduct of the American military. And
my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban
have brought upon Afghanistan, including the terrible
burden of war.
The Afghan people do not deserve their present
rulers. Years of Taliban misrule have brought nothing
but misery and starvation. Even before this current
crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the
United States and other nations, and millions of
Afghans were refugees from Taliban oppression.
I make this promise to all the victims of that
regime: the Taliban’s days of harbouring terrorists, and
dealing in heroin, and brutalizing women are drawing
to a close. When that regime is gone, the people of
Afghanistan will say, with the rest of the world, good
riddance.
I can promise, too, that America will join the
world in helping the people of Afghanistan rebuild
their country.
Many nations, including mine, are sending food
and medicine to help Afghans through the winter.
America has airdropped over 1.3 million packages of
rations in Afghanistan. Just this week, we airlifted
20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into
the region. We continue to provide humanitarian aid,
even while the Taliban try to steal the food we send.
More help, eventually, will be needed. The
United States will work closely with the United
Nations and development banks to reconstruct
Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the
Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States
will work with the United Nations to support a post-
Taliban Government that represents all of the Afghan
people.
In this war of terror, each of us must answer for
what we have done or what we have left undone. After
tragedy, there is a time for sympathy and condolence.
My country has been very grateful for both.
The memorials and vigils around the world will
not be forgotten. But the time for sympathy has now
passed. The time for action has now arrived.
The most basic obligations in this new conflict
have already been defined by the United Nations. On
28 September, the Security Council adopted resolution
1373 (2001). Its requirements are clear: every
United Nations Member has a responsibility to crack
down on terrorist financing. We must pass all necessary
laws in our own countries to allow the confiscation of
terrorist assets. We must apply those laws to every
financial institution in every nation.
We have a responsibility to share intelligence and
coordinate the efforts of law enforcement. If you know
something, tell us. If we know something, we will tell
you. And when we find the terrorists, we must work
together to bring them to justice.
We have a responsibility to deny any sanctuary,
safe haven, or transit to terrorists. Every known
terrorist camp must be shut down, its operators
apprehended, and evidence of their arrest presented to
the United Nations.
We have a responsibility to deny weapons to
terrorists — and to actively prevent private citizens
from providing them.
These obligations are urgent, and they are binding
on every nation with a place in this Hall. Many
Governments are taking these obligations seriously,
and my country appreciates it. Yet even beyond
resolution 1373 (2001), more is required — and more
is expected — of our coalition against terror. We are
asking for a comprehensive commitment to this fight.
We must unite in opposing all terrorists, not just
some of them. In this world, there are good causes and
bad causes, and we may disagree on where that line is
drawn. Yet there is no such thing as a good terrorist.
No national aspiration, no remembered wrong, can ever
justify the deliberate murder of the innocent. Any
Government that rejects this principle — trying to pick
and choose its terrorist friends — will know the
consequences.
We must speak the truth about terror. Let us never
tolerate outrageous conspiracy theories concerning the
attacks of 11 September — malicious lies that attempt
to shift the blame away from the terrorists themselves,
away from the guilty. To inflame ethnic hatred is to
advance the cause of terror.
10

The war against terror must not serve as an
excuse to persecute ethnic and religious minorities in
any country. Innocent people must be allowed to live
their own lives, by their own customs, under their own
religion. And every nation must have avenues for the
peaceful expression of opinion and dissent. When these
avenues are closed, the temptation to speak through
violence grows.
We must press on with our agenda for peace and
prosperity in every land. My country is pledged to
encouraging development and expanding trade. My
country is pledged to investing in education and
combating AIDS and other infectious diseases around
the world. Following 11 September, these pledges are
even more important. In our struggle against hateful
groups that exploit poverty and despair, we must offer
an alternative of opportunity and hope.
The American Government also stands by its
commitment to a just peace in the Middle East. We are
working towards a day when two States — Israel and
Palestine — live peacefully together, within secure and
recognized borders, as called for by the Security
Council resolutions. We will do all in our power to
bring both parties back into negotiations. But peace
will come only when all have sworn off — forever —
incitement, violence and terror.
Finally, this struggle is a defining moment for the
United Nations itself — and the world needs its
principled leadership. It undermines the credibility of
this great institution, for example, when the
Commission on Human Rights offers seats to some of
the world’s most persistent violators of human rights.
The United Nations depends, above all, on its moral
authority — and that authority must be preserved.
The steps I have described will not be easy. For
all nations, they will require effort. For some nations,
they will require great courage. Yet the cost of inaction
is far greater. The only alternative to victory is a
nightmare world where every city is a potential killing
field.
As I told the American people, freedom and fear
are at war. We face enemies that hate not our policies,
but our existence — the tolerance of openness and the
creative culture that define us. But the outcome of this
conflict is certain.
There is a current in history, and it runs towards
freedom. Our enemies resent it and dismiss it, but the
dreams of mankind are defined by liberty — the natural
right to create, and build, and worship, and live in
dignity. When men and women are released from
oppression and isolation, they find fulfilment and hope,
and they leave poverty by the millions. These
aspirations are lifting up the peoples of Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas, and they can lift up all of the
Islamic world. We stand for the permanent hopes of
humanity, and those hopes will not be denied.
We are confident, too, that history has an author,
who fills time and eternity with his purpose. We know
that evil is real, but good will prevail against it. This is
the teaching of many faiths. And in that assurance, we
gain strength for a long journey.
It is our task — the task of this generation — to
provide the response to aggression and terror. We have
no other choice, because there is no other peace. We
did not ask for this mission, yet there is honour in
history’s call. We have a chance to write the story of
our times — a story of courage defeating cruelty, and
light overcoming darkness. This calling is worthy of
any life, and worthy of every nation. So let us go
forward — confident, determined and unafraid.



﻿Please accept my
congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the stewardship of this important Assembly.
11

We also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, for the skilful manner in which he
guided the work of the Millennium Assembly of the
United Nations.
Allow me also to salute the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, on being elected to a second term and,
together with the United Nations, being awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize for 2001. This is because of the
tireless work of both the Secretary-General and the
United Nations to realize the ideal that we all cherish: a
world in which all people can live in peace, security,
freedom, equality and justice.
As has already been noted and as we all know,
this general debate has begun later than usual. The
reason for this is that two months ago, the forces of
terror struck at this city, New York — the Headquarters
of this Organization — and Washington, D.C., the
capital city of the United States of America.
It is proper that we take advantage of this
occasion once more to convey our condolences and
deepest sympathy to the people and the Government of
the United States for the immense loss of life and
property imposed on them through a callous act of
murder. We extend the same sympathy to all other
peoples who lost citizens as a result of the colossal
outrage of 11 September. We speak here about the
terrible tragedy of 11 September on behalf of our
Government and the people of South Africa. We speak
also on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Commonwealth.
There can be no doubt but that the peoples of the
world have to unite in action to defeat terrorism. There
can be no hesitation among any of us in the resolve to
work together to ensure that those responsible for the
heinous actions of September 11 are brought to justice.
This is so not only because many nations lost
their citizens on that terrible day, important as that is. It
is so, because terrorism has demonstrated that it has no
respect for borders. It has shown in a very graphic,
tragic and painful manner, as it did also in Kenya and
Tanzania, that our very humanity renders all of us,
without exception, potential targets of cold-blooded
murder.
Where we might have used the concept of a
global village loosely in the past, on 11 September
terrorism taught us the abiding lesson that we do
indeed belong to a global village. None within this
village will be safe unless all the villagers act together
to secure and guarantee that safety. All must act to
promote the safety and security of one and all, on the
basis of a shared responsibility born of a shared danger.
Accordingly, we have no choice but to get
together in the village square to agree on the threat that
confronts us. Together, in that village square, we have
to determine what we do about this commonly defined
threat. This is the ineluctable conclusion we must draw
from the terrorist attacks of 11 September.
To guarantee world peace and security in the light
of the threat posed by terrorism requires that this
Organization, the United Nations, must discharge its
responsibility to unite the peoples of the world to adopt
an international convention against terrorism.
Necessarily, all of us must experience a shared
sense of ownership of this convention, precisely
because it would not be merely a statement of
principles, but a set of injunctions and prescriptions
that will be binding on all of us as States. Thus should
each one of us be ready to integrate our respective
sovereignties within a global human sovereignty,
defined and governed by all of us, with none treated as
superior or inferior.
The challenge to unite the peoples of the world to
fight the common threat of terrorism brings to the fore
the need to speed up the transformation of the United
Nations so that it is able to respond to the global
challenges we face together, in an equitable manner.
This means that it needs to be efficient, effective and
responsive to the needs of humanity as a whole.
11 September emphasized the point that, even as
the democratic system of government is being
consolidated throughout the world, even as we all work
to sustain the possibility of a serious and meaningful
global dialogue, there are some who are prepared to
resort to force in pursuit of their goals. Clearly, there
must be a response. But what should that response be?
Immediately, it is correct that we must achieve
global security cooperation so that the perpetrators of
the 11 September acts of terrorism are apprehended and
punished. Correctly, the Government of the United
States has emphasized that all action that is carried out
must be clearly targeted against the terrorists. It has
stated that such actions, including military actions,
should not degenerate into collective punishment
against any people on any grounds whatsoever,
12

including those of religion, race or ethnicity.
Accordingly, it is indeed necessary that humanitarian
assistance be extended to the people of Afghanistan.
We fully agree with that approach. The United States
Government has also said that these actions should be
of the shortest duration possible, consistent with the
objective that must be achieved. Again, we agree with
this without reservation.
The call has gone out that all Governments and
countries should contribute whatever they can to ensure
that the common efforts to find and punish the
terrorists responsible for 11 September are met with
their just results. We have responded positively to this
call because it is timely, correct and just.
All these are important elements of what has to
be done to respond to those who committed the mass
murders of 11 September. But they also indicate the
way forward as we consider the rules that should guide
us as we confront the threat of terrorism over the
longer term and beyond the critically important
operations and activities focused on the events of 11
September. They put the matter firmly on our common
agenda: We must also achieve global cooperation for
the speedy resolution of conflict situations everywhere
in the world.
In this regard, it is clear that the situation in the
Middle East cries out for an urgent and lasting solution.
In this context, we might recall the words of the Irish
poet, William Butler Yeats, when he said “too long a
sacrifice can make a stone of the heart”. The sacrifice
of the Palestinian people should not be allowed to drag
on any longer. Whatever these long-suffering people
might themselves think and feel, it is clear that there
are some in the world who will justify their destructive
rage by claiming to be front-line fighters for the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
Beyond this, we must act together to determine
the issues that drive people to resort to force and agree
on what we should do to eliminate those issues. At the
same time, we must make the point patently clear that
such determination does not in any way constitute an
attempt to justify terrorism. Together, we must take the
firm position that no circumstances whatsoever can
ever justify resort to terrorism.
The need to realize together the goal of
determining the matters that make for peace once again
underlines the need for properly representative
international institutions to build the necessary global
consensus. It would seem obvious that the fundamental
source of conflict in the world today is the socio-
economic deprivation of billions of people across the
globe, coexisting side by side with islands of enormous
wealth and prosperity within and among countries. This
necessarily breeds a deep sense of injustice, social
alienation and despair and a willingness to sacrifice
their lives among those who feel they have nothing to
lose and everything to gain, regardless of the form of
action to which they resort.
As the Durban World Conference concluded,
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance remain a critical part of the practices that
serve to alienate billions of people and contribute to
mutual antagonisms among human beings. The
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that this affront to human dignity is totally
eradicated.
Last year, we convened in this very Hall in the
historic Millennium Summit. Solemnly, and with
serious intent, we adopted the Millennium Declaration.
The heavy and urgent obligation we now face is to
implement the programme of action spelt out in that
Declaration. This constitutes and must constitute the
decisive front of struggle against terrorism.
Africa, for its part, has developed a New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, which is a
product of the consciousness among the African people
that they themselves hold the key to the continent’s
development, security and stability. Africans across the
continent have arrived at the correct determination that
human rights, democracy, peace, stability and justice
are the fundamental building blocks for a prosperous
continent. Concomitantly, African countries are taking
measures, jointly and severally, to improve the
conditions for much-needed investment, economic
renewal and development. Naturally, the United
Nations has a pivotal role to play in this regard.
As we meet here, members of the World Trade
Organization are engaged in critical negotiations in
Doha, Qatar, hopefully to agree to a new equitable
trading relationship that is fair and just. It is imperative
that there be a non-discriminatory and equitable trading
system that promotes sustainable development.
Soon, ministers of health, the World Health
Organization and others concerned will be finalizing
the details relating to the global health fund to deal
13

with the major communicable diseases, including
malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS.
The International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held next March in Mexico, will
cover a range of pertinent issues, such as debt relief,
official development assistance and foreign direct
investment. As we all know, substantial capital flows
into the developing countries are critical in the struggle
to defeat poverty and underdevelopment.
All these constitute vital component parts of what
must inform the outcome of the Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development in September
next year. We are confident that the Summit will reach
positive conclusions that will include firm global,
regional and national commitments to the elaboration,
integration and implementation of economically
efficient, socially responsible and environmentally
sound development policies.
There is no doubt that our global village has the
resources and capacity to meet the needs of all its
citizens. What is needed is the collective will of the
international community to act decisively to meet this
challenge, inspired by a sense of human solidarity.
Peace and security for all, freedom and democracy for
all, prosperity for all and genuine equality in conditions
of diversity must surely be the outcomes towards which
the United Nations and all of us must strive. Our
actions must affirm the seriousness of our intent.




