First of all, Sir, please allow me to offer my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the current session of the General Assembly. I wish
also to express my gratitude to Mr. Han Seung-soo,
President of the previous session of the Assembly.
I wish to congratulate the Swiss Confederation on
having joined the United Nations and also to welcome
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, which will
soon become a Member of the Organization.
The opening of this session coincides with the
first anniversary of the events of 11 September. Over
the past year, the international campaign against
terrorism has made headway, and now we should not
only ponder ways to eradicate the global scourge of
terrorism, but also take a broader view of the security
issues facing humankind and seek to achieve lasting
peace and universal security.
At present, the international security situation is
undergoing profound changes. Security has begun to
take on wider connotations. While traditional military
antagonism and conflicts have yet to be eliminated, a
variety of non-traditional security concerns have
become increasingly prominent. Security is no longer a
purely military concern. It has permeated politics,
economics, finance, science, technology, culture and
many other areas.
Security is no longer a zero-sum game. Its
mutuality is obviously on the increase, as countries
have come to realize that they have common security
interests and feel a greater sense of interdependence.
We must overhaul the tools at our disposal to
achieve security. Military means alone have proved
inadequate in meeting the massive and complex
security challenges facing us. The indiscriminate use of
force can only lead to greater trouble in our world.
This new situation calls for new ideas in the area
of safeguarding security. We in China believe in a new
security concept that features mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation.
By mutual trust, we mean that countries should
rise above their differing ideologies and social systems,
abandon the cold-war mentality and the power politics
mindset, and refrain from harbouring suspicion and
hostility towards each other. They should hold frequent
dialogues and mutual briefings on their security and
defence policies or on the major actions they are about
to take.
By mutual benefit, we mean that a country should
respect the security interests of others while pursuing
its own, and also help to create conditions for
enhancing the security of others while making itself
more secure  thus achieving universal security.
By equality, we mean that all countries  large
or small, strong or weak  should respect each other,
treat each other as equals and refrain from interfering
in each other's internal affairs, so that international
relations can become more democratized.
By cooperation, we mean that countries should
resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations,
engage in extensive and close cooperation on their
shared security concerns and work to prevent wars and
conflicts.
All in all, our new security concept is aimed at
increasing mutual trust through dialogue and at
promoting common security through cooperation.
It is in the spirit of this new security concept that
we in China have been working hard to promote
mechanisms for a regional security dialogue and
cooperation, actively participating in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and in the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum,
and endeavouring to establish an Asia-Pacific security
framework that is for dialogue and against
confrontation.
China is actively committed to international arms
control, disarmament and the non-proliferation process.
Not long ago, the Chinese Government promulgated
the Regulations on Export Controls of Missiles and
Related Items and Technologies and its Control List.
The Chinese Government will make further
improvements on its export-management mechanisms
for biological and chemical dual-use items. We call on
the international community actively to undertake
dialogue and cooperation in the spirit of this new
security concept, in a joint effort to tackle the major
security concerns of the day.
We should press ahead with international
cooperation against terrorism and curb the threat of
international terrorism once and for all.
Counter-terrorism should be pursued on the basis
of international law and of the norms governing
16

international relations, allowing the United Nations and
its Security Council to play a leading role. It should
take a comprehensive approach, with a focus on
eliminating the root causes of terrorism. Efforts should
be made to prevent the arbitrary enlargement of the
scope of the counter-terrorism campaign, but proven
terrorists, including the East Turkestan terrorist
forces  trained, armed and bankrolled by the Taliban
and Al Qaeda  must be resolutely stamped out.
We should step up dialogue and reconciliation
processes and facilitate the settlement of regional hot-
spot issues.
China supports the Palestinian people and their
just cause to regain their legitimate national rights and
to establish their own State. We support the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the principle of land
for peace. We are opposed to violence targeting
innocent civilians, and we reject responding to violence
with violence.
We stand for a political settlement of the question
of Iraq. The United Nations should play an important
role in this regard. Iraq should implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions in a faithful and strict
manner.
We hope that India and Pakistan will soon resume
dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect
and resolve all their differences, including that over
Kashmir, through peaceful means.
We will continue to work constructively for a
lasting peace in Afghanistan and its post-war
rehabilitation. We support the important role of the
United Nations in this regard.
We should strengthen exchanges and dialogues
among different civilizations and thereby avert conflict
or confrontation. Differences among diverse
civilizations are a basic characteristic of humanity.
We have every reason to treat the achievements of
various civilizations kindly and to promote exchanges
among them on the basis of respect for diversity.
Everyone is encouraged to draw upon the strength of
others with a view to realizing common development.
Peace and development go hand in hand. Many of
the problems we face today may be development-
related. In coping with these challenges, it is all the
more important to look to development for answers. In
the past year, the United Nations has held a series of
important meetings on development such as the World
Summit on Sustainable Development. What is needed,
right now, is to translate the programmes and
commitments into reality.
In the past year, regional economic cooperation
has continued to move forward. We feel especially
happy about the launching of the African Union,
convinced that Africa will now take fresh strides on the
road to development. At present, our development
tasks have become more pressing. The widening wealth
gap in the world must be reversed. Frequent economic
and social shocks must be dealt with. The sharpening
clashes between economic development, on the one
hand, and resources and the environment, on the other,
must be allayed. The international order and the rules
of the game, which do not fairly reflect the needs of
developing countries, must be changed.
We would like to make the following
propositions. First, to establish a global partnership
geared to development. Governments, international
organizations, transnational corporations and non-
governmental groups are all parties to the cause of
development. The North and the South, the aid-
recipient countries and international aid institutions,
should be equal and cooperative partners in dealing
with the global economic slowdown. The developed
countries ought to lend developing countries a helping
hand. The new round of multilateral trade talks should
be seized as an important opportunity for forging such
a new partnership.
Secondly, to promote a balanced and steady
development in the context of economic globalization.
The international community needs to reform current
roles in the world economy, strengthen guidance and
management of the globalization process and promote
a win-win situation and coexistence among countries.
Thirdly, to strengthen the developing countries'
capacity for self-development. Developing countries
should opt for a development path suited to them and
strive to catch up with the tide of global economic
development. The international community should
respect the right of developing countries to
independently choose a development path, and help
them with capacity-building.
Fourthly, in order to continue on the path of
sustainable development, we should promote a
balanced development of the economy, population,
resources and the environment. Efforts to address the
17

environmental problems of individual countries should
be combined with those aimed at global concerns.
Fifthly, to enhance comprehensive development of the
people. Human resources are the primary resources for
advancing science and technology and for realizing
economic and social development. In formulating
development strategies, countries should make the
people their top priority and main beneficiary.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold its
sixteenth national Congress, the very first in the new
century. Standing in the forefront of the historical tide
and displaying a spirit of progressing with the times,
this party Congress will draw up a new blueprint for
accelerating socialist modernization in China. Our
guiding thought is to consistently represent the
development requirements of China's advanced
productive forces, represent the orientation of China's
advanced culture and represent the fundamental
interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese
people. Our historic mission is to accelerate the drive
for modernization, complete the reunification of the
motherland, maintain world peace and promote
common development.
The first 10 to 20 years of this century present
China with an important strategic window of
opportunity for its development. While taking
development as our number one priority, we must grasp
the opportunities, deepen reform, open the country still
wider to the outside world, promote development and
maintain stability.
We will continue to pursue an independent
foreign policy of peace, actively develop friendly
relations in cooperation with all countries in the world
on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, and facilitate international dialogue and
cooperation, thus contributing constructively to a fairer
and more equitable international order.
There is but one China in the world. Both the
mainland and Taiwan belong to that one China, and
China's sovereignty and territorial integrity brook no
division. The Chinese Government adheres to the basic
policy of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems; and President Jiang Zemin's eight point
proposal on how to develop cross-strait' relations and
promote a peaceful reunification of the motherland for
the current stage. We are firm in our opposition to all
forms of Taiwanese independence activities and will
tolerate no attempt to separate Taiwan from the rest of
China in any fashion. All acts of Taiwan independence
are doomed to failure and our grand cause of national
reunification will triumph.


﻿First of all, I
should like to wish you every success, Mr. President, in
your responsible office. We are delighted that you, a
representative of our Czech neighbours, will preside
over the General Assembly this year. I also express my
sincere thanks to the outgoing President.
I endorse the statement of the Danish presidency
of the European Union.
One year ago, the world was shaken by the terror
of 11 September, which was disdainful of human life.
Civilian aircraft were transformed into guided missiles
whose deployment had been planned without any
regard for human life. The devastating consequences
destroyed families, shattered hopes and tore people
apart, regardless of their age, gender or religious
affiliation. Three days ago, we remembered the victims
in a moving ceremony here in New York. We have not
forgotten the images of 11 September; we have not
recovered from the shock. Our solidarity with the
United States is unbroken. We understand our
American friends. Just like them, we are not prepared
to live under the sword of Damocles that terrorism
represents.
The murderous attack on the people and the
Administration of the United States was also an attack
on all open societies. Countless States mourn their
countrymen among the thousands of World Trade
Center victims. The attack could have struck any open
society, but the terrorists consciously chose the United
States as a symbol of freedom and democracy.
We know that the new totalitarian challenge is
also directed at us all. Since 11 September 2001, the
community of nations has had to look at the question of
peace and security at the dawn of the twenty-first
century from a whole new angle. We will not be able to
negotiate with terrorists like Osama bin Laden. His aim
is to kill as many innocent people as possible, thus
creating the maximum degree of terror and fear. If the
terrorists succeed in acquiring weapons that are yet
more horrific, they will deploy them against us all
without hesitation. Therefore, we must work together
in the international coalition against terrorism to
overcome and destroy that international terrorist
network. The highly dangerous combination of
religious hatred, smouldering regional conflicts,
terrorist attacks and the danger of the deployment of
weapons of mass destruction must be prevented at any
price.
But, above all else, we must not forget: on the
one hand, terrorism must be fought resolutely by the
military and police; on the other, we need to resolve the
political and social conflicts quite rightly emphasized
in the Millennium Declaration, as they form the
breeding ground for the emergence of terrorism. Opting
for one approach and neglecting the other risks failure.
Our common goal is for the people in our
countries to be able to live in safety and freedom, and
without want. To achieve that, we need a system of
global cooperative security that, unlike the former
bipolarity of the cold war, includes all levels of global
policy relevant to security: the relations among great
17

Powers and their alliances as well as the potential
danger of regional crises and the threat posed by
asymmetrical conflicts. For one thing is clearer than
ever after 11 September: terrorism threatens world
peace just as much as civil war and regional conflicts.
Such a system, therefore, must not be toothless, but
rather must function in all three fields through reliable
verification systems and enforceable sanctions
mechanisms. I am convinced that developing such a
comprehensive system of global cooperative security
will be our central political task for the twenty-first
century.
This problem can be solved only through
multilateralism — that is, if nations work together.
Terrorism does not stop at national borders, and
shaping globalization is a task that Governments can
no longer tackle alone. Thus, the United Nations has a
major role to play in developing this security system; it
is the most important forum for establishing global
rules. No other organization has comparable legitimacy
and credibility. Decisively strengthening its ability to
act by continuing the reform path of the Secretary-
General is, therefore, a central focus of German foreign
policy.
The developments in Iraq fill us with grave
concern. Saddam Hussein's regime is a brutal
dictatorship. Under his leadership, Iraq has attacked its
neighbours Iran and Kuwait, has fired missiles at Israel
and has used poison gas against Iran and against its
own Kurdish population. The regime is horrendous for
the Iraqi people and a risk to the region. For that
reason, an effective containment policy and reliable
military control of the no-fly zones have been
implemented and a strict sanctions regime against Iraq
has been introduced since the Gulf War.
The regime in Baghdad must not own or produce
the means for mass destruction or the systems to
deliver them. Despite binding demands from the
Security Council, Saddam Hussein refuses to provide
credible and verifiable answers to the pressing
questions posed by the community of nations regarding
his weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, the United
Nations not only must maintain the pressure on the
Iraqi Government but also must intensify it.
We welcome the fact that President Bush, in his
most recent speech, turned towards the Security
Council. Even if it becomes very difficult, we must do
everything possible to find a diplomatic solution.
The Security Council and Member States must
make it unequivocally clear to Baghdad that the
unrestricted and unconditional re-admission of the
weapons inspectors is the only way to avert a great
tragedy for Iraq and the entire region. The Iraqi
Government must implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions in their entirety and without delay.
We do not, however, want any automatism
leading to the use of military force. The fight against
international terrorism remains perilous. We have not
yet managed to fully stabilize Afghanistan. Explosive
regional conflicts in Kashmir, the Middle East and the
Caucasus must be resolved or at least effectively
contained.
Certain central questions arise for us. Have all
economic and political means of pressure been truly
exhausted? What consequences would military
intervention have? What would it mean for regional
stability? What effect would it have on the Middle East
conflict? Are there new, concrete findings and facts?
Does the situation as assessed justify the taking of a
great risk, namely, taking responsibility for peace and
stability in the entire region for years or even decades
to come? Would such action gain the consent of the
Arab neighbours? What consequences would it have
for the continuation of the global coalition against
terrorism? In the face of these open questions, we feel
deep scepticism with regard to military action and thus
hold to our approach.
I would like to pose the further question of
whether a peaceful solution to the question of the
Middle East could not contribute considerably more to
the establishment of regional stability, to the successful
fight against terrorism and to the effective control and
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. In that
way, would the regime in Baghdad not be isolated
much more effectively, thus generating political
pressure for change? Would this cooperative approach
to finding a new order for the region not be a more
promising way to bring democracy to the Middle
East — one that would be supported by the regional
Powers?
Nowhere is the connection between terrorism and
regional conflict more obvious than in the Near and
Middle East. The breakthrough to peace is therefore of
paramount importance in that region of the world. The
consensus among the international community of
nations on the Middle East question is now greater than
18

ever. We must all pull together to achieve the goal
envisaged by President Bush for 2005, that of two
States, Israel and a democratic Palestine, living as
neighbours within secure and recognized borders. The
European Union has devised a road map to achieve that
goal. An early conference on the Middle East could
help to build bridges and accelerate the process.
Together with our European Union partners, we are
ready to make a considerable contribution in that
respect.
A comprehensive peace in the Middle East must
also include Lebanon and Syria. Saudi Arabia's
significant initiative contains the assurance that the
Arab world would then also be ready to fully normalize
its relations with Israel.
Without a just and lasting solution to regional
conflicts, we will not be able to eliminate the
recruitment base for terrorists and thus successfully
counter the asymmetrical threat. Afghanistan is an
obvious example here. The Taliban system has
collapsed there and the Al Qaeda network has largely
been destroyed. We are still a long way from being able
to call the situation in the country stable and secure,
but progress can be noted. The implementation of the
provisions of the Bonn Conference agreement began
with the formation of a legitimate Interim
Administration. The process that was launched on the
Petersberg was taken to the next level with the
convening in June of the emergency loya jirga. For the
first time in years, the Afghan people have the chance
to lead a life of dignity based on self-determination.
The people of Afghanistan will only grow in
courage, however, when they see and feel that the
international community is also standing by its pledges
for the reconstruction of their country. The
commitments of the donor countries must materialize
in the form of concrete projects.
A system of global cooperative security must be
based on a comprehensive security concept. This must
embrace not only military security but also the
economy, human rights, democracy and culture.
“To achieve a safer world, we must create a better
world”: that is how President Bush summed up the
situation in his impressive speech to the German
Bundestag last May. Shaping cooperative global
security therefore also means shaping a new global
economic order. Account must be taken of the needs of
all — the developing and the developed world alike.
Resources must be more fairly distributed and poorer
countries must be able to participate in international
trade and take advantage of the opportunities of
globalization. This will necessitate free market access
for all, as well as the realization of economic and
political freedoms and a just and reliable legal
framework.
We must not close our eyes to the problems of
Africa, in particular. The food situation in the South of
the continent is a particular source of concern.
Countless people are going hungry and comprehensive
assistance is needed there. In Zimbabwe, however, the
former granary of Africa, a wholly irresponsible policy
is the reason for the difficult situation. In Zimbabwe,
hunger is caused principally not by failed harvests or
droughts but by self-destructive governance — a policy
of keeping a grip on power through the suffering of the
people. Such a policy relies upon the fact that the
international community's humanitarian conscience
and readiness to assume responsibility will reduce the
consequences. We must hold this policy up against the
benchmarks defined by Africa itself in the framework
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Climate and energy policy is a key component of
the new global economic order. The Kyoto Protocol
can be seen as a milestone in global climate protection.
I am delighted that several countries have recently
announced plans to ratify the Protocol, and hope that
this will happen as soon as possible so that it can enter
into force. In the long term, a sensible energy policy —
and that means, above all, the promotion of renewable
energy sources and economical energy consumption —
is the best solution to the climate problem. Work must
therefore start today. Let us not forget that difficult
economic and ecological problems, with their social
and humanitarian repercussions, will increasingly
endanger stability and security too.
The protection of human rights must be one of the
pillars of a global security system. All efforts to secure
peace will fail if human rights are not protected and
made a reality. We need a binding global set of values
to prevent and overcome conflicts that emerge through
inequality, injustice and the denial of freedom. Here,
too, States are called upon to play a decisive and active
role. Moreover, we must be careful today to ensure that
basic human rights are not annulled under the pretext
of combating terrorism. No one has the right to an
“anti-terrorism bonus”.
19

Cooperative global security will have to measure
up to the binding legal framework in which it is
embedded. It is imperative for the globalization process
to be flanked by a growing set of international rules,
because international law and the rule of law constitute
the indispensable foundations for peaceful and ordered
coexistence. That is why the establishment of the
International Criminal Court is so important to us. Its
Statute entered into force on 1 July; Germany, along
with all the other members of the European Union, is
among the 79 States to have ratified it. The Assembly
of States Parties gave the green light this week to the
establishment of the Court. Next spring we will
celebrate its opening in The Hague. The International
Criminal Court will start work as soon as possible and
as efficiently as possible. But it must not be weakened
in its work from the outset.
My country is applying for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2003-2004.
Germany wants to play an active role in developing the
international security system within the United Nations
along the lines that I have outlined. I would like to ask
all members for their vote in the election on 27
September.





﻿I wish at the outset to pay tribute to the
remarkable work of the Secretary-General, who,
through his outstanding personal qualities and sense of
dialogue, gives our Organization unparalleled
influence. I congratulate Mr. Jan Kavan on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-
seventh session. I also congratulate Switzerland on its
admission to our Organization, and Timor-Leste on its
forthcoming admission.
A year ago, to our stunned horror, New York and
Washington were struck in unprecedented attacks.
From now on no one now can disregard the dark side
of the world: international terrorism that combines
archaism with technology, and shifting underground
28

criminal networks with a growing risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
These formidable opponents insinuate themselves
into the heart of the world's complexity. They play on
frustrations and resentment, hatred and fears. They foil
our plans; they know how to find weak spots and turn
our weapons against us. No, the world is definitely not
suffering from an excess of power. To the contrary, it is
suddenly discovering its extreme vulnerability.
Faced with these threats, the temptation to forge
blindly ahead could emerge. That would be a serious
mistake. Force cannot be the sole response to these
elusive adversaries that are constantly changing.
The example of Afghanistan shows this.
Mobilizing the international community enabled us to
overthrow a retrograde totalitarian regime that
harboured and supported the Al Qaeda network and
dealt a harsh blow to terrorist infrastructures. That was
necessary, but it is not enough. We must now rebuild;
we must help the Afghan people, maintain our efforts
over the long term, and continue our work to bring
about stability and democracy, but also to dismantle the
drug economy and the trafficking it fuels.
The fact that force alone is often futile is one of
the characteristics of our age. We live in a world that is
interdependent, where cause and effect may be distant,
indirect and unpredictable. Let us take care that our
interventions do not give rise to new frustrations,
produce new imbalances or spark fires that we cannot
put out.
The case of Iraq is typical of this new situation. It
is a country that has defied the authority of the Security
Council and flouted international law for years. It is a
regime that poses a grave threat to security, particularly
the security of the peoples of its region, because of the
risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Its
conduct is the direct cause of the great suffering
endured by its people.
Is the international community concerned? Of
course it is. Can it continue to tolerate this situation?
Definitely not. Should it act? Obviously: the status quo
cannot go on. France's determination to obtain
compliance with the law is absolute.
We must act, but we must do so effectively. We
must act, but without risking results opposite to those
we seek. We must take care not to exacerbate a
situation that is already very disturbing. We must act,
but there are many traps. Intervention that is politically
or legally ill-defined or poorly mounted would not
garner the broad support necessary; it might galvanize
public opinion in the region against it, and the regime
in Baghdad, which is isolated now, could benefit;
lastly, it might exacerbate tension in the Middle East
and beyond at a time when we should, on the contrary,
redouble our efforts to return to the path of dialogue
and peace.
How are these traps to be avoided? How are we to
succeed? There is only one way, and it is demanding. It
is the path of responsibility  collective responsibility.
The world now is one of interdependence. Its stability
concerns us all. All of us must contribute to it.
The necessary measures must be adopted by the
international community after in-depth and transparent
consideration. Any temptation to engage in unilateral
preventive action would be dangerous. We must take
care to avoid any suspicion of bias or injustice. This is
the only way to ensure that any action to enforce law
and restore security does not add to insecurity. That is
the best guarantee of effectiveness.
That is why, in the case of Iraq, France advocates
a dÈmarche made completely legitimate by collective
deliberation. It requires two successive steps. First, we
must together reaffirm the need for United Nations
inspectors to return and demand that Iraq comply at
last with its obligations under the Security Council
decisions taken since 1991, and do so according to a
definite timetable. That is the objective of the
international community. It is also in Iraq's interest. If
Baghdad persists in its refusal to allow the inspectors
to return unconditionally, then there must be
consequences. The Security Council should then decide
on the measures to be taken without excluding any
option. Responsibilities would be clarified. The world
must be able to act. But it must also be coherent and
effective, in a sustained way. That is today the real
challenge to our values, and to our democracies.
I recently travelled to the Middle East, the
Balkans and Afghanistan. I realized the strength of the
aspirations and hopes for peace. But I also saw how the
efforts and energies of various parties need to be united
and centred on a collective ambition.
No Power can today assume sole responsibility
for world equilibrium. The world aspires to be
structured around poles of stability and progress. In
addition to the United States, the European Union is
29

naturally destined to form one such pole, along with
Russia, China, Japan and India, among others. In future
each actor must make its contribution to the effort. It is
a common project that we must build.
That is the ambition that inspires the European
Union, and France's action within it. The Union affirms
its role on the world stage in the service of peace and
prosperity. It is acquiring the appropriate diplomatic
and defence instruments. With a view to major
enlargement, the Union is also committed to genuinely
re-making its design. That is the purpose of the
Convention on the Future of Europe, guided by the
principles of democracy and effectiveness for a future
Europe. In that way, the Union will contribute to the
stability of the continent and beyond. Finally, the
European model reconciles in a unique way the
requirements of social cohesion and economic
performance to further a common plan, while
respecting the diversity of all. For all those reasons, I
am convinced that Europe's voice offers elements for
addressing the major challenges of our time.
Today, power in all its aspects must be shared. It
is essential to listen to diverse approaches and points of
view. A dialogue among cultures is essential. Only this
will enable us to understand the main issues today by
taking into account the history and aspirations of every
people and every country. Only this can prevent us
from having too narrow a conception of the world
based on ignorance and on fear of the other. Only this
can guide us in putting humankind back at the centre of
our concerns and at the heart of our action and our
shared commitment.
Sharing means responding to the requirement of
solidarity. Extreme poverty, famine, epidemics and
financial crises are factors contributing to disorder and
fomenting instability. Terrorism feeds on these things.
Generosity must be the corollary of power. It is our
political and moral duty. It is also in our own interest.
Accordingly, France has pledged to augment its
development assistance, which will increase by 50 per
cent over the next five years.
Owing to its geographic proximity and historical
and cultural ties, my country has a deep friendship for
Africa. It feels a special responsibility. That continent,
more than others, needs the solidarity of the
international community in the difficult trials it is
experiencing: the too-numerous conflicts that persist;
the return of the spectre of famine; the economic
difficulties; and the tragedy of AIDS, which today
strikes nearly 30 million Africans.
Yet Africa is rich in potential, rich in the
enthusiasm of its young people and in the energy of its
civil society, and rich in memory, in tradition and in a
treasury of wisdom from which we all have much to
learn. Important efforts are under way today to advance
human rights, democracy, the fight against corruption,
and favourable economic and social policies for strong
and balanced growth. The establishment of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development attests to the
continent's willingness to take charge of its
development, in the context of a renewed partnership
with the industrialized countries. Let us recognize and
support those efforts.
In particular, we must help Africa to move
forward on the path of conflict resolution in Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the Sudan. Those
tragedies concern us all, because today there are no
more localized crises. Instability spreads. The
international community must mobilize.
In the Great Lakes region, the agreements signed
at Lusaka, Pretoria and Luanda must be implemented.
They must lead to the withdrawal of all foreign troops
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
the disarmament of foreign armed groups, to
reconciliation and to a return to peace.
With regard to Western Sahara, it is good that the
Security Council, in its most recent resolution,
resolution 1429 (2002), gave Mr. James Baker the time
to work to bring the parties closer together. That time
must be used to make progress.
We must stay engaged in the Balkans, where the
progress made this year must be consolidated in
Kosovo, in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Linking
the Balkans to Europe through the rule of law and
democracy is, more than ever before, our common
aspiration.
In the Middle East, we must emerge from the
impasse and restore hope. The situation will worsen as
long as the parties remain prisoners to the logic of
violence. There is urgency to act. The Palestinian
Authority must use all available means to prevent and
curb terrorist actions. With a view to the creation of an
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State,
30

based on the 1967 borders, it must pursue its reforms,
particularly in the institutional context.
For its part, the State of Israel, while it
legitimately wishes to defend itself against terrorism,
must do so with respect for international law. The
security imperative cannot by itself take the place of
policy. Settlement-building must cease, and the Israeli
armed forces must withdraw from the occupied
territories, as demanded by the Security Council.
Measures must be taken quickly to improve the now
alarming humanitarian and social situation of the
Palestinian people.
On the basis of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle
of land for peace  which all the Arab countries,
meeting in Beirut, agreed to recognize at the initiative
of Saudi Arabia  the political process must be
relaunched with the aid of the `quartet'. We support
the convening of an international conference at an early
date. The objective must be a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace; a peace based on the coexistence of two
States within secure and recognized borders,
guaranteeing security for the Israelis and offering the
Palestinians a normal life with dignity; a peace based
on a comprehensive settlement of the regional conflict
between Israel and its neighbours.
The attention that we pay to regional crises must
not distract us from the responsibility that we must
assume in the face of global challenges. The United
Nations is playing its full role in the fight against
terrorism. Let us do likewise in the other great
struggles of our time.
Let us fight tirelessly against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The President of the French Republic has
proposed that the Security Council meet at the highest
level in 2003, during the General Assembly, with a
double mandate: to review non-proliferation policy and
to give it a new impetus.
Let us mobilize all actors for sustainable
development in a renewed partnership, in conformity
with the commitments made at Doha, Monterrey and
Johannesburg. The time has come to strengthen
concrete cooperation to permit access by all to basic
resources such as water and energy, to basic social
services such as education and health, and to food
security. Let us also call for the ratification and full
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change.
Let us establish true global governance of
sustainable development and give it the necessary
coherence. France proposes the creation of an
economic and social security council and of a world
environmental organization to give all countries 
especially those of the South  the possibility of
making their voices heard on those issues.
Finally, let us fully exercise our responsibility to
defend and promote human rights. These are universal.
Progress, often fragile, must be encouraged. Violations,
often so numerous, must be punished.
Let us strengthen the authority and the
universality of the International Criminal Court to
enable it to ensure that the most serious crimes at the
international level do not go unpunished. This new tool
is essential to build a more just and democratic world
where the principle of responsibility is fully respected.
Through ambitious conventions, let us provide
better protection, as we did for children, for the
disabled and for the victims of forced disappearance
and torture. Let us fight against corruption. Let us
commit ourselves to the negotiation of a universal
convention against human cloning for reproductive
purposes, as proposed by France and Germany.
Yes, the principle of collective responsibility is at
the heart of the international system. It is at the heart of
United Nations action. In order to play its full role, the
Organization must pursue its reforms. In particular, we
must increase the representativity of the Security
Council by enlarging both categories of membership.
France supports the aspirations of Germany, Japan and
India in particular.
The United Nations is the keystone of the world
order. The generous and strong ideas that presided over
its birth, just after a world conflict that pushed the
limits of barbarism to the unspeakable, retain all their
currency. The contemporary world is complex,
confusing and unpredictable. It is urgent that we forge
among nations a new alliance, a community of destiny.
That is our future; that is our chance. Through our
actions, let us respond to the expectations of the
world's peoples.﻿In an imperfect
world, our citizens need the United Nations as they
have never needed it before. The United Nations has
not resolved all conflicts by peaceful means, nor could
it. The authority of the United Nations has to be
underpinned by the force of arms. But the remarkable
achievement of this body has been to make the fine
language of its Charter a force for good beyond just
words; by this the United Nations has raised the bar
against the illegitimate use of violence, by States and
now by terrorists. In doing so, the United Nations has
saved lives by the million and saved millions more
from fear, poverty and tyranny.
Without the United Nations, there could have
been no salvation for the people of East Timor, no
prospect of lasting peace in Sierra Leone, no one to
help rebuild Afghanistan. Forty years ago, President
John F. Kennedy predicted a world in which 25 States
would have nuclear weapons. But the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, supported by international
safeguards, has ensured that this nightmare scenario
has failed to materialize.
All this should serve to remind us of the critical
role which the United Nations has to play in world
affairs, under its excellent Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan. It is the responsibility of all of us here in the
Assembly to ensure that the legitimacy, the authority
and the capacity of the United Nations to preserve
peace and to help build prosperity is strengthened and
not undermined.
Today, alongside the traditional threats to global
peace and security, the United Nations and the world
community face three rising challenges: failing States,
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
The world saw in Afghanistan the graphic
dangers of State failure, where order breaks down, law
is undermined and anarchy takes over. We in the
international community must accept our share of the
blame for allowing that country to disintegrate. Al
Qaeda and their evil creed were only too willing to take
advantage. But we delude ourselves if we believe that
the chaos in Afghanistan over much of the last decade
is unique. In too many areas of the world, our fellow
citizens are forced to live under the rule of gangs,
without the security and freedoms which we all should
be able to take for granted.
If we are serious about the concept of an
international community, then, as Members of the
United Nations, we must accept our responsibility to
help prevent States from failing and to restore order
where States have already collapsed.
The United Kingdom's own experience in
Afghanistan, as the International Security Assistance
12

Force (ISAF) lead nation, working with the United
Nations, shows what can be done; but we all know that
much more needs to be done. We need a much more
structured and methodical approach to this growing
problem of failed and failing States.
But the tools are there. At Monterrey in March
and at Johannesburg earlier this month, the world
community has built on the Millennium Development
Goals to reduce poverty among the world's most
disadvantaged people. We are backing this commitment
with action. Between 1996 and 2006 the United
Kingdom will have doubled its development assistance.
Together with the Doha Round of the World
Trade Organization (WTO), we have within our grasp a
new era of sustainable economic growth and prosperity,
a stable political future for the developing world and a
much more secure global environment.
But people cannot be freed from poverty unless
they are also free from fear. Security is not an option; it
is a necessity. Three years ago over half of Sierra
Leone was under the control of rebels; over half the
population was displaced; countless civilians had been
murdered, abducted or horribly mutilated; a spiral of
sickness and hunger was taking over. Now, thanks to
United Nations and British intervention to end that
decade-long civil war, people are returning home and
rebuilding their shattered lives. But long-term
commitment is necessary in situations like that.
As we found in Afghanistan, when we deal with
failing States, we have to tackle the second challenge
to international law and justice — that of global
terrorism — as well.
All the nations of the world, and all its people —
black, white, Buddhist, Christian, Jew, Muslim, Hindu
and Sikh — have a common interest in defeating
terrorism. There must be no hiding places for terrorism
or for terrorists; no hiding places for their money; and
no semantic hiding places either. The distinction some
claim between terrorists and freedom-fighters is false
and dangerous. Their victims enjoy no such distinction.
There must be no such distinctions either in
international law.
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) created
new obligations on all of us. The United Kingdom has
been honoured to chair the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. There has been an overwhelmingly
positive response. But, as we recall those who lost their
lives on 11 September last year, we cannot relax our
collective determination.
Alongside the threats from failing States and
from terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction poses the greatest current threat to global
security, and nowhere is the case for universal support
for the enforcement of United Nations law stronger
than in the field of weapons of mass destruction.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention comprise
one of the world's most significant bodies of
international law. For the past three decades, this
corpus of law has ensured — with one infamous
exception — that no States have resorted to these, the
world's worst weapons.
That exception is Iraq. For two decades, Saddam
Hussein's regime has defied and frustrated every
attempt to enforce the international rule of law. Iraq is
the only country to be condemned by the United
Nations for breaching the Convention on Chemical
Weapons. Iraq has fought wars of aggression against
two neighbours, and has launched missile attacks
against five countries in the region. Iraq has used
poison gas against its own people. Saddam Hussein has
persistently mocked the authority of the United
Nations. No country has deceived every other country
in the world as systematically and cynically as Iraq.
And no country presents as fundamental a challenge to
the United Nations as Iraq.
Every society, from the smallest village to the
global community represented here in the General
Assembly, must have rules, and every member of that
community must accept responsibility for respecting
and maintaining those rules. Without this, the very
concept of community breaks down. So those of us
who believe in an active international community
cannot stand by and do nothing while Iraq continues to
defy the will of the United Nations. All of us who
believe in the United Nations have to make up our
minds now about how to deal with Iraq. The authority
of the United Nations itself is at stake.
We cannot let Iraq do grave damage to this
Organization and the international order which it
represents. We cannot let Iraq go on defying a decade
of Security Council resolutions. If we do, we will find
that our resolutions are dismissed by aggressors
everywhere as mere words. We have spent 57 years
13

building this Organization beyond a talking shop. We
cannot now let that work be undone.
There are times when hard choices have to be
made. On Iraq, we have now reached such a moment. If
we fail to deal with this challenge, the United Nations
itself will be seriously weakened. And that would make
the world a much more dangerous place.
As President Bush spelled out in his powerful
speech to the Assembly here on Thursday, we have to
be resolute in the face of Iraq's defiance and secure the
will of the United Nations. We must require Iraq to re-
admit inspectors, with unfettered access. We have not
just an interest but a responsibility to ensure that Iraq
complies fully with international law. We have to be
clear to Iraq and to ourselves about the consequences
which will flow from a failure by Iraq to meet its
obligations.
And yes, in dealing with the threat posed by Iraq
we must also tackle those other international
challenges outlined so eloquently by Kofi Annan in his
address.
Over the past year we have seen a further
deterioration in security in Israel and in the occupied
territories. There has never been a greater need for
international involvement in the Middle East peace
process to secure the outcome we all want to see: two
States, Israel and Palestine living side by side within
secure and recognized borders, based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).
In Kashmir, we should continue to urge both
India and Pakistan to act with restraint, and to seek to
resolve that long-running conflict.
At the end of the cold war we had all hoped that
future generations would be able to enjoy a world
where cooperation rather than conflict was the
hallmark of international affairs. That goal is still
within reach, if we are united in tackling State failure,
in the war against terrorism and in confronting those
threats of weapons of mass destruction.
The tasks facing the founders of this institution
were no less intimidating. Yet their combination of
high values and hard-headed realism created the
greatest instrument in history for the avoidance of war.
Our founders' achievement has been formidable. But
the Organization now faces new and emerging threats.
We have to confront those threats and be ever alive to
the challenges which are out there to peace and justice
across the world. All of us who believe in those
principles of international law and justice have a duty
to ensure that they are both upheld and enforced.










﻿I
congratulate Mr. Kavan on his election as President of
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. I also
extend my best wishes to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan in this first year of his second term in office.
Two days ago, we commemorated the first
anniversary of a terrible event that focused the
collective global consciousness on international
terrorism. Terrorism did not start on 11 September. It
was on that day that it brazenly announced itself on the
global stage, flaunting its immunity from distance and
power.
15

As a country exposed to the depredations of
terrorism for decades, India empathized with the pain
of the American people, admired their resilience in
coming to terms with the consequences and supported
the bold decision to counter-attack terrorism at its very
source.
The international community has taken some
collective decisions in the global effort to combat
terrorism and to choke off its lifelines. Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) contains the essence of
these decisions. The Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee should now move beyond information
compilation and legal assistance to enforcing
compliance by States known to be sponsoring,
sheltering, funding, arming and training terrorists.
In our South Asian region, nuclear blackmail has
emerged over the past few months as a new arrow in
the quiver of State-sponsored terrorism. Dark threats
were held out that actions by India to stamp out cross-
border terrorism could provoke a nuclear war. To
succumb to such blatant nuclear terrorism would mean
forgetting the bitter lessons of the 11 September
tragedy.
As far as India is concerned, we have repeatedly
clarified that no one in our country wants a war,
conventional or otherwise. Nor are we seeking any
territory. But absolutely everyone in India wants an end
to the cross-border terrorism which has claimed
thousands of innocent lives and denied entire
generations their right to a peaceful existence with
normal economic and social activity. We are
determined to end it with all the means at our
command. Let there be no doubt about that in any
quarter.
Yesterday we heard the extraordinary claim in
this Assembly that the brutal murder of innocent
civilians in Jammu and Kashmir is actually a freedom
struggle and that the forthcoming elections in that state
are a farce, since they cannot be a substitute for a
plebiscite demanded over 50 years ago. It requires an
effort of acrobatic logic to believe that the carnage
among innocents is an instrument for freedom and that
elections are a symbol of deception and repression. If
the elections are a mere fraud, why are terrorists being
trained and infiltrating India at the command of the
Inter-Services Intelligence Agency of Pakistan to kill
election candidates and to intimidate voters?
If Pakistan claims to be a crucial partner in the
international coalition against terrorism, how can it
continue to use terrorism as an instrument of State
policy against India?


How can the international coalition condone
Pakistan-directed killings of thousands of innocent
civilians  women and children included  to
promote a bizarre version of self-determination? Those
who speak of underlying or root causes of terrorism
offer alibis to the terrorists and absolve them of
responsibility for their heinous actions, such as the 11
September attacks on the United States or the 13
December attack on our Parliament.
Yesterday we heard yet another patently false and
self-serving claim that in India Muslims and other
minorities are the target of Hindu extremists. With 150
million Muslims, India has the second largest Muslim
population in the world; greater than that of Pakistan.
We are proud of the multi-religious character of our
society. Equal respect for all faiths and non-
discrimination on the basis of religion are not just part
of our Constitutional obligations, but, as the whole
world knows, they are the signature theme of India's
civilization and culture.
We have to recognize that the developmental
divide between the North and the South is becoming
wider and deeper by the day. The challenges that face
us are stark, and there is no alternative to having all
countries of the world join hands to face them together.
Over the last decade, 10 million people have been
joining the ranks of the poor each year. A quarter of the
world's population lives in extreme poverty.
We have to find US$ 24 billion annually for
investment in poor countries, if we are to achieve the
World Food Summit goal of halving hunger by 2015.
The continuation of widespread poverty, at a time
when unimaginable wealth is concentrated in a small
social layer, is totally unacceptable. The twenty-first
century has all the means to end this sad legacy of the
past centuries. What is lacking is the political will
among the developed countries to sincerely and
speedily address the legitimate developmental needs of
the developing countries, especially the least developed
ones.
16

Casting an even longer shadow over this grim
developmental canvas is global climate change, from
which the poor will most suffer, though they
contributed least to it. The recent floods and forest fires
in Europe are a forewarning that the countries of Asia
and Africa are not the only victims of the fury of a
degraded environment. The Earth's atmosphere and
biosphere know no national boundaries. The choice
before the global community is stark: Either we take
urgent steps to protect the environment or be prepared
for far worse natural calamities.
Early this month, the Johannesburg Summit for
Sustainable Development debated some of the linkages
between poverty, trade, environment, national,
international and corporate governance and global
financial flows. We emerged from the Summit with
some encouraging outcomes, but these fell well short
of the demands of our time.
It has become a categorical imperative to
understand and address man's developmental needs in
their totality, and not in isolated parts. It is
disconcerting that the highways of development are
jammed with the noisy and unruly traffic of
materialism and its brash cousin, consumerism. Human
values have become mute bystanders in most political,
economic and social activities.
The result of this imbalance between our material
and non-material needs can never be happy for
mankind. On the contrary, if we are guided by
compassion, care, feeling for our fellow human beings,
cooperation and other human values, we are bound to
get the right solutions to every problem on our planet.
Humanity is crying out for a harmonious
integration of the economic, social, political,
environmental and spiritual dimensions of
development. This task calls for the closest possible
cooperation among nations and communities, with a
readiness to accept the best from every cultural and
spiritual tradition around the globe. The United Nations
needs to take up newer and bigger initiatives in this
direction.
In this Assembly, less than a year ago, and in the
United States Congress the year before, I had extended
India's offer to coordinate a comprehensive global
development dialogue. I reiterate that offer today. If we
are to achieve the development goals we have promised
ourselves by 2015, we need such a dialogue urgently.
As we come together once again at the United
Nations, at a time of new and diverse challenges, we
should reflect on our collective commitment to the
Charter, its purposes and principles. There is a growing
perception, particularly among the weaker and poorer
countries, that responses to issues of far-reaching
impact often seem arbitrary and contradictory.
A common destiny is at stake. The world needs
collective multilateralism. It needs the United Nations,
the coming together and working together of all its
nations in the development of a common and collective
perspective.
Conflicts arise when there is no spirit of
democracy within and among nations. A genuinely
democratic framework enables us to respect alternative
points of view, to value diversity and to fashion
solutions responsive to the aspirations of people.
India's own experience as a hugely populated and
diverse nation shows how complex problems can be
addressed within a constitutional and democratic
framework.
These values need to be assiduously nurtured in
our societies, so that at least a future generation is rid
of the scourge of poverty, intolerance, obscurantism
and religious extremism.
Democratic societies are far less prone to
ideologies based on violence or militarist yearnings,
since they do not have their fingers permanently on the
trigger of a gun. We have to be vigilant against threats
to democracy worldwide arising from forces that are
opposed to it, be they rooted in fundamentalist political
ideologies or extremist religious dogmas.
All of us are aware of the challenges. Most of us
are agreed that a stable global order has to rest on the
four strong pillars of peace, security, sustainable
development and democracy. We have to ensure that
each of these pillars is strong and resilient.
We are conscious of our collective responsibility.
It is the leap from this theoretical understanding to its
practical realization that we have often failed to
execute. We should not fail again. Our future
generations will not forgive us if we do.








﻿I would like to congratulate
my friend Mr. Jan Kavan on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly and to wish him
success. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership and his dedication to right what is wrong
and to light the lamps of hope.
The eleventh of September gave rise to a new
world. We find ourselves facing a new confrontation:
borderless, merciless, indiscriminate and inhumane.
The target this time was the United States — a United
States that in the past helped so many nations defend
their freedoms and their liberty. Now the United States
has been challenged again to defend our freedom by
protecting its own and to safeguard our lives by
securing its own.
The attack on the World Trade Center precipitated
a new division in our epoch and in the years to come —
a divide created by groups that preach and cause death
and agony. On the wrong side of the divide are those
who are trying to destroy the free world, which is
diversified and heterogeneous, cherishing the right to
every thought and religion as well as the principle that
every human being has the right to be different and yet
to prosper and live in security.
10

The front from Bin Laden to Saddam Hussein is a
menace to us all. It will not enable peace, nor will it
permit freedom — for all people or for their own
people. In countries that harbour terror, women are
discriminated against, men are oppressed, civil and
human rights are violated, and the poor cannot escape
from their poverty They force us to defend our
inalienable right to look ahead with hope. They
imposed on us a war of self-defence — the defence of
pluralism and of the promise of science. They reject the
incredible technologies that may carry us from the
limits of land to the discovery of uncharted provinces.
The culture of death forces us to defend the culture of
life, to win battles that we did not initiate, to triumph in
this uninvited war.
We never imagined that it could be dangerous to
walk our streets, to fly our skies, to breathe the air or to
drink the water. We cannot agree to this. We cannot
allow dark forces — which, as we are aware, could
destroy the lives of innocent people on a whim — to
possess weapons of mass destruction. We shall not turn
our lives into a series of sleepless nights and
nightmarish days.
We do not have the right to ignore the danger. We
do not have the option to postpone it; it is imminent.
We have to win as soon as possible.
Terror is destined to lose. It will be defeated
because it carries no hope. It respects neither human
beings nor the values of humanity.
Science and technology made the economy
global, and science and technology globalized terror as
well. Now strategy also is globalized, because ballistic
ranges have replaced geographic distances, because
non-conventional warheads have replaced measurable
explosives, because terrorism transcends frontiers and
fronts. Terrorists do not respect the rule of law. They
do not answer to independent judges or relate to
elected leaders. They mock international lines. They
destroy universal norms. They shed blood. They
introduced dullness and stopped affluence. Nothing is
to be expected from them but death.
Terror creates poverty more than poverty creates
terror. Terror leads to backwardness. We have to offer
the economic potential to open prospects and horizons
for all nations, poor and rich. New opportunities can
bring enfranchisement. We have to close ranks to
prevent distorted dreams from becoming a raging
typhoon that reaches all four corners of the globe. We
have experienced in our own country the terrible
effects of terrorism.
Babies were shot in the arms of their mothers.
People at prayer were killed while praying. Yes, it hurt
us, but it did not change our goals. We mourn, but we
did not bury peace.
It harmed the Palestinians in the United States
and in other countries. It prevented the occupation
from ending. It introduced additional problems and did
not solve a single existing problem.
Alas, the Middle East is still replete with
national, religious and territorial disputes. The land is
small; the agony is great. But the real tragedy is that
without terror we could already have resolved these
disputes. Terror entrenched them. Terror changed
priorities — security before policy. It affected
resources — arming young men, for example, instead
of desalinating vital water. If it continues, battlefields
will create deserts of sorrow and days of darkness.
Campuses of learning will be replaced by camps of
violence.
But this is neither a decree of heaven nor the
verdict of man. It can, it should, it will be different.
South Africa, Ireland, Yugoslavia and the Congo
achieved more by talking than by shooting, more by
dialogue than by dispute. We offered the Palestinians a
comprehensive solution without the terror — a solution
that was close to their national aspirations. We related
to their desire to be free, to be equal, to be
independent. We agreed that they would have their land
in accordance with United Nations resolutions. But
terror postponed their destiny. Terror postponed our
willingness to end control over their lives. Smoking
guns replaced the torches of peace.
Now we are following the profound debate taking
place among the Palestinians. We respect it, because
debate is the beginning of democracy. When
democracy prevails, peace undoubtedly will arrive. The
Fatah organization apparently issued a call that
contains some new approaches. I shall quote one of
them:
“We will build an independent State of
Palestine and a political system in accordance
with the principles of democracy, the rule of law,
with an independent judicial system, separation
of power, respect for human rights, civil liberties
and a market economy.”


We look upon these words as the dawn of a
different season; we hope that it is spring. Reducing
violence will shorten political distances. Political
horizons are, in my judgement, within reach. Israel
accepts President Bush's vision. That vision is
supported by the Quartet; it is endorsed by Arab
countries; it outlines a political goal and a timetable. It
can be considered as both a road map and a calendar.
What is needed now are wheels to propel the vehicles
of peace. An economic wheel is needed in order for us
to move to a global market economy that leads to
science-based industry. A market economy can open
gates and skies. An ecological wheel is needed to let
air and water flow cleanly. Pollution is not national; we
have to work together to control it. Ecology has
changed history. In the past, bloodshed was about real
estate, and real estate created divisions, demarcation
and, unfortunately, wars as well. In our era, the battle is
not for real estate but for air, for water and for energy;
it is about the fertility of the land, rather than its size.
“Non-real” estate is not marked, nor can it be divided.
Either we respect it unanimously, or we will be
victimized by its loss.
Then there is the cultural wheel. Three
civilizations were born in the Middle East. They were
made manifest in the Bible, in the New Testament and
in the Koran. We read them in different languages, yet
we pray to the same heavens. The descendants of
Abraham should behave like a family — with tolerance
and solidarity. Spiritual leaders should pray for peace,
but they also need to preach it, call upon it and
contribute to it.
The political wheel should not rotate in the same
misguided orbit as in the past. We have been through
five wars in five decades — Palestinians, Egyptians
and Jordanians lost generations of young people. We
paid heavily with young blood as a result of three terror
campaigns. The time has come to comprehend that the
real triumph is in the harvest of peace, not in the seeds
of another war. When we replace the war maps with
peace maps, we will discover that the differences were
minimal. The wars were appalling. We shall see that
the promised land could have become the land of
promise a long time ago.
Without wars, our region will be able to bloom
again. We can separate politically into two States and
coordinate one economy. That will enable us to take
advantage of the exceptional invitation that came from
both the United States and a united Europe to partake
in their economic opportunities.
Tourism can flourish when terrorism has ended.
Islands of high-tech excellence can be established.
Millions of trees can be planted to produce a new
climate. We can make green our arid lands. We can
become contributors, not dependants.
The call of the future cannot be harmonized with
the voices of the past. Only new solutions can evoke a
grandeur equal to the past. We do not have the right to
suspend it in the face of our children. Young Israelis
and young Palestinians are entitled to a new life — a
life of their own. While fighting terror, let us not fight
people. While seeking freedom, let us not extend
subjugation.
I should like to direct a comment to Syria. The
same principle that enabled us both to participate in the
Madrid conference a decade ago is still valid.
A word to Lebanon: Israel is committed to the
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Israel respects its need
for real political independence. Lebanon should not
permit Hezbollah to destroy its own country. Hezbollah
is not a party, it is a dangerous agenda. Lebanon should
immediately free Israeli prisoners and prisoners of war.
The people of the Middle East should let bygones
be bygones. Let us return to our traditions, where
prophets, not terrorists, told the future. Let us return to
our landscape, where the blue skies did not surrender to
the heavy clouds of despair; to a time when justice
promised equal opportunities for individuals and for
nations. Let us join, together, the march of mankind
towards new discoveries that will make life more
purposeful and may bring security to posterity.
We were born in the cradles of hope, not in the
tombs of despair. We guard our spiritual heritage, and
it is not antithetical to building a new Middle East. The
world is new.
I should like to conclude with an old verse from
our scriptures:
“The Lord led Adam through the Garden of
Eden and said to him, ‘All I created, I created for
you. Beware lest you spoil and destroy my world,
for if you spoil it, there is no one to repair it after
you'.”
We are here to repair.











﻿Mr. President, may I
begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency and assure you of New Zealand's
cooperation during your term of office.
13

The opening of this, the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, came just one day after the
anniversary of the terrorist attack of 11 September
2001, which shocked this city and the international
community. The premeditated and callous mass murder
of 3,000 people from 79 different countries was a sharp
warning to us of the ongoing threats to peace and
stability in our world. It was to protect humanity
against such threats that the nations of the world came
together in 1945 to establish this Organization in the
belief that collective action was necessary to guarantee
global peace.
Today, in the second year of a new millennium,
the need to act multilaterally is greater than ever
before. Terrorism, weapons of mass destruction,
environmental degradation, people-smuggling, drug-
trafficking, diseases such as HIV/AIDS and the
unsustainable depletion of our natural resources are all
global matters that require a collective response.
We can be proud that a year ago the response by
the United Nations to a new and unprecedented level of
terrorism was immediate, united and effective. The
primary victim of the attack, the United States, sought
and secured international cooperation that achieved the
incapacitation of the Al Qaeda terrorist organization
and the removal of the Taliban regime that had hosted
it. It was a model for international unity of purpose and
multilateral action. It was a lesson that should not be
forgotten as this Organization tackles other problems
confronting humanity.
New Zealand has worked wholeheartedly under
the mandate provided by the United Nations to defeat
terrorism. We have introduced legislation to deny
terrorist organizations funding and resources in line
with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We have
sought to assist our neighbours in the Pacific to do the
same. We have committed peacekeeping personnel to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
combat forces under Operation Enduring Freedom in
Afghanistan. But we are also aware that actions to
suppress terrorism must be accompanied by measures
to tackle the causes of terrorism. Injustice, lack of
opportunity, hopelessness, desperation and the failure
of legitimate channels to redress grievances all give
rise to resort to terrorist actions.
The failure to resolve differences between Israeli
and Palestinian people in the Middle East continues to
be a catalyst for recruitment into terrorism. The
Secretary-General, in opening this session, spelled out
the basis for resolving the dispute. He referred to land
for peace, an end to terror and to occupation, and to
two States, Israel and Palestine, with secure and
recognized borders. Both peoples are destined to live
side by side. Both will benefit from an end to violence
and a negotiated settlement. But agreement requires
good faith from each side and a determined effort by
the international community. We fully endorse the
Secretary-General's renewed call for an international
peace conference. Progress on this issue is now more
vital than ever.
The situation in Iraq is also a threat to world
peace, but we must look for solutions that will resolve
and do not exacerbate that threat. No nation can be
exempt from the requirement to comply with the
resolutions passed by this Organization. That is
necessary if the rule of law is to apply internationally.
No nation can be allowed to commit aggression or to
use weapons of mass destruction against its own
people. The requirement to comply with United
Nations resolutions is not the instruction of one
country to Iraq; it is collective instruction that should
have the unanimous endorsement of all Member
countries.
Iraq's non-compliance with Security Council
resolutions is a challenge to the entire United Nations
membership. The United Nations must meet this
challenge. How the situation is resolved matters to us
all, not least the countries of the region itself.
Those who can exercise influence over Iraq
should do so to avoid the need for resort to other
actions. The response chosen by the Security Council
must, however, take into account the need not to
impose further costs on ordinary Iraqi people innocent
of any wrongdoing. The response should not involve
actions that undermine, rather than strengthen, the war
against terrorism.
The United Nations has shown that collective
action can save lives and help rebuild nations. We will
soon welcome the world's newest nation, East Timor,
into the United Nations, and we should celebrate the
success of the United Nations peacekeeping mission
and Transitional Administration in that country. I
congratulate Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-
General's former Special Representative, on his role,
and I thank those countries that contributed so much to
14

giving hope and opportunity to the people of that small
country.
New Zealand has had a battalion of peacekeepers
deployed in East Timor since September 1999, and also
has peacekeepers serving in 12 other countries. We are
proud that they have performed their role with
professionalism and respect for the people in whose
countries they operate. Notwithstanding the small size
of our population, New Zealand currently is the
twenty-second-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping personnel.
The promotion of human rights is another area
where multilateral action by the international
community is essential. In the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and in the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the United Nations has set
out universal standards for the observance of human
rights. There is no justification for any country to
deviate from those human rights standards. It is a mark
of shame that States Members of this Organization
continue to breach basic human rights and a disgrace
that other countries too often act as apologists for the
offending regimes.
An important landmark in the last year has been
the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. As the culmination of
longstanding efforts by non-governmental
organizations, Governments and the international
community as a whole, it offers the prospect of
bringing justice to the victims of the most horrific
crimes known to humankind and bringing their
perpetrators to justice. It will serve as a deterrent where
none has existed before. We have listened carefully to
those who argue that the Court is not necessary and
that it unduly jeopardizes their peacekeepers, but we
cannot agree. The status quo, relying on domestic
jurisdiction alone, has failed humankind throughout
history and has borne witness to appalling crimes. The
new regime has carefully built-in safeguards to protect
the innocent.
We were dismayed by the actions of the Security
Council in July. At that time, we challenged both the
legitimacy and the substance of the Council's action.
We do not believe that it was consistent with the Rome
Statute or that the Council is able to arrogate to itself
the power to change treaty relationships.
A further issue on which greater progress must be
made is that of disarmament. The fact that humanity
survived the nightmare of potential nuclear destruction
during the cold war cannot be allowed to make us
complacent about ongoing threats from weapons of
mass destruction.
We welcome the Treaty of Moscow and the
agreement between Russia and the United States to cut
the number of strategic nuclear weapons each country
deploys. These reductions, however, are not a
substitute for irreversible cuts in, and the total
elimination of, those weapons.
In some respects even greater danger is posed by
short-range tactical nuclear weapons. There is a real
risk that these could be launched by accident or in
confusion, with no time available for communication
between opposing sides.
Over the last year, two significant events have
made our world a most dangerous place. The first is the
emergence of international terrorist groups that have
shown their willingness to use weapons of mass
destruction — biological, chemical or nuclear —
should they gain access to them.
The second is the situation in South Asia, where
the world recently came close to direct conflict
between two countries with nuclear capability. The
international community has not done enough to reduce
those risks.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has
not been brought into effect. Progress towards the
implementation of undertakings made by nuclear-
weapon States at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference has stalled. Nations have not taken
sufficient steps to stop the production of fissile
material and to reduce stocks.
In this and in many other areas much more needs
to be done to address growing problems that affect all
of us. The awful toll of HIV/AIDS, slowness in
response to global warming and the growth in the
smuggling and trafficking of people are but three
further examples.
It is essential that we renew our commitment to
multilateralism as the best way to address global
problems. That requires not simply money but, must
importantly, political will. It is not a case of putting
global interests ahead of national interests. Global
15

interests are national interests. The United Nations is
our most valuable international organization, but we
need to do more to enhance its relevance, value and its
unique authority. All of us are stakeholders in its
success.







﻿One year has passed since the tragic events
that took place on 11 September 2001 in the United
States of America shook the world and demonstrated
the magnitude and brutality of the global threat of
international terrorism. During the past year the world
became fully aware of the challenges that humankind
was facing as we entered the twenty-first century. It
was a year during which the international community
came together and began to take decisive action against
terrorism.
While paying tribute to the memory of all of the
victims of the terrorism that has left a bloody trail
throughout the world, we must now take stock of the
initial results of the joint anti-terrorist campaign and,
most important, outline our objectives in strengthening
the foundations of international security and stability.
The most important outcome of the coming
together of States to achieve common goals 
unprecedented since the Second World War  is clear
today. A broad international anti-terrorist coalition has
been established and is actively functioning; it has
already demonstrated its effectiveness in Afghanistan,
a country that international terrorists of various
affiliations had transformed into their own personal
lair. Our common objective is not only to preserve the
experience of interaction acquired within the
framework of the coalition  avoiding such unilateral
actions as might undermine it  but also to transform
the anti-terrorist alliance into a supportive mechanism
of effective security and cooperation for the new
millennium.
The United Nations must certainly be a pivotal
element of such a mechanism. Indeed, the United
Nations is called upon to continue to guarantee that, in
combating new threats and challenges, the efforts of
20

the international community rest on a solid basis of
international law.
We must acknowledge  and the past year has
been very instructive in this regard  that a great deal
of hard work awaits us. It will be possible to put
insurmountable obstacles in the way of fanatics and
extremists who spread death and destruction only if we
can reach general agreement on core issues relating to
the world order. In this context, the role of the United
Nations is, indeed, irreplaceable.
The fact that the process of implementing the
fundamental anti-terrorist resolution  Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001)  is under way is of
critical importance. That resolution is binding on all
States, and we must now seek to achieve its
unconditional implementation by all States.
A priority task in the war on terrorism is the
strengthening of its international legal framework. First
and foremost, there is a need to ensure the genuinely
universal character of existing anti-terrorist
conventions.
Having ratified the 1999 Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, Russia is
now completing the process of accession to those
international instruments. At the same time, we are
seriously concerned about the lack of real progress in
negotiating a comprehensive convention on combating
terrorism and a convention on the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism.
The well-known differences in the approaches of
States to the provisions of such instruments could
certainly be fully reconciled. They should not
overshadow the objective, which is pressing for all of
us, of establishing a legal basis to counter terrorism in
all its manifestations  a basis that would be in
keeping with the realities of today's world. Russia is
continuing to make resolute efforts to achieve that
objective.
It is the obligation of all States to protect the
rights and freedoms of their citizens, the most
important of these being the right to life. But it is
precisely the lives of ordinary people that are
threatened by terrorists, and each year new names are
added to the list of victims. The international
community can no longer tolerate this. It is our
obligation to provide our citizens with the right to
reliable protection against terrorism.
Such an objective can be achieved only if all
States agree on a range of specific measures under
United Nations auspices. There is now a need to draw
up an effective code to protect human rights against
terrorism. Some of these measures have already been
discussed by the international community, including in
this forum. Others will require consideration in a
broader context. The most important consideration,
however, is that we should agree on a unified system of
values and measures shared by all States.
The results of the war against terrorism will be
tangible only if we act in concert at all levels  global,
regional and national. The anti-terrorist cooperation
mechanisms aimed at preventing the spread of
terrorism in Central Asia, including those within the
framework of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, are
gaining momentum and thus provide clear evidence of
that fact. There is a great deal of potential in the new
partnership between Russia and the countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The field of anti-terrorism is an integral part of
our continuous dialogue and cooperation with the
leading countries of the world, including the United
States, China, India and the States members of the
European Union. We are confident that the
development of such interaction at many levels will
promote a climate of confidence, security and
cooperation in all parts of the world.
The stability and credibility of the emerging
international system of the twenty-first century will
depend directly on the maintenance and strengthening
of strategic stability. This fundamental objective was
advanced by the signing, by the Presidents of Russia
and of the United States, at their May meeting in
Moscow, of the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty,
which was a specific, major contribution by the leading
nuclear Powers to nuclear disarmament.
It is also very important to ensure the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
danger of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or
their components falling into the irresponsible hands of
terrorists increases international terrorism's potential to
cause devastation. This means that there is a need to
step up efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery vehicles.
21

By acting jointly and responsibly, we have
already achieved a great deal. When we speak about
the establishment of new regimes for the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and for
arms control, we by no means wish to imply a
renunciation of regimes and agreements already in
effect. They are our shared protective mechanism  a
mechanism that is very reliable and has stood the test
of time. Unjustified removal of the key elements of the
international legal framework of non-proliferation can
aggravate the international military and strategic
situation and undermine global security.
Furthermore, we should universalize' the most
important agreements on non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and on comprehensive nuclear test ban. The
missile sphere needs a sustainable negotiating process
aimed at concluding an international arrangement on a
global regime of missile and missile technology non-
proliferation.
The prevention of the deployment of weapons in
outer space forms an integral part of the non-
proliferation process. Together with a number of our
partners we suggest that a comprehensive agreement be
worked out aimed at preserving outer space as a zone
free from any kind of weapons. We are confident that
this proposal serves the interests of all States, and
expect that it will enjoy wide support.
Since its establishment, the United Nations has
been engaged in the settlement of regional conflicts.
Those so-called local problems have long turned into
one of the main threats to international stability.
Terrorism, political extremism, and economic and
social degradation are their customary companions.
Certainly, the primary responsibility in any settlement
rests with the relevant parties, but multilateral
mechanisms have also repeatedly demonstrated their
effectiveness in the restoration of peace and concord. A
tangible progress made with the United Nations visible
involvement in the post-Taliban reconstruction of
Afghanistan is one of our common accomplishments.
We can add to this the adoption by the United Nations
Security Council of major practical decisions in
support of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East and the resolution of crises in a number of African
countries.
And yet, we are still far from a radical decrease in
the number and intensity of armed conflicts. Hard
work, requiring great human as well as material and
financial resources, is awaiting us. But the most
important here is the presence of a strong political will
to implement the provisions of the United Nations
Charter pertaining to the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Experience shows that no matter how complex
international crises and conflicts may be, whatever
challenges and threats they may be fraught with, they
can be settled with the aid of United Nations
instruments and on the basis of international law. This
fully applies to the situation around Iraq, which has
long required political settlement in strict compliance
with the Security Council resolutions.
The entire international community benefits from
a steady enhancement of the leading role of our
Organization in peacemaking. We cannot relax our
attention to this task.
At all times and throughout the world, terrorism
and extremism have tried to justify themselves with
continuous social and economic instability and poverty.
While recognizing the existence of these serious
problems we should state most resolutely that terrorism
does not and will not have any justification. At the
same time, the creation of a sustainable and fair global
financial and economic structure would, certainly, help
combat many dangerous challenges to mankind. The
latest major international forums  the International
Conference on Financing for Development
in Monterey, World Food Summit in Rome,
World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg  adopted decisions designed to uproot
the causes of the most threatening disparities in the
world. The next step is to implement the agreements
we have reached.
Equally sweeping are the tasks that face us in the
field of environmental protection. Natural disasters that
afflicted many regions of our planet this summer have
demonstrated again that the solution of environmental
issues cannot be put off unless we want to endanger the
very survival of future generations. This sphere also
depends on multilateral efforts that exclude the egoism
of individual States.
The initiative of Russian President Vladimir V.
Putin on holding in autumn 2003 a World Conference
on Climate Change in Moscow is designed to
coordinate our efforts in this field.
22

A year ago, the Russian Federation called on the
international community from the podium of the
United Nations General Assembly to create a global
system of counteraction to present-day threats and
challenges that would be aimed at tackling real issues
in the sphere of security and at meeting the vital
interests of each and every State. This system would
provide for long-term international stability and
sustainable development.
To be efficient, such a system needs a generally
recognized coordinating centre capable of rallying the
international community. And we do have such a
centre  the United Nations with its unique
legitimacy, universality and experience. Our common
task is to unite around the United Nations to provide it
with the necessary potential and resources and to
develop as much as possible its internal reserves.
Today, we can state with satisfaction that the
global system is already evolving and the beginning of
this process is largely successful. We suggest that an
additional impetus should be given to this process and
a resolution to encourage a most prompt creation of a
global system of counteraction to present-day threats
and challenges should be adopted at this session of the
General Assembly. By doing so, we will direct all
States towards the joint elaboration of its general shape
and parameters. This is even more relevant because
some of its parameters are already visible.
It is apparent that the system to be created must
be:
ñ Global, as modern challenges in the context of
globalization pose a universal threat, and should
be addressed at the global level.
ñ Comprehensive in scope, as each of the modern
threats bears a huge destructive potential and all
such problems without exceptions should be
embraced by the system.
ñ Holistic in approach, as quite often the new
threats and challenges are directly interrelated.
ñ Universal in participation.
Finally, the system should become a reflection of
the international rule of law, as its power will be built
on principles and regulations of international law, the
United Nations Charter above all.
We bear grave responsibility to future
generations, and the model of world order we will
establish is destined to influence the life on our planet
for decades. As for Russia, we have made our choice.
This is the choice in favour of a democratic, multi-
polar world order, which would guarantee sustainable
development and equal security for all States; a world
order formed on the basis of the extensive structure of
multilateral institutions integrated within the
framework of the United Nations.
We hope that the decisions of this General
Assembly session will mark an important stage of this
process.



﻿We meet one year and one day
after a terrorist attack brought grief to my country and
brought grief to many citizens of our world. Yesterday,
we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible
morning. Today we turn to the urgent duty of
protecting other lives without illusion and without fear.
We have accomplished much in the last year — in
Afghanistan and beyond. We have much yet to do — in
Afghanistan and beyond. Many nations represented
here have joined in the fight against global terror, and
the people of the United States are grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that
survived a world war — the hope of a world moving
towards justice, escaping old patterns of conflict and
fear. The founding Members resolved that the peace of
the world must never again be destroyed by the will
and the wickedness of any man. We created the United
Nations Security Council so that, unlike the League of
Nations, our deliberations would be more than talk, our
resolutions would be more than wishes. After
generations of deceitful dictators, broken treaties and
squandered lives, we dedicated ourselves to standards
of human dignity, shared by all, and to a system of
security defended by all.
Today, these standards, and this security, are
challenged.
Our commitment to human dignity is challenged
by persistent poverty and raging disease. The suffering
is great, and our responsibilities are clear. The United
States is joining with the world to supply aid where it
reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and
the prosperity it brings, and to bring medical care
where it is desperately needed.
As a symbol of our commitment to human
dignity, the United States will return to the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). This organization has been
reformed, and America will participate fully in its
mission to advance human rights, tolerance and
learning.
Our common security is challenged by regional
conflicts — ethnic and religious strife that is ancient,
but not inevitable. In the Middle East, there can be no
peace for either side without freedom for both sides.
America stands committed to an independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Like all other people, Palestinians
deserve a government that serves their interests and
listens to their voices. My nation will continue to
encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities
as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the
conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are
challenged today by outlaw groups and regimes that
accept no law of morality and have no limit to their
violent ambitions. In the attacks on America a year
ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies.
This threat hides within many nations, including my
own. In cells and camps, terrorists are plotting further
destruction and are building new bases for their war
against civilization. And our greatest fear is that
terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions
when an outlaw regime supplies them with the
technologies enabling them to kill on a massive scale.
In one place, in one regime, we find all these
dangers, in their most lethal and aggressive forms —
exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations
was born to confront. Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded
Kuwait without provocation. And the regime's forces
were poised to continue their march to seize other
countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein
been appeased instead of stopped, he would have
endangered the peace and stability of the world. Yet,
this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition
forces and the will of the United Nations.
In order to suspend hostilities and to spare
himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of
commitments. The terms were clear to him, and to all.
And he agreed to prove that he is complying with every
one of those obligations. He has proven instead only
his contempt for the United Nations and for all his
pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions
and by his cruelties, Saddam Hussein has made the
case against himself.
In 1991, Security Council resolution 688 (1991)
demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once the
repression of its own people, including the systematic
repression of minorities, which the Council said,
“threaten[ed] international peace and security in the
region”.
This demand goes ignored. Last year, the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq
continues to commit extremely grave violations of
human rights and that the regime's repression is all
pervasive. Tens of thousands of political opponents and
7

ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest
and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by
beating, burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation
and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands;
children in the presence of their parents; and all of
these horrors are concealed from the world by the
apparatus of a totalitarian State.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through its resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991),
demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait
and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this
promise. Last year the Secretary-General's high-level
coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti, Saudi,
Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini,
and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for — more
than 600 people. One American pilot is among them.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through resolution 687 (1991), demanded that Iraq
renounce all involvement with terrorism and permit no
terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq's regime
agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), Iraq continues to
shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct
violence against Iran, Israel, and Western
Governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for
murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Emir
of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq's
Government openly praised the attacks of 11
September. Al-Qaida terrorists have escaped from
Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq.
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and to
stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and
long-range missiles, and to prove to the world it has
done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq
has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge.
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had
no biological weapons. After a senior official in its
weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the
regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of
litres of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for
use in Scud missile warheads, aerial bombs and aircraft
spray tanks. United Nations inspectors believe Iraq has
produced two to four times the amount of biological
agents it declared and has failed to account for more
than three metric tons of material that could be used to
produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is
expanding and improving facilities that were used for
the production of biological weapons.
United Nations inspections also reveal that Iraq
likely maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard and other
chemical agents, and that the regime is rebuilding and
expanding facilities capable of producing chemical
weapons.
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq
finally admitted that it had had a crash nuclear
weapons programme prior to the Gulf war. We know
now that, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq
would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later
than 1993.
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important
information about its nuclear programme: weapons
design, procurement logs, experiment data, an
accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of
foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear
scientists and technicians. It retains physical
infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq
has made several attempts to buy high-strength
aluminium tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear
weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would
be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And
Iraq's State-controlled media have reported numerous
meetings between Saddam Hussein and his nuclear
scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued
appetite for these weapons.
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles
with ranges beyond the 150 kilometres permitted by the
United Nations. Work at testing and production
facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range
missiles that can inflict mass death throughout the
region.
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the
world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Those
sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the
regime's compliance with Security Council resolutions.
In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy
food. Saddam Hussein has subverted that programme,
working around the sanctions to buy missile
technology and military materials. He blames the
suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even
as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for
himself and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to
comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for
the hunger and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens.
In 1991, Iraq promised United Nations inspectors
immediate and unrestricted access to verify Iraq's
commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass
8

destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke that
promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading and
harassing United Nations inspectors before ceasing
cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991
ceasefire, the Security Council twice renewed its
demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with
inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of its
obligations. The Security Council again renewed that
demand in 1994 and twice more in 1996, deploring
Iraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security
Council renewed its demand three more times in 1997,
citing flagrant violations, and three more times in
1998, calling Iraq's behaviour totally unacceptable.
And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again.
As we meet today, it has been almost four years
since the last United Nations inspector set foot in
Iraq — four years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to
build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. We know
that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder
even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to
assume that he stopped when they left? The history, the
logic and the facts lead to one conclusion. Saddam
Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger. To
suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To
assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of
millions and the peace of the world in a reckless
gamble. And that is a risk we must not take.
We have been more than patient. We have tried
sanctions. We have tried the carrot of oil-for-food and
the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam
Hussein has defied all those efforts and continues to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The first time we
may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is
when, God forbid, he uses one. We owe it to all our
citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that
day from coming.
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the
authority of the United Nations and a threat to peace.
Iraq has answered a decade of United Nations demands
with a decade of defiance. All the world now faces a
test and the United Nations a difficult and defining
moment. Are Security Council resolutions to be
honoured and enforced or cast aside without
consequence? Will the United Nations serve the
purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant?
The United States helped found the United
Nations. We want the United Nations to be effective
and respected and successful. We want the resolutions
of the world's most important multilateral body to be
enforced, and right now those resolutions are being
unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our
partnership of nations can meet the test before us by
making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose
and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction,
long-range missiles and all related material.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all support for terrorism and act to
suppress it, as all States are required to do by Security
Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease
persecution of its civilian population, including Shia,
Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans and others — again, as
required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or
account for all Gulf war personnel whose fate is still
unknown. It will return the remains of any who are
deceased, return stolen property, accept liability for
losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait and fully
cooperate with international efforts to resolve those
issues, as required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food
programme. It will accept United Nations
administration of funds from that programme, to ensure
that the money is used fairly and promptly for the
benefit of the Iraqi people.
If all those steps are taken, it will signal a new
openness and accountability in Iraq. And it could open
the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a
Government that represents all Iraqis — a Government
based on respect for human rights, economic liberty
and internationally supervised elections.
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi
people. They have suffered too long in silent captivity.
Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a
great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it. The
security of all nations requires it.
Free societies do not intimidate through cruelty
and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the
world with mass murder. The United States supports
political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq.
9

We can harbour no illusions, and that is important
today to remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in
1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He has fired ballistic
missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Israel.
His regime once ordered the killing of every person
between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish
villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians
and 40 Iraqi villages.
My nation will work with the Security Council to
meet our common challenge. If Iraq's regime defies us
again, the world must move deliberately and decisively
to hold Iraq to account. We will work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions. But the purposes
of the United States should not be doubted. The
Security Council resolutions will be enforced, and the
just demands of peace and security will be met, or
action will be unavoidable, and a regime that has lost
its legitimacy will also lose its power.
Events can turn in one of two ways.
If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people
of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. The
regime will have new power to bully, dominate and
conquer its neighbours, condemning the Middle East to
more years of bloodshed and fear. The region will
remain unstable, with little hope of freedom, and
isolated from the progress of our times. With every step
the Iraqi regime takes towards gaining and deploying
the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront
that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regime
were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies, then
the attacks of 11 September would be a prelude to far
greater horrors.
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome
this danger, we can arrive at a very different future.
The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They
can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a
democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the
Muslim world. These nations can show by their
example that honest government, respect for women,
and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph
in the Middle East and beyond. We will show that the
promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our
time.
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have
been set before us. We must choose between a world of
fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and
do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand up for
our security and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States
of America will make that stand. Representatives to the
United Nations have the power to make that stand as
well.




﻿I would like to join in thanking
the outgoing President of the General Assembly for the
diligent manner in which he managed the affairs of the
Assembly. I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for taking over the leadership of the
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. We hope that you
will have a successful tenure in your stewardship of
this important body.
Allow us to also welcome Switzerland and East
Timor to membership of the United Nations.
Two years ago, the world's political leaders met
at this place and, through the historic United Nations
Millennium Declaration, reaffirmed our faith in the
United Nations Organization and its Charter as
indispensable foundations of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. That an unprecedented
number of heads of State and Government had gathered
at the United Nations to make that commitment to
cooperation among the peoples of the world — to
peace, prosperity and justice throughout our
universe — gave hope to the billions throughout the
world who know the painful meaning of oppression by
10

another, of war and violent conflict, of poverty and
injustice.
None of those who spoke from this podium knew
that a year after they had pledged to use their energies
and talents to provide a meaningful life for all, peace in
this country and the rest of the world would be brutally
challenged by the murderous terrorist attack of 11
September. We meet a day after the anniversary of that
fateful 11 September. We have a collective duty to
reaffirm our united resolve to create a world free of the
fear of terrorism. We have a common task to ensure
that this Organization truly lives up to its obligations to
do all the things that make for peace. We have a solemn
obligation to give real meaning to the message of hope
we proclaimed in the Millennium Declaration. It may
be that future generations will say that if we have
learned anything at all from the horrendous events of
11 September, it is that the General Assembly should
dedicate its efforts to the accomplishment of these
tasks.
In keeping with that perspective, we have come to
the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
report that the peoples of Africa have risen to those
challenges by forming the African Union. Our Union is
based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It results from the transformation of
the Organization of African Unity, which championed
the cause of the unity and independence of Africa for
nearly 40 years. The African Union is Africa's
practical and determined response to its past and
present, in favour of peace and stability, democracy
and human rights, cooperation, development,
prosperity and human dignity. Its programme for the
socio-economic revitalization of our continent is the
New Partnership for Africa's Development, which must
help us to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment
throughout Africa and, within the context of the
African Union, end Africa's humiliation as an object of
charity.
Clearly, the objectives of the African Union and
the programme enunciated in the New Partnership
essentially, and of necessity, seek to advance the aims
contained in the Millennium Development Goals.
Naturally, the United Nations — as an Organization
seized of the task to address the critical issues of peace,
human rights and poverty eradication within the
framework of sustainable development — will forever
be central to the success of the African Union and the
accomplishment of the goals of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development. Accordingly, on behalf of
the united peoples of Africa, we are honoured and
privileged to commend to this Organization both the
African Union and the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. We are convinced that with the support
of the United Nations, we will transform this into an
African century.
We are happy that there are encouraging peace
processes in Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan, with the Comoros already
having held successful elections. We are particularly
pleased because these positive developments will
create the possibility for millions of our fellow
Africans to reaffirm the sanctity of human life and
security and to engage in the important tasks of
rebuilding their countries to bring about a better life for
all.
As part of our commitment to wage a sustained
struggle to realize the long-deferred hopes of the
peoples of Africa, we have agreed to the establishment
of various institutions, including a peer-review
mechanism, which must help us ensure that we honour
our commitments to democracy, human rights and good
governance. I am confident that the United Nations will
work closely with the African Union and that this
premier Organization of the peoples of the world will
use its vast and invaluable experience to ensure that the
African Union delivers on the important and pressing
duty of achieving sustainable development in each and
every country on our continent.
Together, the agencies of the United Nations and
the organs of the African Union must give priority to
such matters as human resources development and
capacity-building, modernizing Africa's economy,
dealing decisively with the intolerable debt burden,
ensuring access of our products to the markets of the
developed world, spreading the emancipation and
empowerment of women, combating communicable
and other diseases — including AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis — and fighting against environmental
degradation.
At the end of August and the beginning of this
month, the people of South Africa and Africa were
honoured to host the World Summit for Sustainable
Development. A number of far-reaching decisions were
taken at that important Summit to ensure that we will
bequeath to the next generations a better, humane and
equitable world based on what we agree are the
11

inseparable pillars of sustainable development:
economic development, social development and
environmental protection. Delegates from around the
world enshrined the decisions they took in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development
to ensure that the billions of people who have placed
their fate on our collective shoulders have a concrete
programme of action to realize the goals contained in
Agenda 21 and other documents adopted by the world
community of nations during the last 10 years.
The Johannesburg Summit confronted the stark
reality that billions of people across the world are poor,
and it boldly confirmed the need for us to collaborate
for a shared human prosperity through sustainable
development. We agree that this goal can be achieved
because we are inspired by the knowledge that the
resources needed exist within the global community.
Indeed, Member States have already committed
themselves to make available the means necessary for
the implementation of our plans, especially finance,
technology and capacity-building.
It is critically important that we implement
everything we agreed, acting with the necessary sense
of urgency. Again, this we will do together, under the
leadership of the United Nations, while we continue to
strengthen the multilateral system of global governance
as the only viable international response to all our
challenges. Fundamentally, this is the only credible
response to the challenge of globalization and the need
to enhance human solidarity to meet our common
needs.
It has been our privilege to chair the Non-Aligned
Movement for the past four years. During that time, the
Movement has ensured constant dialogue between the
countries of the North and South, which has advanced
the commonality of interest between States, confirming
the view that the future of all humanity is interlinked.
We are pleased that the views of the Movement have
helped to inform the advance towards a better life for
all, to which we have all committed ourselves by word
and deed.
In February next year, Malaysia will assume the
responsibility of guiding our Movement as it responds
to the changed and changing global environment. I am
certain that this will add new strength to the Non-
Aligned Movement in the interests of all humanity,
especially the poor of the world. As before, the Non-
Aligned Movement is committed to the peaceful
resolution of all conflicts, including those pertaining to
Palestine and Israel, as well as Iraq, in keeping with the
resolutions of the United Nations. These are urgent
tasks to which the Organization must respond.
In conclusion, let me recall that two years ago in
the Millennium Declaration more than 150 heads of
State or Government resolved that “we believe that the
central challenge we face today is to ensure that
globalization becomes a positive force for all the
world's people” (resolution 55/2, para. 5). Through
both our global and our regional programmes we can
and must ensure that globalization indeed becomes a
valuable process which will bring about sustainable
development and prosperity for all.
From this fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly must surely issue the unequivocal message
that the peoples of the world are united in their resolve
to sustain the message of hope by advancing the goals
of peace, of democracy, of prosperity and of
sustainable development.





﻿First of all, Sir, please allow me to offer my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the current session of the General Assembly. I wish
also to express my gratitude to Mr. Han Seung-soo,
President of the previous session of the Assembly.
I wish to congratulate the Swiss Confederation on
having joined the United Nations and also to welcome
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, which will
soon become a Member of the Organization.
The opening of this session coincides with the
first anniversary of the events of 11 September. Over
the past year, the international campaign against
terrorism has made headway, and now we should not
only ponder ways to eradicate the global scourge of
terrorism, but also take a broader view of the security
issues facing humankind and seek to achieve lasting
peace and universal security.
At present, the international security situation is
undergoing profound changes. Security has begun to
take on wider connotations. While traditional military
antagonism and conflicts have yet to be eliminated, a
variety of non-traditional security concerns have
become increasingly prominent. Security is no longer a
purely military concern. It has permeated politics,
economics, finance, science, technology, culture and
many other areas.
Security is no longer a zero-sum game. Its
mutuality is obviously on the increase, as countries
have come to realize that they have common security
interests and feel a greater sense of interdependence.
We must overhaul the tools at our disposal to
achieve security. Military means alone have proved
inadequate in meeting the massive and complex
security challenges facing us. The indiscriminate use of
force can only lead to greater trouble in our world.
This new situation calls for new ideas in the area
of safeguarding security. We in China believe in a new
security concept that features mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation.
By mutual trust, we mean that countries should
rise above their differing ideologies and social systems,
abandon the cold-war mentality and the power politics
mindset, and refrain from harbouring suspicion and
hostility towards each other. They should hold frequent
dialogues and mutual briefings on their security and
defence policies or on the major actions they are about
to take.
By mutual benefit, we mean that a country should
respect the security interests of others while pursuing
its own, and also help to create conditions for
enhancing the security of others while making itself
more secure  thus achieving universal security.
By equality, we mean that all countries  large
or small, strong or weak  should respect each other,
treat each other as equals and refrain from interfering
in each other's internal affairs, so that international
relations can become more democratized.
By cooperation, we mean that countries should
resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations,
engage in extensive and close cooperation on their
shared security concerns and work to prevent wars and
conflicts.
All in all, our new security concept is aimed at
increasing mutual trust through dialogue and at
promoting common security through cooperation.
It is in the spirit of this new security concept that
we in China have been working hard to promote
mechanisms for a regional security dialogue and
cooperation, actively participating in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and in the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum,
and endeavouring to establish an Asia-Pacific security
framework that is for dialogue and against
confrontation.
China is actively committed to international arms
control, disarmament and the non-proliferation process.
Not long ago, the Chinese Government promulgated
the Regulations on Export Controls of Missiles and
Related Items and Technologies and its Control List.
The Chinese Government will make further
improvements on its export-management mechanisms
for biological and chemical dual-use items. We call on
the international community actively to undertake
dialogue and cooperation in the spirit of this new
security concept, in a joint effort to tackle the major
security concerns of the day.
We should press ahead with international
cooperation against terrorism and curb the threat of
international terrorism once and for all.
Counter-terrorism should be pursued on the basis
of international law and of the norms governing
16

international relations, allowing the United Nations and
its Security Council to play a leading role. It should
take a comprehensive approach, with a focus on
eliminating the root causes of terrorism. Efforts should
be made to prevent the arbitrary enlargement of the
scope of the counter-terrorism campaign, but proven
terrorists, including the East Turkestan terrorist
forces  trained, armed and bankrolled by the Taliban
and Al Qaeda  must be resolutely stamped out.
We should step up dialogue and reconciliation
processes and facilitate the settlement of regional hot-
spot issues.
China supports the Palestinian people and their
just cause to regain their legitimate national rights and
to establish their own State. We support the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the principle of land
for peace. We are opposed to violence targeting
innocent civilians, and we reject responding to violence
with violence.
We stand for a political settlement of the question
of Iraq. The United Nations should play an important
role in this regard. Iraq should implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions in a faithful and strict
manner.
We hope that India and Pakistan will soon resume
dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect
and resolve all their differences, including that over
Kashmir, through peaceful means.
We will continue to work constructively for a
lasting peace in Afghanistan and its post-war
rehabilitation. We support the important role of the
United Nations in this regard.
We should strengthen exchanges and dialogues
among different civilizations and thereby avert conflict
or confrontation. Differences among diverse
civilizations are a basic characteristic of humanity.
We have every reason to treat the achievements of
various civilizations kindly and to promote exchanges
among them on the basis of respect for diversity.
Everyone is encouraged to draw upon the strength of
others with a view to realizing common development.
Peace and development go hand in hand. Many of
the problems we face today may be development-
related. In coping with these challenges, it is all the
more important to look to development for answers. In
the past year, the United Nations has held a series of
important meetings on development such as the World
Summit on Sustainable Development. What is needed,
right now, is to translate the programmes and
commitments into reality.
In the past year, regional economic cooperation
has continued to move forward. We feel especially
happy about the launching of the African Union,
convinced that Africa will now take fresh strides on the
road to development. At present, our development
tasks have become more pressing. The widening wealth
gap in the world must be reversed. Frequent economic
and social shocks must be dealt with. The sharpening
clashes between economic development, on the one
hand, and resources and the environment, on the other,
must be allayed. The international order and the rules
of the game, which do not fairly reflect the needs of
developing countries, must be changed.
We would like to make the following
propositions. First, to establish a global partnership
geared to development. Governments, international
organizations, transnational corporations and non-
governmental groups are all parties to the cause of
development. The North and the South, the aid-
recipient countries and international aid institutions,
should be equal and cooperative partners in dealing
with the global economic slowdown. The developed
countries ought to lend developing countries a helping
hand. The new round of multilateral trade talks should
be seized as an important opportunity for forging such
a new partnership.
Secondly, to promote a balanced and steady
development in the context of economic globalization.
The international community needs to reform current
roles in the world economy, strengthen guidance and
management of the globalization process and promote
a win-win situation and coexistence among countries.
Thirdly, to strengthen the developing countries'
capacity for self-development. Developing countries
should opt for a development path suited to them and
strive to catch up with the tide of global economic
development. The international community should
respect the right of developing countries to
independently choose a development path, and help
them with capacity-building.
Fourthly, in order to continue on the path of
sustainable development, we should promote a
balanced development of the economy, population,
resources and the environment. Efforts to address the
17

environmental problems of individual countries should
be combined with those aimed at global concerns.
Fifthly, to enhance comprehensive development of the
people. Human resources are the primary resources for
advancing science and technology and for realizing
economic and social development. In formulating
development strategies, countries should make the
people their top priority and main beneficiary.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold its
sixteenth national Congress, the very first in the new
century. Standing in the forefront of the historical tide
and displaying a spirit of progressing with the times,
this party Congress will draw up a new blueprint for
accelerating socialist modernization in China. Our
guiding thought is to consistently represent the
development requirements of China's advanced
productive forces, represent the orientation of China's
advanced culture and represent the fundamental
interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese
people. Our historic mission is to accelerate the drive
for modernization, complete the reunification of the
motherland, maintain world peace and promote
common development.
The first 10 to 20 years of this century present
China with an important strategic window of
opportunity for its development. While taking
development as our number one priority, we must grasp
the opportunities, deepen reform, open the country still
wider to the outside world, promote development and
maintain stability.
We will continue to pursue an independent
foreign policy of peace, actively develop friendly
relations in cooperation with all countries in the world
on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, and facilitate international dialogue and
cooperation, thus contributing constructively to a fairer
and more equitable international order.
There is but one China in the world. Both the
mainland and Taiwan belong to that one China, and
China's sovereignty and territorial integrity brook no
division. The Chinese Government adheres to the basic
policy of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems; and President Jiang Zemin's eight point
proposal on how to develop cross-strait' relations and
promote a peaceful reunification of the motherland for
the current stage. We are firm in our opposition to all
forms of Taiwanese independence activities and will
tolerate no attempt to separate Taiwan from the rest of
China in any fashion. All acts of Taiwan independence
are doomed to failure and our grand cause of national
reunification will triumph.


﻿First of all, I
should like to wish you every success, Mr. President, in
your responsible office. We are delighted that you, a
representative of our Czech neighbours, will preside
over the General Assembly this year. I also express my
sincere thanks to the outgoing President.
I endorse the statement of the Danish presidency
of the European Union.
One year ago, the world was shaken by the terror
of 11 September, which was disdainful of human life.
Civilian aircraft were transformed into guided missiles
whose deployment had been planned without any
regard for human life. The devastating consequences
destroyed families, shattered hopes and tore people
apart, regardless of their age, gender or religious
affiliation. Three days ago, we remembered the victims
in a moving ceremony here in New York. We have not
forgotten the images of 11 September; we have not
recovered from the shock. Our solidarity with the
United States is unbroken. We understand our
American friends. Just like them, we are not prepared
to live under the sword of Damocles that terrorism
represents.
The murderous attack on the people and the
Administration of the United States was also an attack
on all open societies. Countless States mourn their
countrymen among the thousands of World Trade
Center victims. The attack could have struck any open
society, but the terrorists consciously chose the United
States as a symbol of freedom and democracy.
We know that the new totalitarian challenge is
also directed at us all. Since 11 September 2001, the
community of nations has had to look at the question of
peace and security at the dawn of the twenty-first
century from a whole new angle. We will not be able to
negotiate with terrorists like Osama bin Laden. His aim
is to kill as many innocent people as possible, thus
creating the maximum degree of terror and fear. If the
terrorists succeed in acquiring weapons that are yet
more horrific, they will deploy them against us all
without hesitation. Therefore, we must work together
in the international coalition against terrorism to
overcome and destroy that international terrorist
network. The highly dangerous combination of
religious hatred, smouldering regional conflicts,
terrorist attacks and the danger of the deployment of
weapons of mass destruction must be prevented at any
price.
But, above all else, we must not forget: on the
one hand, terrorism must be fought resolutely by the
military and police; on the other, we need to resolve the
political and social conflicts quite rightly emphasized
in the Millennium Declaration, as they form the
breeding ground for the emergence of terrorism. Opting
for one approach and neglecting the other risks failure.
Our common goal is for the people in our
countries to be able to live in safety and freedom, and
without want. To achieve that, we need a system of
global cooperative security that, unlike the former
bipolarity of the cold war, includes all levels of global
policy relevant to security: the relations among great
17

Powers and their alliances as well as the potential
danger of regional crises and the threat posed by
asymmetrical conflicts. For one thing is clearer than
ever after 11 September: terrorism threatens world
peace just as much as civil war and regional conflicts.
Such a system, therefore, must not be toothless, but
rather must function in all three fields through reliable
verification systems and enforceable sanctions
mechanisms. I am convinced that developing such a
comprehensive system of global cooperative security
will be our central political task for the twenty-first
century.
This problem can be solved only through
multilateralism — that is, if nations work together.
Terrorism does not stop at national borders, and
shaping globalization is a task that Governments can
no longer tackle alone. Thus, the United Nations has a
major role to play in developing this security system; it
is the most important forum for establishing global
rules. No other organization has comparable legitimacy
and credibility. Decisively strengthening its ability to
act by continuing the reform path of the Secretary-
General is, therefore, a central focus of German foreign
policy.
The developments in Iraq fill us with grave
concern. Saddam Hussein's regime is a brutal
dictatorship. Under his leadership, Iraq has attacked its
neighbours Iran and Kuwait, has fired missiles at Israel
and has used poison gas against Iran and against its
own Kurdish population. The regime is horrendous for
the Iraqi people and a risk to the region. For that
reason, an effective containment policy and reliable
military control of the no-fly zones have been
implemented and a strict sanctions regime against Iraq
has been introduced since the Gulf War.
The regime in Baghdad must not own or produce
the means for mass destruction or the systems to
deliver them. Despite binding demands from the
Security Council, Saddam Hussein refuses to provide
credible and verifiable answers to the pressing
questions posed by the community of nations regarding
his weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, the United
Nations not only must maintain the pressure on the
Iraqi Government but also must intensify it.
We welcome the fact that President Bush, in his
most recent speech, turned towards the Security
Council. Even if it becomes very difficult, we must do
everything possible to find a diplomatic solution.
The Security Council and Member States must
make it unequivocally clear to Baghdad that the
unrestricted and unconditional re-admission of the
weapons inspectors is the only way to avert a great
tragedy for Iraq and the entire region. The Iraqi
Government must implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions in their entirety and without delay.
We do not, however, want any automatism
leading to the use of military force. The fight against
international terrorism remains perilous. We have not
yet managed to fully stabilize Afghanistan. Explosive
regional conflicts in Kashmir, the Middle East and the
Caucasus must be resolved or at least effectively
contained.
Certain central questions arise for us. Have all
economic and political means of pressure been truly
exhausted? What consequences would military
intervention have? What would it mean for regional
stability? What effect would it have on the Middle East
conflict? Are there new, concrete findings and facts?
Does the situation as assessed justify the taking of a
great risk, namely, taking responsibility for peace and
stability in the entire region for years or even decades
to come? Would such action gain the consent of the
Arab neighbours? What consequences would it have
for the continuation of the global coalition against
terrorism? In the face of these open questions, we feel
deep scepticism with regard to military action and thus
hold to our approach.
I would like to pose the further question of
whether a peaceful solution to the question of the
Middle East could not contribute considerably more to
the establishment of regional stability, to the successful
fight against terrorism and to the effective control and
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. In that
way, would the regime in Baghdad not be isolated
much more effectively, thus generating political
pressure for change? Would this cooperative approach
to finding a new order for the region not be a more
promising way to bring democracy to the Middle
East — one that would be supported by the regional
Powers?
Nowhere is the connection between terrorism and
regional conflict more obvious than in the Near and
Middle East. The breakthrough to peace is therefore of
paramount importance in that region of the world. The
consensus among the international community of
nations on the Middle East question is now greater than
18

ever. We must all pull together to achieve the goal
envisaged by President Bush for 2005, that of two
States, Israel and a democratic Palestine, living as
neighbours within secure and recognized borders. The
European Union has devised a road map to achieve that
goal. An early conference on the Middle East could
help to build bridges and accelerate the process.
Together with our European Union partners, we are
ready to make a considerable contribution in that
respect.
A comprehensive peace in the Middle East must
also include Lebanon and Syria. Saudi Arabia's
significant initiative contains the assurance that the
Arab world would then also be ready to fully normalize
its relations with Israel.
Without a just and lasting solution to regional
conflicts, we will not be able to eliminate the
recruitment base for terrorists and thus successfully
counter the asymmetrical threat. Afghanistan is an
obvious example here. The Taliban system has
collapsed there and the Al Qaeda network has largely
been destroyed. We are still a long way from being able
to call the situation in the country stable and secure,
but progress can be noted. The implementation of the
provisions of the Bonn Conference agreement began
with the formation of a legitimate Interim
Administration. The process that was launched on the
Petersberg was taken to the next level with the
convening in June of the emergency loya jirga. For the
first time in years, the Afghan people have the chance
to lead a life of dignity based on self-determination.
The people of Afghanistan will only grow in
courage, however, when they see and feel that the
international community is also standing by its pledges
for the reconstruction of their country. The
commitments of the donor countries must materialize
in the form of concrete projects.
A system of global cooperative security must be
based on a comprehensive security concept. This must
embrace not only military security but also the
economy, human rights, democracy and culture.
“To achieve a safer world, we must create a better
world”: that is how President Bush summed up the
situation in his impressive speech to the German
Bundestag last May. Shaping cooperative global
security therefore also means shaping a new global
economic order. Account must be taken of the needs of
all — the developing and the developed world alike.
Resources must be more fairly distributed and poorer
countries must be able to participate in international
trade and take advantage of the opportunities of
globalization. This will necessitate free market access
for all, as well as the realization of economic and
political freedoms and a just and reliable legal
framework.
We must not close our eyes to the problems of
Africa, in particular. The food situation in the South of
the continent is a particular source of concern.
Countless people are going hungry and comprehensive
assistance is needed there. In Zimbabwe, however, the
former granary of Africa, a wholly irresponsible policy
is the reason for the difficult situation. In Zimbabwe,
hunger is caused principally not by failed harvests or
droughts but by self-destructive governance — a policy
of keeping a grip on power through the suffering of the
people. Such a policy relies upon the fact that the
international community's humanitarian conscience
and readiness to assume responsibility will reduce the
consequences. We must hold this policy up against the
benchmarks defined by Africa itself in the framework
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Climate and energy policy is a key component of
the new global economic order. The Kyoto Protocol
can be seen as a milestone in global climate protection.
I am delighted that several countries have recently
announced plans to ratify the Protocol, and hope that
this will happen as soon as possible so that it can enter
into force. In the long term, a sensible energy policy —
and that means, above all, the promotion of renewable
energy sources and economical energy consumption —
is the best solution to the climate problem. Work must
therefore start today. Let us not forget that difficult
economic and ecological problems, with their social
and humanitarian repercussions, will increasingly
endanger stability and security too.
The protection of human rights must be one of the
pillars of a global security system. All efforts to secure
peace will fail if human rights are not protected and
made a reality. We need a binding global set of values
to prevent and overcome conflicts that emerge through
inequality, injustice and the denial of freedom. Here,
too, States are called upon to play a decisive and active
role. Moreover, we must be careful today to ensure that
basic human rights are not annulled under the pretext
of combating terrorism. No one has the right to an
“anti-terrorism bonus”.
19

Cooperative global security will have to measure
up to the binding legal framework in which it is
embedded. It is imperative for the globalization process
to be flanked by a growing set of international rules,
because international law and the rule of law constitute
the indispensable foundations for peaceful and ordered
coexistence. That is why the establishment of the
International Criminal Court is so important to us. Its
Statute entered into force on 1 July; Germany, along
with all the other members of the European Union, is
among the 79 States to have ratified it. The Assembly
of States Parties gave the green light this week to the
establishment of the Court. Next spring we will
celebrate its opening in The Hague. The International
Criminal Court will start work as soon as possible and
as efficiently as possible. But it must not be weakened
in its work from the outset.
My country is applying for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2003-2004.
Germany wants to play an active role in developing the
international security system within the United Nations
along the lines that I have outlined. I would like to ask
all members for their vote in the election on 27
September.





﻿I wish at the outset to pay tribute to the
remarkable work of the Secretary-General, who,
through his outstanding personal qualities and sense of
dialogue, gives our Organization unparalleled
influence. I congratulate Mr. Jan Kavan on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-
seventh session. I also congratulate Switzerland on its
admission to our Organization, and Timor-Leste on its
forthcoming admission.
A year ago, to our stunned horror, New York and
Washington were struck in unprecedented attacks.
From now on no one now can disregard the dark side
of the world: international terrorism that combines
archaism with technology, and shifting underground
28

criminal networks with a growing risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
These formidable opponents insinuate themselves
into the heart of the world's complexity. They play on
frustrations and resentment, hatred and fears. They foil
our plans; they know how to find weak spots and turn
our weapons against us. No, the world is definitely not
suffering from an excess of power. To the contrary, it is
suddenly discovering its extreme vulnerability.
Faced with these threats, the temptation to forge
blindly ahead could emerge. That would be a serious
mistake. Force cannot be the sole response to these
elusive adversaries that are constantly changing.
The example of Afghanistan shows this.
Mobilizing the international community enabled us to
overthrow a retrograde totalitarian regime that
harboured and supported the Al Qaeda network and
dealt a harsh blow to terrorist infrastructures. That was
necessary, but it is not enough. We must now rebuild;
we must help the Afghan people, maintain our efforts
over the long term, and continue our work to bring
about stability and democracy, but also to dismantle the
drug economy and the trafficking it fuels.
The fact that force alone is often futile is one of
the characteristics of our age. We live in a world that is
interdependent, where cause and effect may be distant,
indirect and unpredictable. Let us take care that our
interventions do not give rise to new frustrations,
produce new imbalances or spark fires that we cannot
put out.
The case of Iraq is typical of this new situation. It
is a country that has defied the authority of the Security
Council and flouted international law for years. It is a
regime that poses a grave threat to security, particularly
the security of the peoples of its region, because of the
risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Its
conduct is the direct cause of the great suffering
endured by its people.
Is the international community concerned? Of
course it is. Can it continue to tolerate this situation?
Definitely not. Should it act? Obviously: the status quo
cannot go on. France's determination to obtain
compliance with the law is absolute.
We must act, but we must do so effectively. We
must act, but without risking results opposite to those
we seek. We must take care not to exacerbate a
situation that is already very disturbing. We must act,
but there are many traps. Intervention that is politically
or legally ill-defined or poorly mounted would not
garner the broad support necessary; it might galvanize
public opinion in the region against it, and the regime
in Baghdad, which is isolated now, could benefit;
lastly, it might exacerbate tension in the Middle East
and beyond at a time when we should, on the contrary,
redouble our efforts to return to the path of dialogue
and peace.
How are these traps to be avoided? How are we to
succeed? There is only one way, and it is demanding. It
is the path of responsibility  collective responsibility.
The world now is one of interdependence. Its stability
concerns us all. All of us must contribute to it.
The necessary measures must be adopted by the
international community after in-depth and transparent
consideration. Any temptation to engage in unilateral
preventive action would be dangerous. We must take
care to avoid any suspicion of bias or injustice. This is
the only way to ensure that any action to enforce law
and restore security does not add to insecurity. That is
the best guarantee of effectiveness.
That is why, in the case of Iraq, France advocates
a dÈmarche made completely legitimate by collective
deliberation. It requires two successive steps. First, we
must together reaffirm the need for United Nations
inspectors to return and demand that Iraq comply at
last with its obligations under the Security Council
decisions taken since 1991, and do so according to a
definite timetable. That is the objective of the
international community. It is also in Iraq's interest. If
Baghdad persists in its refusal to allow the inspectors
to return unconditionally, then there must be
consequences. The Security Council should then decide
on the measures to be taken without excluding any
option. Responsibilities would be clarified. The world
must be able to act. But it must also be coherent and
effective, in a sustained way. That is today the real
challenge to our values, and to our democracies.
I recently travelled to the Middle East, the
Balkans and Afghanistan. I realized the strength of the
aspirations and hopes for peace. But I also saw how the
efforts and energies of various parties need to be united
and centred on a collective ambition.
No Power can today assume sole responsibility
for world equilibrium. The world aspires to be
structured around poles of stability and progress. In
addition to the United States, the European Union is
29

naturally destined to form one such pole, along with
Russia, China, Japan and India, among others. In future
each actor must make its contribution to the effort. It is
a common project that we must build.
That is the ambition that inspires the European
Union, and France's action within it. The Union affirms
its role on the world stage in the service of peace and
prosperity. It is acquiring the appropriate diplomatic
and defence instruments. With a view to major
enlargement, the Union is also committed to genuinely
re-making its design. That is the purpose of the
Convention on the Future of Europe, guided by the
principles of democracy and effectiveness for a future
Europe. In that way, the Union will contribute to the
stability of the continent and beyond. Finally, the
European model reconciles in a unique way the
requirements of social cohesion and economic
performance to further a common plan, while
respecting the diversity of all. For all those reasons, I
am convinced that Europe's voice offers elements for
addressing the major challenges of our time.
Today, power in all its aspects must be shared. It
is essential to listen to diverse approaches and points of
view. A dialogue among cultures is essential. Only this
will enable us to understand the main issues today by
taking into account the history and aspirations of every
people and every country. Only this can prevent us
from having too narrow a conception of the world
based on ignorance and on fear of the other. Only this
can guide us in putting humankind back at the centre of
our concerns and at the heart of our action and our
shared commitment.
Sharing means responding to the requirement of
solidarity. Extreme poverty, famine, epidemics and
financial crises are factors contributing to disorder and
fomenting instability. Terrorism feeds on these things.
Generosity must be the corollary of power. It is our
political and moral duty. It is also in our own interest.
Accordingly, France has pledged to augment its
development assistance, which will increase by 50 per
cent over the next five years.
Owing to its geographic proximity and historical
and cultural ties, my country has a deep friendship for
Africa. It feels a special responsibility. That continent,
more than others, needs the solidarity of the
international community in the difficult trials it is
experiencing: the too-numerous conflicts that persist;
the return of the spectre of famine; the economic
difficulties; and the tragedy of AIDS, which today
strikes nearly 30 million Africans.
Yet Africa is rich in potential, rich in the
enthusiasm of its young people and in the energy of its
civil society, and rich in memory, in tradition and in a
treasury of wisdom from which we all have much to
learn. Important efforts are under way today to advance
human rights, democracy, the fight against corruption,
and favourable economic and social policies for strong
and balanced growth. The establishment of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development attests to the
continent's willingness to take charge of its
development, in the context of a renewed partnership
with the industrialized countries. Let us recognize and
support those efforts.
In particular, we must help Africa to move
forward on the path of conflict resolution in Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the Sudan. Those
tragedies concern us all, because today there are no
more localized crises. Instability spreads. The
international community must mobilize.
In the Great Lakes region, the agreements signed
at Lusaka, Pretoria and Luanda must be implemented.
They must lead to the withdrawal of all foreign troops
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
the disarmament of foreign armed groups, to
reconciliation and to a return to peace.
With regard to Western Sahara, it is good that the
Security Council, in its most recent resolution,
resolution 1429 (2002), gave Mr. James Baker the time
to work to bring the parties closer together. That time
must be used to make progress.
We must stay engaged in the Balkans, where the
progress made this year must be consolidated in
Kosovo, in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Linking
the Balkans to Europe through the rule of law and
democracy is, more than ever before, our common
aspiration.
In the Middle East, we must emerge from the
impasse and restore hope. The situation will worsen as
long as the parties remain prisoners to the logic of
violence. There is urgency to act. The Palestinian
Authority must use all available means to prevent and
curb terrorist actions. With a view to the creation of an
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State,
30

based on the 1967 borders, it must pursue its reforms,
particularly in the institutional context.
For its part, the State of Israel, while it
legitimately wishes to defend itself against terrorism,
must do so with respect for international law. The
security imperative cannot by itself take the place of
policy. Settlement-building must cease, and the Israeli
armed forces must withdraw from the occupied
territories, as demanded by the Security Council.
Measures must be taken quickly to improve the now
alarming humanitarian and social situation of the
Palestinian people.
On the basis of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle
of land for peace  which all the Arab countries,
meeting in Beirut, agreed to recognize at the initiative
of Saudi Arabia  the political process must be
relaunched with the aid of the `quartet'. We support
the convening of an international conference at an early
date. The objective must be a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace; a peace based on the coexistence of two
States within secure and recognized borders,
guaranteeing security for the Israelis and offering the
Palestinians a normal life with dignity; a peace based
on a comprehensive settlement of the regional conflict
between Israel and its neighbours.
The attention that we pay to regional crises must
not distract us from the responsibility that we must
assume in the face of global challenges. The United
Nations is playing its full role in the fight against
terrorism. Let us do likewise in the other great
struggles of our time.
Let us fight tirelessly against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The President of the French Republic has
proposed that the Security Council meet at the highest
level in 2003, during the General Assembly, with a
double mandate: to review non-proliferation policy and
to give it a new impetus.
Let us mobilize all actors for sustainable
development in a renewed partnership, in conformity
with the commitments made at Doha, Monterrey and
Johannesburg. The time has come to strengthen
concrete cooperation to permit access by all to basic
resources such as water and energy, to basic social
services such as education and health, and to food
security. Let us also call for the ratification and full
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change.
Let us establish true global governance of
sustainable development and give it the necessary
coherence. France proposes the creation of an
economic and social security council and of a world
environmental organization to give all countries 
especially those of the South  the possibility of
making their voices heard on those issues.
Finally, let us fully exercise our responsibility to
defend and promote human rights. These are universal.
Progress, often fragile, must be encouraged. Violations,
often so numerous, must be punished.
Let us strengthen the authority and the
universality of the International Criminal Court to
enable it to ensure that the most serious crimes at the
international level do not go unpunished. This new tool
is essential to build a more just and democratic world
where the principle of responsibility is fully respected.
Through ambitious conventions, let us provide
better protection, as we did for children, for the
disabled and for the victims of forced disappearance
and torture. Let us fight against corruption. Let us
commit ourselves to the negotiation of a universal
convention against human cloning for reproductive
purposes, as proposed by France and Germany.
Yes, the principle of collective responsibility is at
the heart of the international system. It is at the heart of
United Nations action. In order to play its full role, the
Organization must pursue its reforms. In particular, we
must increase the representativity of the Security
Council by enlarging both categories of membership.
France supports the aspirations of Germany, Japan and
India in particular.
The United Nations is the keystone of the world
order. The generous and strong ideas that presided over
its birth, just after a world conflict that pushed the
limits of barbarism to the unspeakable, retain all their
currency. The contemporary world is complex,
confusing and unpredictable. It is urgent that we forge
among nations a new alliance, a community of destiny.
That is our future; that is our chance. Through our
actions, let us respond to the expectations of the
world's peoples.﻿In an imperfect
world, our citizens need the United Nations as they
have never needed it before. The United Nations has
not resolved all conflicts by peaceful means, nor could
it. The authority of the United Nations has to be
underpinned by the force of arms. But the remarkable
achievement of this body has been to make the fine
language of its Charter a force for good beyond just
words; by this the United Nations has raised the bar
against the illegitimate use of violence, by States and
now by terrorists. In doing so, the United Nations has
saved lives by the million and saved millions more
from fear, poverty and tyranny.
Without the United Nations, there could have
been no salvation for the people of East Timor, no
prospect of lasting peace in Sierra Leone, no one to
help rebuild Afghanistan. Forty years ago, President
John F. Kennedy predicted a world in which 25 States
would have nuclear weapons. But the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, supported by international
safeguards, has ensured that this nightmare scenario
has failed to materialize.
All this should serve to remind us of the critical
role which the United Nations has to play in world
affairs, under its excellent Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan. It is the responsibility of all of us here in the
Assembly to ensure that the legitimacy, the authority
and the capacity of the United Nations to preserve
peace and to help build prosperity is strengthened and
not undermined.
Today, alongside the traditional threats to global
peace and security, the United Nations and the world
community face three rising challenges: failing States,
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
The world saw in Afghanistan the graphic
dangers of State failure, where order breaks down, law
is undermined and anarchy takes over. We in the
international community must accept our share of the
blame for allowing that country to disintegrate. Al
Qaeda and their evil creed were only too willing to take
advantage. But we delude ourselves if we believe that
the chaos in Afghanistan over much of the last decade
is unique. In too many areas of the world, our fellow
citizens are forced to live under the rule of gangs,
without the security and freedoms which we all should
be able to take for granted.
If we are serious about the concept of an
international community, then, as Members of the
United Nations, we must accept our responsibility to
help prevent States from failing and to restore order
where States have already collapsed.
The United Kingdom's own experience in
Afghanistan, as the International Security Assistance
12

Force (ISAF) lead nation, working with the United
Nations, shows what can be done; but we all know that
much more needs to be done. We need a much more
structured and methodical approach to this growing
problem of failed and failing States.
But the tools are there. At Monterrey in March
and at Johannesburg earlier this month, the world
community has built on the Millennium Development
Goals to reduce poverty among the world's most
disadvantaged people. We are backing this commitment
with action. Between 1996 and 2006 the United
Kingdom will have doubled its development assistance.
Together with the Doha Round of the World
Trade Organization (WTO), we have within our grasp a
new era of sustainable economic growth and prosperity,
a stable political future for the developing world and a
much more secure global environment.
But people cannot be freed from poverty unless
they are also free from fear. Security is not an option; it
is a necessity. Three years ago over half of Sierra
Leone was under the control of rebels; over half the
population was displaced; countless civilians had been
murdered, abducted or horribly mutilated; a spiral of
sickness and hunger was taking over. Now, thanks to
United Nations and British intervention to end that
decade-long civil war, people are returning home and
rebuilding their shattered lives. But long-term
commitment is necessary in situations like that.
As we found in Afghanistan, when we deal with
failing States, we have to tackle the second challenge
to international law and justice — that of global
terrorism — as well.
All the nations of the world, and all its people —
black, white, Buddhist, Christian, Jew, Muslim, Hindu
and Sikh — have a common interest in defeating
terrorism. There must be no hiding places for terrorism
or for terrorists; no hiding places for their money; and
no semantic hiding places either. The distinction some
claim between terrorists and freedom-fighters is false
and dangerous. Their victims enjoy no such distinction.
There must be no such distinctions either in
international law.
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) created
new obligations on all of us. The United Kingdom has
been honoured to chair the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. There has been an overwhelmingly
positive response. But, as we recall those who lost their
lives on 11 September last year, we cannot relax our
collective determination.
Alongside the threats from failing States and
from terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction poses the greatest current threat to global
security, and nowhere is the case for universal support
for the enforcement of United Nations law stronger
than in the field of weapons of mass destruction.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention comprise
one of the world's most significant bodies of
international law. For the past three decades, this
corpus of law has ensured — with one infamous
exception — that no States have resorted to these, the
world's worst weapons.
That exception is Iraq. For two decades, Saddam
Hussein's regime has defied and frustrated every
attempt to enforce the international rule of law. Iraq is
the only country to be condemned by the United
Nations for breaching the Convention on Chemical
Weapons. Iraq has fought wars of aggression against
two neighbours, and has launched missile attacks
against five countries in the region. Iraq has used
poison gas against its own people. Saddam Hussein has
persistently mocked the authority of the United
Nations. No country has deceived every other country
in the world as systematically and cynically as Iraq.
And no country presents as fundamental a challenge to
the United Nations as Iraq.
Every society, from the smallest village to the
global community represented here in the General
Assembly, must have rules, and every member of that
community must accept responsibility for respecting
and maintaining those rules. Without this, the very
concept of community breaks down. So those of us
who believe in an active international community
cannot stand by and do nothing while Iraq continues to
defy the will of the United Nations. All of us who
believe in the United Nations have to make up our
minds now about how to deal with Iraq. The authority
of the United Nations itself is at stake.
We cannot let Iraq do grave damage to this
Organization and the international order which it
represents. We cannot let Iraq go on defying a decade
of Security Council resolutions. If we do, we will find
that our resolutions are dismissed by aggressors
everywhere as mere words. We have spent 57 years
13

building this Organization beyond a talking shop. We
cannot now let that work be undone.
There are times when hard choices have to be
made. On Iraq, we have now reached such a moment. If
we fail to deal with this challenge, the United Nations
itself will be seriously weakened. And that would make
the world a much more dangerous place.
As President Bush spelled out in his powerful
speech to the Assembly here on Thursday, we have to
be resolute in the face of Iraq's defiance and secure the
will of the United Nations. We must require Iraq to re-
admit inspectors, with unfettered access. We have not
just an interest but a responsibility to ensure that Iraq
complies fully with international law. We have to be
clear to Iraq and to ourselves about the consequences
which will flow from a failure by Iraq to meet its
obligations.
And yes, in dealing with the threat posed by Iraq
we must also tackle those other international
challenges outlined so eloquently by Kofi Annan in his
address.
Over the past year we have seen a further
deterioration in security in Israel and in the occupied
territories. There has never been a greater need for
international involvement in the Middle East peace
process to secure the outcome we all want to see: two
States, Israel and Palestine living side by side within
secure and recognized borders, based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).
In Kashmir, we should continue to urge both
India and Pakistan to act with restraint, and to seek to
resolve that long-running conflict.
At the end of the cold war we had all hoped that
future generations would be able to enjoy a world
where cooperation rather than conflict was the
hallmark of international affairs. That goal is still
within reach, if we are united in tackling State failure,
in the war against terrorism and in confronting those
threats of weapons of mass destruction.
The tasks facing the founders of this institution
were no less intimidating. Yet their combination of
high values and hard-headed realism created the
greatest instrument in history for the avoidance of war.
Our founders' achievement has been formidable. But
the Organization now faces new and emerging threats.
We have to confront those threats and be ever alive to
the challenges which are out there to peace and justice
across the world. All of us who believe in those
principles of international law and justice have a duty
to ensure that they are both upheld and enforced.










﻿I
congratulate Mr. Kavan on his election as President of
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. I also
extend my best wishes to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan in this first year of his second term in office.
Two days ago, we commemorated the first
anniversary of a terrible event that focused the
collective global consciousness on international
terrorism. Terrorism did not start on 11 September. It
was on that day that it brazenly announced itself on the
global stage, flaunting its immunity from distance and
power.
15

As a country exposed to the depredations of
terrorism for decades, India empathized with the pain
of the American people, admired their resilience in
coming to terms with the consequences and supported
the bold decision to counter-attack terrorism at its very
source.
The international community has taken some
collective decisions in the global effort to combat
terrorism and to choke off its lifelines. Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) contains the essence of
these decisions. The Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee should now move beyond information
compilation and legal assistance to enforcing
compliance by States known to be sponsoring,
sheltering, funding, arming and training terrorists.
In our South Asian region, nuclear blackmail has
emerged over the past few months as a new arrow in
the quiver of State-sponsored terrorism. Dark threats
were held out that actions by India to stamp out cross-
border terrorism could provoke a nuclear war. To
succumb to such blatant nuclear terrorism would mean
forgetting the bitter lessons of the 11 September
tragedy.
As far as India is concerned, we have repeatedly
clarified that no one in our country wants a war,
conventional or otherwise. Nor are we seeking any
territory. But absolutely everyone in India wants an end
to the cross-border terrorism which has claimed
thousands of innocent lives and denied entire
generations their right to a peaceful existence with
normal economic and social activity. We are
determined to end it with all the means at our
command. Let there be no doubt about that in any
quarter.
Yesterday we heard the extraordinary claim in
this Assembly that the brutal murder of innocent
civilians in Jammu and Kashmir is actually a freedom
struggle and that the forthcoming elections in that state
are a farce, since they cannot be a substitute for a
plebiscite demanded over 50 years ago. It requires an
effort of acrobatic logic to believe that the carnage
among innocents is an instrument for freedom and that
elections are a symbol of deception and repression. If
the elections are a mere fraud, why are terrorists being
trained and infiltrating India at the command of the
Inter-Services Intelligence Agency of Pakistan to kill
election candidates and to intimidate voters?
If Pakistan claims to be a crucial partner in the
international coalition against terrorism, how can it
continue to use terrorism as an instrument of State
policy against India?


How can the international coalition condone
Pakistan-directed killings of thousands of innocent
civilians  women and children included  to
promote a bizarre version of self-determination? Those
who speak of underlying or root causes of terrorism
offer alibis to the terrorists and absolve them of
responsibility for their heinous actions, such as the 11
September attacks on the United States or the 13
December attack on our Parliament.
Yesterday we heard yet another patently false and
self-serving claim that in India Muslims and other
minorities are the target of Hindu extremists. With 150
million Muslims, India has the second largest Muslim
population in the world; greater than that of Pakistan.
We are proud of the multi-religious character of our
society. Equal respect for all faiths and non-
discrimination on the basis of religion are not just part
of our Constitutional obligations, but, as the whole
world knows, they are the signature theme of India's
civilization and culture.
We have to recognize that the developmental
divide between the North and the South is becoming
wider and deeper by the day. The challenges that face
us are stark, and there is no alternative to having all
countries of the world join hands to face them together.
Over the last decade, 10 million people have been
joining the ranks of the poor each year. A quarter of the
world's population lives in extreme poverty.
We have to find US$ 24 billion annually for
investment in poor countries, if we are to achieve the
World Food Summit goal of halving hunger by 2015.
The continuation of widespread poverty, at a time
when unimaginable wealth is concentrated in a small
social layer, is totally unacceptable. The twenty-first
century has all the means to end this sad legacy of the
past centuries. What is lacking is the political will
among the developed countries to sincerely and
speedily address the legitimate developmental needs of
the developing countries, especially the least developed
ones.
16

Casting an even longer shadow over this grim
developmental canvas is global climate change, from
which the poor will most suffer, though they
contributed least to it. The recent floods and forest fires
in Europe are a forewarning that the countries of Asia
and Africa are not the only victims of the fury of a
degraded environment. The Earth's atmosphere and
biosphere know no national boundaries. The choice
before the global community is stark: Either we take
urgent steps to protect the environment or be prepared
for far worse natural calamities.
Early this month, the Johannesburg Summit for
Sustainable Development debated some of the linkages
between poverty, trade, environment, national,
international and corporate governance and global
financial flows. We emerged from the Summit with
some encouraging outcomes, but these fell well short
of the demands of our time.
It has become a categorical imperative to
understand and address man's developmental needs in
their totality, and not in isolated parts. It is
disconcerting that the highways of development are
jammed with the noisy and unruly traffic of
materialism and its brash cousin, consumerism. Human
values have become mute bystanders in most political,
economic and social activities.
The result of this imbalance between our material
and non-material needs can never be happy for
mankind. On the contrary, if we are guided by
compassion, care, feeling for our fellow human beings,
cooperation and other human values, we are bound to
get the right solutions to every problem on our planet.
Humanity is crying out for a harmonious
integration of the economic, social, political,
environmental and spiritual dimensions of
development. This task calls for the closest possible
cooperation among nations and communities, with a
readiness to accept the best from every cultural and
spiritual tradition around the globe. The United Nations
needs to take up newer and bigger initiatives in this
direction.
In this Assembly, less than a year ago, and in the
United States Congress the year before, I had extended
India's offer to coordinate a comprehensive global
development dialogue. I reiterate that offer today. If we
are to achieve the development goals we have promised
ourselves by 2015, we need such a dialogue urgently.
As we come together once again at the United
Nations, at a time of new and diverse challenges, we
should reflect on our collective commitment to the
Charter, its purposes and principles. There is a growing
perception, particularly among the weaker and poorer
countries, that responses to issues of far-reaching
impact often seem arbitrary and contradictory.
A common destiny is at stake. The world needs
collective multilateralism. It needs the United Nations,
the coming together and working together of all its
nations in the development of a common and collective
perspective.
Conflicts arise when there is no spirit of
democracy within and among nations. A genuinely
democratic framework enables us to respect alternative
points of view, to value diversity and to fashion
solutions responsive to the aspirations of people.
India's own experience as a hugely populated and
diverse nation shows how complex problems can be
addressed within a constitutional and democratic
framework.
These values need to be assiduously nurtured in
our societies, so that at least a future generation is rid
of the scourge of poverty, intolerance, obscurantism
and religious extremism.
Democratic societies are far less prone to
ideologies based on violence or militarist yearnings,
since they do not have their fingers permanently on the
trigger of a gun. We have to be vigilant against threats
to democracy worldwide arising from forces that are
opposed to it, be they rooted in fundamentalist political
ideologies or extremist religious dogmas.
All of us are aware of the challenges. Most of us
are agreed that a stable global order has to rest on the
four strong pillars of peace, security, sustainable
development and democracy. We have to ensure that
each of these pillars is strong and resilient.
We are conscious of our collective responsibility.
It is the leap from this theoretical understanding to its
practical realization that we have often failed to
execute. We should not fail again. Our future
generations will not forgive us if we do.








﻿I would like to congratulate
my friend Mr. Jan Kavan on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly and to wish him
success. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership and his dedication to right what is wrong
and to light the lamps of hope.
The eleventh of September gave rise to a new
world. We find ourselves facing a new confrontation:
borderless, merciless, indiscriminate and inhumane.
The target this time was the United States — a United
States that in the past helped so many nations defend
their freedoms and their liberty. Now the United States
has been challenged again to defend our freedom by
protecting its own and to safeguard our lives by
securing its own.
The attack on the World Trade Center precipitated
a new division in our epoch and in the years to come —
a divide created by groups that preach and cause death
and agony. On the wrong side of the divide are those
who are trying to destroy the free world, which is
diversified and heterogeneous, cherishing the right to
every thought and religion as well as the principle that
every human being has the right to be different and yet
to prosper and live in security.
10

The front from Bin Laden to Saddam Hussein is a
menace to us all. It will not enable peace, nor will it
permit freedom — for all people or for their own
people. In countries that harbour terror, women are
discriminated against, men are oppressed, civil and
human rights are violated, and the poor cannot escape
from their poverty They force us to defend our
inalienable right to look ahead with hope. They
imposed on us a war of self-defence — the defence of
pluralism and of the promise of science. They reject the
incredible technologies that may carry us from the
limits of land to the discovery of uncharted provinces.
The culture of death forces us to defend the culture of
life, to win battles that we did not initiate, to triumph in
this uninvited war.
We never imagined that it could be dangerous to
walk our streets, to fly our skies, to breathe the air or to
drink the water. We cannot agree to this. We cannot
allow dark forces — which, as we are aware, could
destroy the lives of innocent people on a whim — to
possess weapons of mass destruction. We shall not turn
our lives into a series of sleepless nights and
nightmarish days.
We do not have the right to ignore the danger. We
do not have the option to postpone it; it is imminent.
We have to win as soon as possible.
Terror is destined to lose. It will be defeated
because it carries no hope. It respects neither human
beings nor the values of humanity.
Science and technology made the economy
global, and science and technology globalized terror as
well. Now strategy also is globalized, because ballistic
ranges have replaced geographic distances, because
non-conventional warheads have replaced measurable
explosives, because terrorism transcends frontiers and
fronts. Terrorists do not respect the rule of law. They
do not answer to independent judges or relate to
elected leaders. They mock international lines. They
destroy universal norms. They shed blood. They
introduced dullness and stopped affluence. Nothing is
to be expected from them but death.
Terror creates poverty more than poverty creates
terror. Terror leads to backwardness. We have to offer
the economic potential to open prospects and horizons
for all nations, poor and rich. New opportunities can
bring enfranchisement. We have to close ranks to
prevent distorted dreams from becoming a raging
typhoon that reaches all four corners of the globe. We
have experienced in our own country the terrible
effects of terrorism.
Babies were shot in the arms of their mothers.
People at prayer were killed while praying. Yes, it hurt
us, but it did not change our goals. We mourn, but we
did not bury peace.
It harmed the Palestinians in the United States
and in other countries. It prevented the occupation
from ending. It introduced additional problems and did
not solve a single existing problem.
Alas, the Middle East is still replete with
national, religious and territorial disputes. The land is
small; the agony is great. But the real tragedy is that
without terror we could already have resolved these
disputes. Terror entrenched them. Terror changed
priorities — security before policy. It affected
resources — arming young men, for example, instead
of desalinating vital water. If it continues, battlefields
will create deserts of sorrow and days of darkness.
Campuses of learning will be replaced by camps of
violence.
But this is neither a decree of heaven nor the
verdict of man. It can, it should, it will be different.
South Africa, Ireland, Yugoslavia and the Congo
achieved more by talking than by shooting, more by
dialogue than by dispute. We offered the Palestinians a
comprehensive solution without the terror — a solution
that was close to their national aspirations. We related
to their desire to be free, to be equal, to be
independent. We agreed that they would have their land
in accordance with United Nations resolutions. But
terror postponed their destiny. Terror postponed our
willingness to end control over their lives. Smoking
guns replaced the torches of peace.
Now we are following the profound debate taking
place among the Palestinians. We respect it, because
debate is the beginning of democracy. When
democracy prevails, peace undoubtedly will arrive. The
Fatah organization apparently issued a call that
contains some new approaches. I shall quote one of
them:
“We will build an independent State of
Palestine and a political system in accordance
with the principles of democracy, the rule of law,
with an independent judicial system, separation
of power, respect for human rights, civil liberties
and a market economy.”


We look upon these words as the dawn of a
different season; we hope that it is spring. Reducing
violence will shorten political distances. Political
horizons are, in my judgement, within reach. Israel
accepts President Bush's vision. That vision is
supported by the Quartet; it is endorsed by Arab
countries; it outlines a political goal and a timetable. It
can be considered as both a road map and a calendar.
What is needed now are wheels to propel the vehicles
of peace. An economic wheel is needed in order for us
to move to a global market economy that leads to
science-based industry. A market economy can open
gates and skies. An ecological wheel is needed to let
air and water flow cleanly. Pollution is not national; we
have to work together to control it. Ecology has
changed history. In the past, bloodshed was about real
estate, and real estate created divisions, demarcation
and, unfortunately, wars as well. In our era, the battle is
not for real estate but for air, for water and for energy;
it is about the fertility of the land, rather than its size.
“Non-real” estate is not marked, nor can it be divided.
Either we respect it unanimously, or we will be
victimized by its loss.
Then there is the cultural wheel. Three
civilizations were born in the Middle East. They were
made manifest in the Bible, in the New Testament and
in the Koran. We read them in different languages, yet
we pray to the same heavens. The descendants of
Abraham should behave like a family — with tolerance
and solidarity. Spiritual leaders should pray for peace,
but they also need to preach it, call upon it and
contribute to it.
The political wheel should not rotate in the same
misguided orbit as in the past. We have been through
five wars in five decades — Palestinians, Egyptians
and Jordanians lost generations of young people. We
paid heavily with young blood as a result of three terror
campaigns. The time has come to comprehend that the
real triumph is in the harvest of peace, not in the seeds
of another war. When we replace the war maps with
peace maps, we will discover that the differences were
minimal. The wars were appalling. We shall see that
the promised land could have become the land of
promise a long time ago.
Without wars, our region will be able to bloom
again. We can separate politically into two States and
coordinate one economy. That will enable us to take
advantage of the exceptional invitation that came from
both the United States and a united Europe to partake
in their economic opportunities.
Tourism can flourish when terrorism has ended.
Islands of high-tech excellence can be established.
Millions of trees can be planted to produce a new
climate. We can make green our arid lands. We can
become contributors, not dependants.
The call of the future cannot be harmonized with
the voices of the past. Only new solutions can evoke a
grandeur equal to the past. We do not have the right to
suspend it in the face of our children. Young Israelis
and young Palestinians are entitled to a new life — a
life of their own. While fighting terror, let us not fight
people. While seeking freedom, let us not extend
subjugation.
I should like to direct a comment to Syria. The
same principle that enabled us both to participate in the
Madrid conference a decade ago is still valid.
A word to Lebanon: Israel is committed to the
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Israel respects its need
for real political independence. Lebanon should not
permit Hezbollah to destroy its own country. Hezbollah
is not a party, it is a dangerous agenda. Lebanon should
immediately free Israeli prisoners and prisoners of war.
The people of the Middle East should let bygones
be bygones. Let us return to our traditions, where
prophets, not terrorists, told the future. Let us return to
our landscape, where the blue skies did not surrender to
the heavy clouds of despair; to a time when justice
promised equal opportunities for individuals and for
nations. Let us join, together, the march of mankind
towards new discoveries that will make life more
purposeful and may bring security to posterity.
We were born in the cradles of hope, not in the
tombs of despair. We guard our spiritual heritage, and
it is not antithetical to building a new Middle East. The
world is new.
I should like to conclude with an old verse from
our scriptures:
“The Lord led Adam through the Garden of
Eden and said to him, ‘All I created, I created for
you. Beware lest you spoil and destroy my world,
for if you spoil it, there is no one to repair it after
you'.”
We are here to repair.











﻿Mr. President, may I
begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency and assure you of New Zealand's
cooperation during your term of office.
13

The opening of this, the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, came just one day after the
anniversary of the terrorist attack of 11 September
2001, which shocked this city and the international
community. The premeditated and callous mass murder
of 3,000 people from 79 different countries was a sharp
warning to us of the ongoing threats to peace and
stability in our world. It was to protect humanity
against such threats that the nations of the world came
together in 1945 to establish this Organization in the
belief that collective action was necessary to guarantee
global peace.
Today, in the second year of a new millennium,
the need to act multilaterally is greater than ever
before. Terrorism, weapons of mass destruction,
environmental degradation, people-smuggling, drug-
trafficking, diseases such as HIV/AIDS and the
unsustainable depletion of our natural resources are all
global matters that require a collective response.
We can be proud that a year ago the response by
the United Nations to a new and unprecedented level of
terrorism was immediate, united and effective. The
primary victim of the attack, the United States, sought
and secured international cooperation that achieved the
incapacitation of the Al Qaeda terrorist organization
and the removal of the Taliban regime that had hosted
it. It was a model for international unity of purpose and
multilateral action. It was a lesson that should not be
forgotten as this Organization tackles other problems
confronting humanity.
New Zealand has worked wholeheartedly under
the mandate provided by the United Nations to defeat
terrorism. We have introduced legislation to deny
terrorist organizations funding and resources in line
with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We have
sought to assist our neighbours in the Pacific to do the
same. We have committed peacekeeping personnel to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
combat forces under Operation Enduring Freedom in
Afghanistan. But we are also aware that actions to
suppress terrorism must be accompanied by measures
to tackle the causes of terrorism. Injustice, lack of
opportunity, hopelessness, desperation and the failure
of legitimate channels to redress grievances all give
rise to resort to terrorist actions.
The failure to resolve differences between Israeli
and Palestinian people in the Middle East continues to
be a catalyst for recruitment into terrorism. The
Secretary-General, in opening this session, spelled out
the basis for resolving the dispute. He referred to land
for peace, an end to terror and to occupation, and to
two States, Israel and Palestine, with secure and
recognized borders. Both peoples are destined to live
side by side. Both will benefit from an end to violence
and a negotiated settlement. But agreement requires
good faith from each side and a determined effort by
the international community. We fully endorse the
Secretary-General's renewed call for an international
peace conference. Progress on this issue is now more
vital than ever.
The situation in Iraq is also a threat to world
peace, but we must look for solutions that will resolve
and do not exacerbate that threat. No nation can be
exempt from the requirement to comply with the
resolutions passed by this Organization. That is
necessary if the rule of law is to apply internationally.
No nation can be allowed to commit aggression or to
use weapons of mass destruction against its own
people. The requirement to comply with United
Nations resolutions is not the instruction of one
country to Iraq; it is collective instruction that should
have the unanimous endorsement of all Member
countries.
Iraq's non-compliance with Security Council
resolutions is a challenge to the entire United Nations
membership. The United Nations must meet this
challenge. How the situation is resolved matters to us
all, not least the countries of the region itself.
Those who can exercise influence over Iraq
should do so to avoid the need for resort to other
actions. The response chosen by the Security Council
must, however, take into account the need not to
impose further costs on ordinary Iraqi people innocent
of any wrongdoing. The response should not involve
actions that undermine, rather than strengthen, the war
against terrorism.
The United Nations has shown that collective
action can save lives and help rebuild nations. We will
soon welcome the world's newest nation, East Timor,
into the United Nations, and we should celebrate the
success of the United Nations peacekeeping mission
and Transitional Administration in that country. I
congratulate Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-
General's former Special Representative, on his role,
and I thank those countries that contributed so much to
14

giving hope and opportunity to the people of that small
country.
New Zealand has had a battalion of peacekeepers
deployed in East Timor since September 1999, and also
has peacekeepers serving in 12 other countries. We are
proud that they have performed their role with
professionalism and respect for the people in whose
countries they operate. Notwithstanding the small size
of our population, New Zealand currently is the
twenty-second-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping personnel.
The promotion of human rights is another area
where multilateral action by the international
community is essential. In the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and in the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the United Nations has set
out universal standards for the observance of human
rights. There is no justification for any country to
deviate from those human rights standards. It is a mark
of shame that States Members of this Organization
continue to breach basic human rights and a disgrace
that other countries too often act as apologists for the
offending regimes.
An important landmark in the last year has been
the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. As the culmination of
longstanding efforts by non-governmental
organizations, Governments and the international
community as a whole, it offers the prospect of
bringing justice to the victims of the most horrific
crimes known to humankind and bringing their
perpetrators to justice. It will serve as a deterrent where
none has existed before. We have listened carefully to
those who argue that the Court is not necessary and
that it unduly jeopardizes their peacekeepers, but we
cannot agree. The status quo, relying on domestic
jurisdiction alone, has failed humankind throughout
history and has borne witness to appalling crimes. The
new regime has carefully built-in safeguards to protect
the innocent.
We were dismayed by the actions of the Security
Council in July. At that time, we challenged both the
legitimacy and the substance of the Council's action.
We do not believe that it was consistent with the Rome
Statute or that the Council is able to arrogate to itself
the power to change treaty relationships.
A further issue on which greater progress must be
made is that of disarmament. The fact that humanity
survived the nightmare of potential nuclear destruction
during the cold war cannot be allowed to make us
complacent about ongoing threats from weapons of
mass destruction.
We welcome the Treaty of Moscow and the
agreement between Russia and the United States to cut
the number of strategic nuclear weapons each country
deploys. These reductions, however, are not a
substitute for irreversible cuts in, and the total
elimination of, those weapons.
In some respects even greater danger is posed by
short-range tactical nuclear weapons. There is a real
risk that these could be launched by accident or in
confusion, with no time available for communication
between opposing sides.
Over the last year, two significant events have
made our world a most dangerous place. The first is the
emergence of international terrorist groups that have
shown their willingness to use weapons of mass
destruction — biological, chemical or nuclear —
should they gain access to them.
The second is the situation in South Asia, where
the world recently came close to direct conflict
between two countries with nuclear capability. The
international community has not done enough to reduce
those risks.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has
not been brought into effect. Progress towards the
implementation of undertakings made by nuclear-
weapon States at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference has stalled. Nations have not taken
sufficient steps to stop the production of fissile
material and to reduce stocks.
In this and in many other areas much more needs
to be done to address growing problems that affect all
of us. The awful toll of HIV/AIDS, slowness in
response to global warming and the growth in the
smuggling and trafficking of people are but three
further examples.
It is essential that we renew our commitment to
multilateralism as the best way to address global
problems. That requires not simply money but, must
importantly, political will. It is not a case of putting
global interests ahead of national interests. Global
15

interests are national interests. The United Nations is
our most valuable international organization, but we
need to do more to enhance its relevance, value and its
unique authority. All of us are stakeholders in its
success.







﻿One year has passed since the tragic events
that took place on 11 September 2001 in the United
States of America shook the world and demonstrated
the magnitude and brutality of the global threat of
international terrorism. During the past year the world
became fully aware of the challenges that humankind
was facing as we entered the twenty-first century. It
was a year during which the international community
came together and began to take decisive action against
terrorism.
While paying tribute to the memory of all of the
victims of the terrorism that has left a bloody trail
throughout the world, we must now take stock of the
initial results of the joint anti-terrorist campaign and,
most important, outline our objectives in strengthening
the foundations of international security and stability.
The most important outcome of the coming
together of States to achieve common goals 
unprecedented since the Second World War  is clear
today. A broad international anti-terrorist coalition has
been established and is actively functioning; it has
already demonstrated its effectiveness in Afghanistan,
a country that international terrorists of various
affiliations had transformed into their own personal
lair. Our common objective is not only to preserve the
experience of interaction acquired within the
framework of the coalition  avoiding such unilateral
actions as might undermine it  but also to transform
the anti-terrorist alliance into a supportive mechanism
of effective security and cooperation for the new
millennium.
The United Nations must certainly be a pivotal
element of such a mechanism. Indeed, the United
Nations is called upon to continue to guarantee that, in
combating new threats and challenges, the efforts of
20

the international community rest on a solid basis of
international law.
We must acknowledge  and the past year has
been very instructive in this regard  that a great deal
of hard work awaits us. It will be possible to put
insurmountable obstacles in the way of fanatics and
extremists who spread death and destruction only if we
can reach general agreement on core issues relating to
the world order. In this context, the role of the United
Nations is, indeed, irreplaceable.
The fact that the process of implementing the
fundamental anti-terrorist resolution  Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001)  is under way is of
critical importance. That resolution is binding on all
States, and we must now seek to achieve its
unconditional implementation by all States.
A priority task in the war on terrorism is the
strengthening of its international legal framework. First
and foremost, there is a need to ensure the genuinely
universal character of existing anti-terrorist
conventions.
Having ratified the 1999 Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, Russia is
now completing the process of accession to those
international instruments. At the same time, we are
seriously concerned about the lack of real progress in
negotiating a comprehensive convention on combating
terrorism and a convention on the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism.
The well-known differences in the approaches of
States to the provisions of such instruments could
certainly be fully reconciled. They should not
overshadow the objective, which is pressing for all of
us, of establishing a legal basis to counter terrorism in
all its manifestations  a basis that would be in
keeping with the realities of today's world. Russia is
continuing to make resolute efforts to achieve that
objective.
It is the obligation of all States to protect the
rights and freedoms of their citizens, the most
important of these being the right to life. But it is
precisely the lives of ordinary people that are
threatened by terrorists, and each year new names are
added to the list of victims. The international
community can no longer tolerate this. It is our
obligation to provide our citizens with the right to
reliable protection against terrorism.
Such an objective can be achieved only if all
States agree on a range of specific measures under
United Nations auspices. There is now a need to draw
up an effective code to protect human rights against
terrorism. Some of these measures have already been
discussed by the international community, including in
this forum. Others will require consideration in a
broader context. The most important consideration,
however, is that we should agree on a unified system of
values and measures shared by all States.
The results of the war against terrorism will be
tangible only if we act in concert at all levels  global,
regional and national. The anti-terrorist cooperation
mechanisms aimed at preventing the spread of
terrorism in Central Asia, including those within the
framework of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, are
gaining momentum and thus provide clear evidence of
that fact. There is a great deal of potential in the new
partnership between Russia and the countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The field of anti-terrorism is an integral part of
our continuous dialogue and cooperation with the
leading countries of the world, including the United
States, China, India and the States members of the
European Union. We are confident that the
development of such interaction at many levels will
promote a climate of confidence, security and
cooperation in all parts of the world.
The stability and credibility of the emerging
international system of the twenty-first century will
depend directly on the maintenance and strengthening
of strategic stability. This fundamental objective was
advanced by the signing, by the Presidents of Russia
and of the United States, at their May meeting in
Moscow, of the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty,
which was a specific, major contribution by the leading
nuclear Powers to nuclear disarmament.
It is also very important to ensure the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
danger of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or
their components falling into the irresponsible hands of
terrorists increases international terrorism's potential to
cause devastation. This means that there is a need to
step up efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery vehicles.
21

By acting jointly and responsibly, we have
already achieved a great deal. When we speak about
the establishment of new regimes for the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and for
arms control, we by no means wish to imply a
renunciation of regimes and agreements already in
effect. They are our shared protective mechanism  a
mechanism that is very reliable and has stood the test
of time. Unjustified removal of the key elements of the
international legal framework of non-proliferation can
aggravate the international military and strategic
situation and undermine global security.
Furthermore, we should universalize' the most
important agreements on non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and on comprehensive nuclear test ban. The
missile sphere needs a sustainable negotiating process
aimed at concluding an international arrangement on a
global regime of missile and missile technology non-
proliferation.
The prevention of the deployment of weapons in
outer space forms an integral part of the non-
proliferation process. Together with a number of our
partners we suggest that a comprehensive agreement be
worked out aimed at preserving outer space as a zone
free from any kind of weapons. We are confident that
this proposal serves the interests of all States, and
expect that it will enjoy wide support.
Since its establishment, the United Nations has
been engaged in the settlement of regional conflicts.
Those so-called local problems have long turned into
one of the main threats to international stability.
Terrorism, political extremism, and economic and
social degradation are their customary companions.
Certainly, the primary responsibility in any settlement
rests with the relevant parties, but multilateral
mechanisms have also repeatedly demonstrated their
effectiveness in the restoration of peace and concord. A
tangible progress made with the United Nations visible
involvement in the post-Taliban reconstruction of
Afghanistan is one of our common accomplishments.
We can add to this the adoption by the United Nations
Security Council of major practical decisions in
support of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East and the resolution of crises in a number of African
countries.
And yet, we are still far from a radical decrease in
the number and intensity of armed conflicts. Hard
work, requiring great human as well as material and
financial resources, is awaiting us. But the most
important here is the presence of a strong political will
to implement the provisions of the United Nations
Charter pertaining to the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Experience shows that no matter how complex
international crises and conflicts may be, whatever
challenges and threats they may be fraught with, they
can be settled with the aid of United Nations
instruments and on the basis of international law. This
fully applies to the situation around Iraq, which has
long required political settlement in strict compliance
with the Security Council resolutions.
The entire international community benefits from
a steady enhancement of the leading role of our
Organization in peacemaking. We cannot relax our
attention to this task.
At all times and throughout the world, terrorism
and extremism have tried to justify themselves with
continuous social and economic instability and poverty.
While recognizing the existence of these serious
problems we should state most resolutely that terrorism
does not and will not have any justification. At the
same time, the creation of a sustainable and fair global
financial and economic structure would, certainly, help
combat many dangerous challenges to mankind. The
latest major international forums  the International
Conference on Financing for Development
in Monterey, World Food Summit in Rome,
World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg  adopted decisions designed to uproot
the causes of the most threatening disparities in the
world. The next step is to implement the agreements
we have reached.
Equally sweeping are the tasks that face us in the
field of environmental protection. Natural disasters that
afflicted many regions of our planet this summer have
demonstrated again that the solution of environmental
issues cannot be put off unless we want to endanger the
very survival of future generations. This sphere also
depends on multilateral efforts that exclude the egoism
of individual States.
The initiative of Russian President Vladimir V.
Putin on holding in autumn 2003 a World Conference
on Climate Change in Moscow is designed to
coordinate our efforts in this field.
22

A year ago, the Russian Federation called on the
international community from the podium of the
United Nations General Assembly to create a global
system of counteraction to present-day threats and
challenges that would be aimed at tackling real issues
in the sphere of security and at meeting the vital
interests of each and every State. This system would
provide for long-term international stability and
sustainable development.
To be efficient, such a system needs a generally
recognized coordinating centre capable of rallying the
international community. And we do have such a
centre  the United Nations with its unique
legitimacy, universality and experience. Our common
task is to unite around the United Nations to provide it
with the necessary potential and resources and to
develop as much as possible its internal reserves.
Today, we can state with satisfaction that the
global system is already evolving and the beginning of
this process is largely successful. We suggest that an
additional impetus should be given to this process and
a resolution to encourage a most prompt creation of a
global system of counteraction to present-day threats
and challenges should be adopted at this session of the
General Assembly. By doing so, we will direct all
States towards the joint elaboration of its general shape
and parameters. This is even more relevant because
some of its parameters are already visible.
It is apparent that the system to be created must
be:
ñ Global, as modern challenges in the context of
globalization pose a universal threat, and should
be addressed at the global level.
ñ Comprehensive in scope, as each of the modern
threats bears a huge destructive potential and all
such problems without exceptions should be
embraced by the system.
ñ Holistic in approach, as quite often the new
threats and challenges are directly interrelated.
ñ Universal in participation.
Finally, the system should become a reflection of
the international rule of law, as its power will be built
on principles and regulations of international law, the
United Nations Charter above all.
We bear grave responsibility to future
generations, and the model of world order we will
establish is destined to influence the life on our planet
for decades. As for Russia, we have made our choice.
This is the choice in favour of a democratic, multi-
polar world order, which would guarantee sustainable
development and equal security for all States; a world
order formed on the basis of the extensive structure of
multilateral institutions integrated within the
framework of the United Nations.
We hope that the decisions of this General
Assembly session will mark an important stage of this
process.



﻿We meet one year and one day
after a terrorist attack brought grief to my country and
brought grief to many citizens of our world. Yesterday,
we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible
morning. Today we turn to the urgent duty of
protecting other lives without illusion and without fear.
We have accomplished much in the last year — in
Afghanistan and beyond. We have much yet to do — in
Afghanistan and beyond. Many nations represented
here have joined in the fight against global terror, and
the people of the United States are grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that
survived a world war — the hope of a world moving
towards justice, escaping old patterns of conflict and
fear. The founding Members resolved that the peace of
the world must never again be destroyed by the will
and the wickedness of any man. We created the United
Nations Security Council so that, unlike the League of
Nations, our deliberations would be more than talk, our
resolutions would be more than wishes. After
generations of deceitful dictators, broken treaties and
squandered lives, we dedicated ourselves to standards
of human dignity, shared by all, and to a system of
security defended by all.
Today, these standards, and this security, are
challenged.
Our commitment to human dignity is challenged
by persistent poverty and raging disease. The suffering
is great, and our responsibilities are clear. The United
States is joining with the world to supply aid where it
reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and
the prosperity it brings, and to bring medical care
where it is desperately needed.
As a symbol of our commitment to human
dignity, the United States will return to the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). This organization has been
reformed, and America will participate fully in its
mission to advance human rights, tolerance and
learning.
Our common security is challenged by regional
conflicts — ethnic and religious strife that is ancient,
but not inevitable. In the Middle East, there can be no
peace for either side without freedom for both sides.
America stands committed to an independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Like all other people, Palestinians
deserve a government that serves their interests and
listens to their voices. My nation will continue to
encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities
as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the
conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are
challenged today by outlaw groups and regimes that
accept no law of morality and have no limit to their
violent ambitions. In the attacks on America a year
ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies.
This threat hides within many nations, including my
own. In cells and camps, terrorists are plotting further
destruction and are building new bases for their war
against civilization. And our greatest fear is that
terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions
when an outlaw regime supplies them with the
technologies enabling them to kill on a massive scale.
In one place, in one regime, we find all these
dangers, in their most lethal and aggressive forms —
exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations
was born to confront. Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded
Kuwait without provocation. And the regime's forces
were poised to continue their march to seize other
countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein
been appeased instead of stopped, he would have
endangered the peace and stability of the world. Yet,
this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition
forces and the will of the United Nations.
In order to suspend hostilities and to spare
himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of
commitments. The terms were clear to him, and to all.
And he agreed to prove that he is complying with every
one of those obligations. He has proven instead only
his contempt for the United Nations and for all his
pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions
and by his cruelties, Saddam Hussein has made the
case against himself.
In 1991, Security Council resolution 688 (1991)
demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once the
repression of its own people, including the systematic
repression of minorities, which the Council said,
“threaten[ed] international peace and security in the
region”.
This demand goes ignored. Last year, the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq
continues to commit extremely grave violations of
human rights and that the regime's repression is all
pervasive. Tens of thousands of political opponents and
7

ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest
and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by
beating, burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation
and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands;
children in the presence of their parents; and all of
these horrors are concealed from the world by the
apparatus of a totalitarian State.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through its resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991),
demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait
and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this
promise. Last year the Secretary-General's high-level
coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti, Saudi,
Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini,
and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for — more
than 600 people. One American pilot is among them.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through resolution 687 (1991), demanded that Iraq
renounce all involvement with terrorism and permit no
terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq's regime
agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), Iraq continues to
shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct
violence against Iran, Israel, and Western
Governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for
murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Emir
of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq's
Government openly praised the attacks of 11
September. Al-Qaida terrorists have escaped from
Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq.
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and to
stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and
long-range missiles, and to prove to the world it has
done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq
has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge.
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had
no biological weapons. After a senior official in its
weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the
regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of
litres of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for
use in Scud missile warheads, aerial bombs and aircraft
spray tanks. United Nations inspectors believe Iraq has
produced two to four times the amount of biological
agents it declared and has failed to account for more
than three metric tons of material that could be used to
produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is
expanding and improving facilities that were used for
the production of biological weapons.
United Nations inspections also reveal that Iraq
likely maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard and other
chemical agents, and that the regime is rebuilding and
expanding facilities capable of producing chemical
weapons.
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq
finally admitted that it had had a crash nuclear
weapons programme prior to the Gulf war. We know
now that, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq
would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later
than 1993.
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important
information about its nuclear programme: weapons
design, procurement logs, experiment data, an
accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of
foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear
scientists and technicians. It retains physical
infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq
has made several attempts to buy high-strength
aluminium tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear
weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would
be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And
Iraq's State-controlled media have reported numerous
meetings between Saddam Hussein and his nuclear
scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued
appetite for these weapons.
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles
with ranges beyond the 150 kilometres permitted by the
United Nations. Work at testing and production
facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range
missiles that can inflict mass death throughout the
region.
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the
world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Those
sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the
regime's compliance with Security Council resolutions.
In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy
food. Saddam Hussein has subverted that programme,
working around the sanctions to buy missile
technology and military materials. He blames the
suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even
as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for
himself and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to
comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for
the hunger and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens.
In 1991, Iraq promised United Nations inspectors
immediate and unrestricted access to verify Iraq's
commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass
8

destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke that
promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading and
harassing United Nations inspectors before ceasing
cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991
ceasefire, the Security Council twice renewed its
demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with
inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of its
obligations. The Security Council again renewed that
demand in 1994 and twice more in 1996, deploring
Iraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security
Council renewed its demand three more times in 1997,
citing flagrant violations, and three more times in
1998, calling Iraq's behaviour totally unacceptable.
And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again.
As we meet today, it has been almost four years
since the last United Nations inspector set foot in
Iraq — four years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to
build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. We know
that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder
even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to
assume that he stopped when they left? The history, the
logic and the facts lead to one conclusion. Saddam
Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger. To
suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To
assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of
millions and the peace of the world in a reckless
gamble. And that is a risk we must not take.
We have been more than patient. We have tried
sanctions. We have tried the carrot of oil-for-food and
the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam
Hussein has defied all those efforts and continues to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The first time we
may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is
when, God forbid, he uses one. We owe it to all our
citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that
day from coming.
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the
authority of the United Nations and a threat to peace.
Iraq has answered a decade of United Nations demands
with a decade of defiance. All the world now faces a
test and the United Nations a difficult and defining
moment. Are Security Council resolutions to be
honoured and enforced or cast aside without
consequence? Will the United Nations serve the
purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant?
The United States helped found the United
Nations. We want the United Nations to be effective
and respected and successful. We want the resolutions
of the world's most important multilateral body to be
enforced, and right now those resolutions are being
unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our
partnership of nations can meet the test before us by
making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose
and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction,
long-range missiles and all related material.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all support for terrorism and act to
suppress it, as all States are required to do by Security
Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease
persecution of its civilian population, including Shia,
Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans and others — again, as
required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or
account for all Gulf war personnel whose fate is still
unknown. It will return the remains of any who are
deceased, return stolen property, accept liability for
losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait and fully
cooperate with international efforts to resolve those
issues, as required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food
programme. It will accept United Nations
administration of funds from that programme, to ensure
that the money is used fairly and promptly for the
benefit of the Iraqi people.
If all those steps are taken, it will signal a new
openness and accountability in Iraq. And it could open
the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a
Government that represents all Iraqis — a Government
based on respect for human rights, economic liberty
and internationally supervised elections.
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi
people. They have suffered too long in silent captivity.
Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a
great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it. The
security of all nations requires it.
Free societies do not intimidate through cruelty
and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the
world with mass murder. The United States supports
political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq.
9

We can harbour no illusions, and that is important
today to remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in
1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He has fired ballistic
missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Israel.
His regime once ordered the killing of every person
between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish
villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians
and 40 Iraqi villages.
My nation will work with the Security Council to
meet our common challenge. If Iraq's regime defies us
again, the world must move deliberately and decisively
to hold Iraq to account. We will work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions. But the purposes
of the United States should not be doubted. The
Security Council resolutions will be enforced, and the
just demands of peace and security will be met, or
action will be unavoidable, and a regime that has lost
its legitimacy will also lose its power.
Events can turn in one of two ways.
If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people
of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. The
regime will have new power to bully, dominate and
conquer its neighbours, condemning the Middle East to
more years of bloodshed and fear. The region will
remain unstable, with little hope of freedom, and
isolated from the progress of our times. With every step
the Iraqi regime takes towards gaining and deploying
the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront
that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regime
were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies, then
the attacks of 11 September would be a prelude to far
greater horrors.
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome
this danger, we can arrive at a very different future.
The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They
can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a
democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the
Muslim world. These nations can show by their
example that honest government, respect for women,
and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph
in the Middle East and beyond. We will show that the
promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our
time.
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have
been set before us. We must choose between a world of
fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and
do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand up for
our security and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States
of America will make that stand. Representatives to the
United Nations have the power to make that stand as
well.




﻿I would like to join in thanking
the outgoing President of the General Assembly for the
diligent manner in which he managed the affairs of the
Assembly. I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for taking over the leadership of the
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. We hope that you
will have a successful tenure in your stewardship of
this important body.
Allow us to also welcome Switzerland and East
Timor to membership of the United Nations.
Two years ago, the world's political leaders met
at this place and, through the historic United Nations
Millennium Declaration, reaffirmed our faith in the
United Nations Organization and its Charter as
indispensable foundations of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. That an unprecedented
number of heads of State and Government had gathered
at the United Nations to make that commitment to
cooperation among the peoples of the world — to
peace, prosperity and justice throughout our
universe — gave hope to the billions throughout the
world who know the painful meaning of oppression by
10

another, of war and violent conflict, of poverty and
injustice.
None of those who spoke from this podium knew
that a year after they had pledged to use their energies
and talents to provide a meaningful life for all, peace in
this country and the rest of the world would be brutally
challenged by the murderous terrorist attack of 11
September. We meet a day after the anniversary of that
fateful 11 September. We have a collective duty to
reaffirm our united resolve to create a world free of the
fear of terrorism. We have a common task to ensure
that this Organization truly lives up to its obligations to
do all the things that make for peace. We have a solemn
obligation to give real meaning to the message of hope
we proclaimed in the Millennium Declaration. It may
be that future generations will say that if we have
learned anything at all from the horrendous events of
11 September, it is that the General Assembly should
dedicate its efforts to the accomplishment of these
tasks.
In keeping with that perspective, we have come to
the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
report that the peoples of Africa have risen to those
challenges by forming the African Union. Our Union is
based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It results from the transformation of
the Organization of African Unity, which championed
the cause of the unity and independence of Africa for
nearly 40 years. The African Union is Africa's
practical and determined response to its past and
present, in favour of peace and stability, democracy
and human rights, cooperation, development,
prosperity and human dignity. Its programme for the
socio-economic revitalization of our continent is the
New Partnership for Africa's Development, which must
help us to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment
throughout Africa and, within the context of the
African Union, end Africa's humiliation as an object of
charity.
Clearly, the objectives of the African Union and
the programme enunciated in the New Partnership
essentially, and of necessity, seek to advance the aims
contained in the Millennium Development Goals.
Naturally, the United Nations — as an Organization
seized of the task to address the critical issues of peace,
human rights and poverty eradication within the
framework of sustainable development — will forever
be central to the success of the African Union and the
accomplishment of the goals of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development. Accordingly, on behalf of
the united peoples of Africa, we are honoured and
privileged to commend to this Organization both the
African Union and the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. We are convinced that with the support
of the United Nations, we will transform this into an
African century.
We are happy that there are encouraging peace
processes in Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan, with the Comoros already
having held successful elections. We are particularly
pleased because these positive developments will
create the possibility for millions of our fellow
Africans to reaffirm the sanctity of human life and
security and to engage in the important tasks of
rebuilding their countries to bring about a better life for
all.
As part of our commitment to wage a sustained
struggle to realize the long-deferred hopes of the
peoples of Africa, we have agreed to the establishment
of various institutions, including a peer-review
mechanism, which must help us ensure that we honour
our commitments to democracy, human rights and good
governance. I am confident that the United Nations will
work closely with the African Union and that this
premier Organization of the peoples of the world will
use its vast and invaluable experience to ensure that the
African Union delivers on the important and pressing
duty of achieving sustainable development in each and
every country on our continent.
Together, the agencies of the United Nations and
the organs of the African Union must give priority to
such matters as human resources development and
capacity-building, modernizing Africa's economy,
dealing decisively with the intolerable debt burden,
ensuring access of our products to the markets of the
developed world, spreading the emancipation and
empowerment of women, combating communicable
and other diseases — including AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis — and fighting against environmental
degradation.
At the end of August and the beginning of this
month, the people of South Africa and Africa were
honoured to host the World Summit for Sustainable
Development. A number of far-reaching decisions were
taken at that important Summit to ensure that we will
bequeath to the next generations a better, humane and
equitable world based on what we agree are the
11

inseparable pillars of sustainable development:
economic development, social development and
environmental protection. Delegates from around the
world enshrined the decisions they took in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development
to ensure that the billions of people who have placed
their fate on our collective shoulders have a concrete
programme of action to realize the goals contained in
Agenda 21 and other documents adopted by the world
community of nations during the last 10 years.
The Johannesburg Summit confronted the stark
reality that billions of people across the world are poor,
and it boldly confirmed the need for us to collaborate
for a shared human prosperity through sustainable
development. We agree that this goal can be achieved
because we are inspired by the knowledge that the
resources needed exist within the global community.
Indeed, Member States have already committed
themselves to make available the means necessary for
the implementation of our plans, especially finance,
technology and capacity-building.
It is critically important that we implement
everything we agreed, acting with the necessary sense
of urgency. Again, this we will do together, under the
leadership of the United Nations, while we continue to
strengthen the multilateral system of global governance
as the only viable international response to all our
challenges. Fundamentally, this is the only credible
response to the challenge of globalization and the need
to enhance human solidarity to meet our common
needs.
It has been our privilege to chair the Non-Aligned
Movement for the past four years. During that time, the
Movement has ensured constant dialogue between the
countries of the North and South, which has advanced
the commonality of interest between States, confirming
the view that the future of all humanity is interlinked.
We are pleased that the views of the Movement have
helped to inform the advance towards a better life for
all, to which we have all committed ourselves by word
and deed.
In February next year, Malaysia will assume the
responsibility of guiding our Movement as it responds
to the changed and changing global environment. I am
certain that this will add new strength to the Non-
Aligned Movement in the interests of all humanity,
especially the poor of the world. As before, the Non-
Aligned Movement is committed to the peaceful
resolution of all conflicts, including those pertaining to
Palestine and Israel, as well as Iraq, in keeping with the
resolutions of the United Nations. These are urgent
tasks to which the Organization must respond.
In conclusion, let me recall that two years ago in
the Millennium Declaration more than 150 heads of
State or Government resolved that “we believe that the
central challenge we face today is to ensure that
globalization becomes a positive force for all the
world's people” (resolution 55/2, para. 5). Through
both our global and our regional programmes we can
and must ensure that globalization indeed becomes a
valuable process which will bring about sustainable
development and prosperity for all.
From this fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly must surely issue the unequivocal message
that the peoples of the world are united in their resolve
to sustain the message of hope by advancing the goals
of peace, of democracy, of prosperity and of
sustainable development.





﻿First of all, Sir, please allow me to offer my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the current session of the General Assembly. I wish
also to express my gratitude to Mr. Han Seung-soo,
President of the previous session of the Assembly.
I wish to congratulate the Swiss Confederation on
having joined the United Nations and also to welcome
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, which will
soon become a Member of the Organization.
The opening of this session coincides with the
first anniversary of the events of 11 September. Over
the past year, the international campaign against
terrorism has made headway, and now we should not
only ponder ways to eradicate the global scourge of
terrorism, but also take a broader view of the security
issues facing humankind and seek to achieve lasting
peace and universal security.
At present, the international security situation is
undergoing profound changes. Security has begun to
take on wider connotations. While traditional military
antagonism and conflicts have yet to be eliminated, a
variety of non-traditional security concerns have
become increasingly prominent. Security is no longer a
purely military concern. It has permeated politics,
economics, finance, science, technology, culture and
many other areas.
Security is no longer a zero-sum game. Its
mutuality is obviously on the increase, as countries
have come to realize that they have common security
interests and feel a greater sense of interdependence.
We must overhaul the tools at our disposal to
achieve security. Military means alone have proved
inadequate in meeting the massive and complex
security challenges facing us. The indiscriminate use of
force can only lead to greater trouble in our world.
This new situation calls for new ideas in the area
of safeguarding security. We in China believe in a new
security concept that features mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation.
By mutual trust, we mean that countries should
rise above their differing ideologies and social systems,
abandon the cold-war mentality and the power politics
mindset, and refrain from harbouring suspicion and
hostility towards each other. They should hold frequent
dialogues and mutual briefings on their security and
defence policies or on the major actions they are about
to take.
By mutual benefit, we mean that a country should
respect the security interests of others while pursuing
its own, and also help to create conditions for
enhancing the security of others while making itself
more secure  thus achieving universal security.
By equality, we mean that all countries  large
or small, strong or weak  should respect each other,
treat each other as equals and refrain from interfering
in each other's internal affairs, so that international
relations can become more democratized.
By cooperation, we mean that countries should
resolve their disputes through peaceful negotiations,
engage in extensive and close cooperation on their
shared security concerns and work to prevent wars and
conflicts.
All in all, our new security concept is aimed at
increasing mutual trust through dialogue and at
promoting common security through cooperation.
It is in the spirit of this new security concept that
we in China have been working hard to promote
mechanisms for a regional security dialogue and
cooperation, actively participating in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and in the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum,
and endeavouring to establish an Asia-Pacific security
framework that is for dialogue and against
confrontation.
China is actively committed to international arms
control, disarmament and the non-proliferation process.
Not long ago, the Chinese Government promulgated
the Regulations on Export Controls of Missiles and
Related Items and Technologies and its Control List.
The Chinese Government will make further
improvements on its export-management mechanisms
for biological and chemical dual-use items. We call on
the international community actively to undertake
dialogue and cooperation in the spirit of this new
security concept, in a joint effort to tackle the major
security concerns of the day.
We should press ahead with international
cooperation against terrorism and curb the threat of
international terrorism once and for all.
Counter-terrorism should be pursued on the basis
of international law and of the norms governing
16

international relations, allowing the United Nations and
its Security Council to play a leading role. It should
take a comprehensive approach, with a focus on
eliminating the root causes of terrorism. Efforts should
be made to prevent the arbitrary enlargement of the
scope of the counter-terrorism campaign, but proven
terrorists, including the East Turkestan terrorist
forces  trained, armed and bankrolled by the Taliban
and Al Qaeda  must be resolutely stamped out.
We should step up dialogue and reconciliation
processes and facilitate the settlement of regional hot-
spot issues.
China supports the Palestinian people and their
just cause to regain their legitimate national rights and
to establish their own State. We support the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the principle of land
for peace. We are opposed to violence targeting
innocent civilians, and we reject responding to violence
with violence.
We stand for a political settlement of the question
of Iraq. The United Nations should play an important
role in this regard. Iraq should implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions in a faithful and strict
manner.
We hope that India and Pakistan will soon resume
dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect
and resolve all their differences, including that over
Kashmir, through peaceful means.
We will continue to work constructively for a
lasting peace in Afghanistan and its post-war
rehabilitation. We support the important role of the
United Nations in this regard.
We should strengthen exchanges and dialogues
among different civilizations and thereby avert conflict
or confrontation. Differences among diverse
civilizations are a basic characteristic of humanity.
We have every reason to treat the achievements of
various civilizations kindly and to promote exchanges
among them on the basis of respect for diversity.
Everyone is encouraged to draw upon the strength of
others with a view to realizing common development.
Peace and development go hand in hand. Many of
the problems we face today may be development-
related. In coping with these challenges, it is all the
more important to look to development for answers. In
the past year, the United Nations has held a series of
important meetings on development such as the World
Summit on Sustainable Development. What is needed,
right now, is to translate the programmes and
commitments into reality.
In the past year, regional economic cooperation
has continued to move forward. We feel especially
happy about the launching of the African Union,
convinced that Africa will now take fresh strides on the
road to development. At present, our development
tasks have become more pressing. The widening wealth
gap in the world must be reversed. Frequent economic
and social shocks must be dealt with. The sharpening
clashes between economic development, on the one
hand, and resources and the environment, on the other,
must be allayed. The international order and the rules
of the game, which do not fairly reflect the needs of
developing countries, must be changed.
We would like to make the following
propositions. First, to establish a global partnership
geared to development. Governments, international
organizations, transnational corporations and non-
governmental groups are all parties to the cause of
development. The North and the South, the aid-
recipient countries and international aid institutions,
should be equal and cooperative partners in dealing
with the global economic slowdown. The developed
countries ought to lend developing countries a helping
hand. The new round of multilateral trade talks should
be seized as an important opportunity for forging such
a new partnership.
Secondly, to promote a balanced and steady
development in the context of economic globalization.
The international community needs to reform current
roles in the world economy, strengthen guidance and
management of the globalization process and promote
a win-win situation and coexistence among countries.
Thirdly, to strengthen the developing countries'
capacity for self-development. Developing countries
should opt for a development path suited to them and
strive to catch up with the tide of global economic
development. The international community should
respect the right of developing countries to
independently choose a development path, and help
them with capacity-building.
Fourthly, in order to continue on the path of
sustainable development, we should promote a
balanced development of the economy, population,
resources and the environment. Efforts to address the
17

environmental problems of individual countries should
be combined with those aimed at global concerns.
Fifthly, to enhance comprehensive development of the
people. Human resources are the primary resources for
advancing science and technology and for realizing
economic and social development. In formulating
development strategies, countries should make the
people their top priority and main beneficiary.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold its
sixteenth national Congress, the very first in the new
century. Standing in the forefront of the historical tide
and displaying a spirit of progressing with the times,
this party Congress will draw up a new blueprint for
accelerating socialist modernization in China. Our
guiding thought is to consistently represent the
development requirements of China's advanced
productive forces, represent the orientation of China's
advanced culture and represent the fundamental
interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese
people. Our historic mission is to accelerate the drive
for modernization, complete the reunification of the
motherland, maintain world peace and promote
common development.
The first 10 to 20 years of this century present
China with an important strategic window of
opportunity for its development. While taking
development as our number one priority, we must grasp
the opportunities, deepen reform, open the country still
wider to the outside world, promote development and
maintain stability.
We will continue to pursue an independent
foreign policy of peace, actively develop friendly
relations in cooperation with all countries in the world
on the basis of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence, and facilitate international dialogue and
cooperation, thus contributing constructively to a fairer
and more equitable international order.
There is but one China in the world. Both the
mainland and Taiwan belong to that one China, and
China's sovereignty and territorial integrity brook no
division. The Chinese Government adheres to the basic
policy of peaceful reunification and one country, two
systems; and President Jiang Zemin's eight point
proposal on how to develop cross-strait' relations and
promote a peaceful reunification of the motherland for
the current stage. We are firm in our opposition to all
forms of Taiwanese independence activities and will
tolerate no attempt to separate Taiwan from the rest of
China in any fashion. All acts of Taiwan independence
are doomed to failure and our grand cause of national
reunification will triumph.


﻿First of all, I
should like to wish you every success, Mr. President, in
your responsible office. We are delighted that you, a
representative of our Czech neighbours, will preside
over the General Assembly this year. I also express my
sincere thanks to the outgoing President.
I endorse the statement of the Danish presidency
of the European Union.
One year ago, the world was shaken by the terror
of 11 September, which was disdainful of human life.
Civilian aircraft were transformed into guided missiles
whose deployment had been planned without any
regard for human life. The devastating consequences
destroyed families, shattered hopes and tore people
apart, regardless of their age, gender or religious
affiliation. Three days ago, we remembered the victims
in a moving ceremony here in New York. We have not
forgotten the images of 11 September; we have not
recovered from the shock. Our solidarity with the
United States is unbroken. We understand our
American friends. Just like them, we are not prepared
to live under the sword of Damocles that terrorism
represents.
The murderous attack on the people and the
Administration of the United States was also an attack
on all open societies. Countless States mourn their
countrymen among the thousands of World Trade
Center victims. The attack could have struck any open
society, but the terrorists consciously chose the United
States as a symbol of freedom and democracy.
We know that the new totalitarian challenge is
also directed at us all. Since 11 September 2001, the
community of nations has had to look at the question of
peace and security at the dawn of the twenty-first
century from a whole new angle. We will not be able to
negotiate with terrorists like Osama bin Laden. His aim
is to kill as many innocent people as possible, thus
creating the maximum degree of terror and fear. If the
terrorists succeed in acquiring weapons that are yet
more horrific, they will deploy them against us all
without hesitation. Therefore, we must work together
in the international coalition against terrorism to
overcome and destroy that international terrorist
network. The highly dangerous combination of
religious hatred, smouldering regional conflicts,
terrorist attacks and the danger of the deployment of
weapons of mass destruction must be prevented at any
price.
But, above all else, we must not forget: on the
one hand, terrorism must be fought resolutely by the
military and police; on the other, we need to resolve the
political and social conflicts quite rightly emphasized
in the Millennium Declaration, as they form the
breeding ground for the emergence of terrorism. Opting
for one approach and neglecting the other risks failure.
Our common goal is for the people in our
countries to be able to live in safety and freedom, and
without want. To achieve that, we need a system of
global cooperative security that, unlike the former
bipolarity of the cold war, includes all levels of global
policy relevant to security: the relations among great
17

Powers and their alliances as well as the potential
danger of regional crises and the threat posed by
asymmetrical conflicts. For one thing is clearer than
ever after 11 September: terrorism threatens world
peace just as much as civil war and regional conflicts.
Such a system, therefore, must not be toothless, but
rather must function in all three fields through reliable
verification systems and enforceable sanctions
mechanisms. I am convinced that developing such a
comprehensive system of global cooperative security
will be our central political task for the twenty-first
century.
This problem can be solved only through
multilateralism — that is, if nations work together.
Terrorism does not stop at national borders, and
shaping globalization is a task that Governments can
no longer tackle alone. Thus, the United Nations has a
major role to play in developing this security system; it
is the most important forum for establishing global
rules. No other organization has comparable legitimacy
and credibility. Decisively strengthening its ability to
act by continuing the reform path of the Secretary-
General is, therefore, a central focus of German foreign
policy.
The developments in Iraq fill us with grave
concern. Saddam Hussein's regime is a brutal
dictatorship. Under his leadership, Iraq has attacked its
neighbours Iran and Kuwait, has fired missiles at Israel
and has used poison gas against Iran and against its
own Kurdish population. The regime is horrendous for
the Iraqi people and a risk to the region. For that
reason, an effective containment policy and reliable
military control of the no-fly zones have been
implemented and a strict sanctions regime against Iraq
has been introduced since the Gulf War.
The regime in Baghdad must not own or produce
the means for mass destruction or the systems to
deliver them. Despite binding demands from the
Security Council, Saddam Hussein refuses to provide
credible and verifiable answers to the pressing
questions posed by the community of nations regarding
his weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, the United
Nations not only must maintain the pressure on the
Iraqi Government but also must intensify it.
We welcome the fact that President Bush, in his
most recent speech, turned towards the Security
Council. Even if it becomes very difficult, we must do
everything possible to find a diplomatic solution.
The Security Council and Member States must
make it unequivocally clear to Baghdad that the
unrestricted and unconditional re-admission of the
weapons inspectors is the only way to avert a great
tragedy for Iraq and the entire region. The Iraqi
Government must implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions in their entirety and without delay.
We do not, however, want any automatism
leading to the use of military force. The fight against
international terrorism remains perilous. We have not
yet managed to fully stabilize Afghanistan. Explosive
regional conflicts in Kashmir, the Middle East and the
Caucasus must be resolved or at least effectively
contained.
Certain central questions arise for us. Have all
economic and political means of pressure been truly
exhausted? What consequences would military
intervention have? What would it mean for regional
stability? What effect would it have on the Middle East
conflict? Are there new, concrete findings and facts?
Does the situation as assessed justify the taking of a
great risk, namely, taking responsibility for peace and
stability in the entire region for years or even decades
to come? Would such action gain the consent of the
Arab neighbours? What consequences would it have
for the continuation of the global coalition against
terrorism? In the face of these open questions, we feel
deep scepticism with regard to military action and thus
hold to our approach.
I would like to pose the further question of
whether a peaceful solution to the question of the
Middle East could not contribute considerably more to
the establishment of regional stability, to the successful
fight against terrorism and to the effective control and
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction. In that
way, would the regime in Baghdad not be isolated
much more effectively, thus generating political
pressure for change? Would this cooperative approach
to finding a new order for the region not be a more
promising way to bring democracy to the Middle
East — one that would be supported by the regional
Powers?
Nowhere is the connection between terrorism and
regional conflict more obvious than in the Near and
Middle East. The breakthrough to peace is therefore of
paramount importance in that region of the world. The
consensus among the international community of
nations on the Middle East question is now greater than
18

ever. We must all pull together to achieve the goal
envisaged by President Bush for 2005, that of two
States, Israel and a democratic Palestine, living as
neighbours within secure and recognized borders. The
European Union has devised a road map to achieve that
goal. An early conference on the Middle East could
help to build bridges and accelerate the process.
Together with our European Union partners, we are
ready to make a considerable contribution in that
respect.
A comprehensive peace in the Middle East must
also include Lebanon and Syria. Saudi Arabia's
significant initiative contains the assurance that the
Arab world would then also be ready to fully normalize
its relations with Israel.
Without a just and lasting solution to regional
conflicts, we will not be able to eliminate the
recruitment base for terrorists and thus successfully
counter the asymmetrical threat. Afghanistan is an
obvious example here. The Taliban system has
collapsed there and the Al Qaeda network has largely
been destroyed. We are still a long way from being able
to call the situation in the country stable and secure,
but progress can be noted. The implementation of the
provisions of the Bonn Conference agreement began
with the formation of a legitimate Interim
Administration. The process that was launched on the
Petersberg was taken to the next level with the
convening in June of the emergency loya jirga. For the
first time in years, the Afghan people have the chance
to lead a life of dignity based on self-determination.
The people of Afghanistan will only grow in
courage, however, when they see and feel that the
international community is also standing by its pledges
for the reconstruction of their country. The
commitments of the donor countries must materialize
in the form of concrete projects.
A system of global cooperative security must be
based on a comprehensive security concept. This must
embrace not only military security but also the
economy, human rights, democracy and culture.
“To achieve a safer world, we must create a better
world”: that is how President Bush summed up the
situation in his impressive speech to the German
Bundestag last May. Shaping cooperative global
security therefore also means shaping a new global
economic order. Account must be taken of the needs of
all — the developing and the developed world alike.
Resources must be more fairly distributed and poorer
countries must be able to participate in international
trade and take advantage of the opportunities of
globalization. This will necessitate free market access
for all, as well as the realization of economic and
political freedoms and a just and reliable legal
framework.
We must not close our eyes to the problems of
Africa, in particular. The food situation in the South of
the continent is a particular source of concern.
Countless people are going hungry and comprehensive
assistance is needed there. In Zimbabwe, however, the
former granary of Africa, a wholly irresponsible policy
is the reason for the difficult situation. In Zimbabwe,
hunger is caused principally not by failed harvests or
droughts but by self-destructive governance — a policy
of keeping a grip on power through the suffering of the
people. Such a policy relies upon the fact that the
international community's humanitarian conscience
and readiness to assume responsibility will reduce the
consequences. We must hold this policy up against the
benchmarks defined by Africa itself in the framework
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development.
Climate and energy policy is a key component of
the new global economic order. The Kyoto Protocol
can be seen as a milestone in global climate protection.
I am delighted that several countries have recently
announced plans to ratify the Protocol, and hope that
this will happen as soon as possible so that it can enter
into force. In the long term, a sensible energy policy —
and that means, above all, the promotion of renewable
energy sources and economical energy consumption —
is the best solution to the climate problem. Work must
therefore start today. Let us not forget that difficult
economic and ecological problems, with their social
and humanitarian repercussions, will increasingly
endanger stability and security too.
The protection of human rights must be one of the
pillars of a global security system. All efforts to secure
peace will fail if human rights are not protected and
made a reality. We need a binding global set of values
to prevent and overcome conflicts that emerge through
inequality, injustice and the denial of freedom. Here,
too, States are called upon to play a decisive and active
role. Moreover, we must be careful today to ensure that
basic human rights are not annulled under the pretext
of combating terrorism. No one has the right to an
“anti-terrorism bonus”.
19

Cooperative global security will have to measure
up to the binding legal framework in which it is
embedded. It is imperative for the globalization process
to be flanked by a growing set of international rules,
because international law and the rule of law constitute
the indispensable foundations for peaceful and ordered
coexistence. That is why the establishment of the
International Criminal Court is so important to us. Its
Statute entered into force on 1 July; Germany, along
with all the other members of the European Union, is
among the 79 States to have ratified it. The Assembly
of States Parties gave the green light this week to the
establishment of the Court. Next spring we will
celebrate its opening in The Hague. The International
Criminal Court will start work as soon as possible and
as efficiently as possible. But it must not be weakened
in its work from the outset.
My country is applying for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2003-2004.
Germany wants to play an active role in developing the
international security system within the United Nations
along the lines that I have outlined. I would like to ask
all members for their vote in the election on 27
September.





﻿I wish at the outset to pay tribute to the
remarkable work of the Secretary-General, who,
through his outstanding personal qualities and sense of
dialogue, gives our Organization unparalleled
influence. I congratulate Mr. Jan Kavan on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-
seventh session. I also congratulate Switzerland on its
admission to our Organization, and Timor-Leste on its
forthcoming admission.
A year ago, to our stunned horror, New York and
Washington were struck in unprecedented attacks.
From now on no one now can disregard the dark side
of the world: international terrorism that combines
archaism with technology, and shifting underground
28

criminal networks with a growing risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
These formidable opponents insinuate themselves
into the heart of the world's complexity. They play on
frustrations and resentment, hatred and fears. They foil
our plans; they know how to find weak spots and turn
our weapons against us. No, the world is definitely not
suffering from an excess of power. To the contrary, it is
suddenly discovering its extreme vulnerability.
Faced with these threats, the temptation to forge
blindly ahead could emerge. That would be a serious
mistake. Force cannot be the sole response to these
elusive adversaries that are constantly changing.
The example of Afghanistan shows this.
Mobilizing the international community enabled us to
overthrow a retrograde totalitarian regime that
harboured and supported the Al Qaeda network and
dealt a harsh blow to terrorist infrastructures. That was
necessary, but it is not enough. We must now rebuild;
we must help the Afghan people, maintain our efforts
over the long term, and continue our work to bring
about stability and democracy, but also to dismantle the
drug economy and the trafficking it fuels.
The fact that force alone is often futile is one of
the characteristics of our age. We live in a world that is
interdependent, where cause and effect may be distant,
indirect and unpredictable. Let us take care that our
interventions do not give rise to new frustrations,
produce new imbalances or spark fires that we cannot
put out.
The case of Iraq is typical of this new situation. It
is a country that has defied the authority of the Security
Council and flouted international law for years. It is a
regime that poses a grave threat to security, particularly
the security of the peoples of its region, because of the
risk of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Its
conduct is the direct cause of the great suffering
endured by its people.
Is the international community concerned? Of
course it is. Can it continue to tolerate this situation?
Definitely not. Should it act? Obviously: the status quo
cannot go on. France's determination to obtain
compliance with the law is absolute.
We must act, but we must do so effectively. We
must act, but without risking results opposite to those
we seek. We must take care not to exacerbate a
situation that is already very disturbing. We must act,
but there are many traps. Intervention that is politically
or legally ill-defined or poorly mounted would not
garner the broad support necessary; it might galvanize
public opinion in the region against it, and the regime
in Baghdad, which is isolated now, could benefit;
lastly, it might exacerbate tension in the Middle East
and beyond at a time when we should, on the contrary,
redouble our efforts to return to the path of dialogue
and peace.
How are these traps to be avoided? How are we to
succeed? There is only one way, and it is demanding. It
is the path of responsibility  collective responsibility.
The world now is one of interdependence. Its stability
concerns us all. All of us must contribute to it.
The necessary measures must be adopted by the
international community after in-depth and transparent
consideration. Any temptation to engage in unilateral
preventive action would be dangerous. We must take
care to avoid any suspicion of bias or injustice. This is
the only way to ensure that any action to enforce law
and restore security does not add to insecurity. That is
the best guarantee of effectiveness.
That is why, in the case of Iraq, France advocates
a dÈmarche made completely legitimate by collective
deliberation. It requires two successive steps. First, we
must together reaffirm the need for United Nations
inspectors to return and demand that Iraq comply at
last with its obligations under the Security Council
decisions taken since 1991, and do so according to a
definite timetable. That is the objective of the
international community. It is also in Iraq's interest. If
Baghdad persists in its refusal to allow the inspectors
to return unconditionally, then there must be
consequences. The Security Council should then decide
on the measures to be taken without excluding any
option. Responsibilities would be clarified. The world
must be able to act. But it must also be coherent and
effective, in a sustained way. That is today the real
challenge to our values, and to our democracies.
I recently travelled to the Middle East, the
Balkans and Afghanistan. I realized the strength of the
aspirations and hopes for peace. But I also saw how the
efforts and energies of various parties need to be united
and centred on a collective ambition.
No Power can today assume sole responsibility
for world equilibrium. The world aspires to be
structured around poles of stability and progress. In
addition to the United States, the European Union is
29

naturally destined to form one such pole, along with
Russia, China, Japan and India, among others. In future
each actor must make its contribution to the effort. It is
a common project that we must build.
That is the ambition that inspires the European
Union, and France's action within it. The Union affirms
its role on the world stage in the service of peace and
prosperity. It is acquiring the appropriate diplomatic
and defence instruments. With a view to major
enlargement, the Union is also committed to genuinely
re-making its design. That is the purpose of the
Convention on the Future of Europe, guided by the
principles of democracy and effectiveness for a future
Europe. In that way, the Union will contribute to the
stability of the continent and beyond. Finally, the
European model reconciles in a unique way the
requirements of social cohesion and economic
performance to further a common plan, while
respecting the diversity of all. For all those reasons, I
am convinced that Europe's voice offers elements for
addressing the major challenges of our time.
Today, power in all its aspects must be shared. It
is essential to listen to diverse approaches and points of
view. A dialogue among cultures is essential. Only this
will enable us to understand the main issues today by
taking into account the history and aspirations of every
people and every country. Only this can prevent us
from having too narrow a conception of the world
based on ignorance and on fear of the other. Only this
can guide us in putting humankind back at the centre of
our concerns and at the heart of our action and our
shared commitment.
Sharing means responding to the requirement of
solidarity. Extreme poverty, famine, epidemics and
financial crises are factors contributing to disorder and
fomenting instability. Terrorism feeds on these things.
Generosity must be the corollary of power. It is our
political and moral duty. It is also in our own interest.
Accordingly, France has pledged to augment its
development assistance, which will increase by 50 per
cent over the next five years.
Owing to its geographic proximity and historical
and cultural ties, my country has a deep friendship for
Africa. It feels a special responsibility. That continent,
more than others, needs the solidarity of the
international community in the difficult trials it is
experiencing: the too-numerous conflicts that persist;
the return of the spectre of famine; the economic
difficulties; and the tragedy of AIDS, which today
strikes nearly 30 million Africans.
Yet Africa is rich in potential, rich in the
enthusiasm of its young people and in the energy of its
civil society, and rich in memory, in tradition and in a
treasury of wisdom from which we all have much to
learn. Important efforts are under way today to advance
human rights, democracy, the fight against corruption,
and favourable economic and social policies for strong
and balanced growth. The establishment of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development attests to the
continent's willingness to take charge of its
development, in the context of a renewed partnership
with the industrialized countries. Let us recognize and
support those efforts.
In particular, we must help Africa to move
forward on the path of conflict resolution in Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and the Sudan. Those
tragedies concern us all, because today there are no
more localized crises. Instability spreads. The
international community must mobilize.
In the Great Lakes region, the agreements signed
at Lusaka, Pretoria and Luanda must be implemented.
They must lead to the withdrawal of all foreign troops
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
the disarmament of foreign armed groups, to
reconciliation and to a return to peace.
With regard to Western Sahara, it is good that the
Security Council, in its most recent resolution,
resolution 1429 (2002), gave Mr. James Baker the time
to work to bring the parties closer together. That time
must be used to make progress.
We must stay engaged in the Balkans, where the
progress made this year must be consolidated in
Kosovo, in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Linking
the Balkans to Europe through the rule of law and
democracy is, more than ever before, our common
aspiration.
In the Middle East, we must emerge from the
impasse and restore hope. The situation will worsen as
long as the parties remain prisoners to the logic of
violence. There is urgency to act. The Palestinian
Authority must use all available means to prevent and
curb terrorist actions. With a view to the creation of an
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State,
30

based on the 1967 borders, it must pursue its reforms,
particularly in the institutional context.
For its part, the State of Israel, while it
legitimately wishes to defend itself against terrorism,
must do so with respect for international law. The
security imperative cannot by itself take the place of
policy. Settlement-building must cease, and the Israeli
armed forces must withdraw from the occupied
territories, as demanded by the Security Council.
Measures must be taken quickly to improve the now
alarming humanitarian and social situation of the
Palestinian people.
On the basis of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle
of land for peace  which all the Arab countries,
meeting in Beirut, agreed to recognize at the initiative
of Saudi Arabia  the political process must be
relaunched with the aid of the `quartet'. We support
the convening of an international conference at an early
date. The objective must be a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace; a peace based on the coexistence of two
States within secure and recognized borders,
guaranteeing security for the Israelis and offering the
Palestinians a normal life with dignity; a peace based
on a comprehensive settlement of the regional conflict
between Israel and its neighbours.
The attention that we pay to regional crises must
not distract us from the responsibility that we must
assume in the face of global challenges. The United
Nations is playing its full role in the fight against
terrorism. Let us do likewise in the other great
struggles of our time.
Let us fight tirelessly against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The President of the French Republic has
proposed that the Security Council meet at the highest
level in 2003, during the General Assembly, with a
double mandate: to review non-proliferation policy and
to give it a new impetus.
Let us mobilize all actors for sustainable
development in a renewed partnership, in conformity
with the commitments made at Doha, Monterrey and
Johannesburg. The time has come to strengthen
concrete cooperation to permit access by all to basic
resources such as water and energy, to basic social
services such as education and health, and to food
security. Let us also call for the ratification and full
implementation of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change.
Let us establish true global governance of
sustainable development and give it the necessary
coherence. France proposes the creation of an
economic and social security council and of a world
environmental organization to give all countries 
especially those of the South  the possibility of
making their voices heard on those issues.
Finally, let us fully exercise our responsibility to
defend and promote human rights. These are universal.
Progress, often fragile, must be encouraged. Violations,
often so numerous, must be punished.
Let us strengthen the authority and the
universality of the International Criminal Court to
enable it to ensure that the most serious crimes at the
international level do not go unpunished. This new tool
is essential to build a more just and democratic world
where the principle of responsibility is fully respected.
Through ambitious conventions, let us provide
better protection, as we did for children, for the
disabled and for the victims of forced disappearance
and torture. Let us fight against corruption. Let us
commit ourselves to the negotiation of a universal
convention against human cloning for reproductive
purposes, as proposed by France and Germany.
Yes, the principle of collective responsibility is at
the heart of the international system. It is at the heart of
United Nations action. In order to play its full role, the
Organization must pursue its reforms. In particular, we
must increase the representativity of the Security
Council by enlarging both categories of membership.
France supports the aspirations of Germany, Japan and
India in particular.
The United Nations is the keystone of the world
order. The generous and strong ideas that presided over
its birth, just after a world conflict that pushed the
limits of barbarism to the unspeakable, retain all their
currency. The contemporary world is complex,
confusing and unpredictable. It is urgent that we forge
among nations a new alliance, a community of destiny.
That is our future; that is our chance. Through our
actions, let us respond to the expectations of the
world's peoples.﻿In an imperfect
world, our citizens need the United Nations as they
have never needed it before. The United Nations has
not resolved all conflicts by peaceful means, nor could
it. The authority of the United Nations has to be
underpinned by the force of arms. But the remarkable
achievement of this body has been to make the fine
language of its Charter a force for good beyond just
words; by this the United Nations has raised the bar
against the illegitimate use of violence, by States and
now by terrorists. In doing so, the United Nations has
saved lives by the million and saved millions more
from fear, poverty and tyranny.
Without the United Nations, there could have
been no salvation for the people of East Timor, no
prospect of lasting peace in Sierra Leone, no one to
help rebuild Afghanistan. Forty years ago, President
John F. Kennedy predicted a world in which 25 States
would have nuclear weapons. But the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, supported by international
safeguards, has ensured that this nightmare scenario
has failed to materialize.
All this should serve to remind us of the critical
role which the United Nations has to play in world
affairs, under its excellent Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan. It is the responsibility of all of us here in the
Assembly to ensure that the legitimacy, the authority
and the capacity of the United Nations to preserve
peace and to help build prosperity is strengthened and
not undermined.
Today, alongside the traditional threats to global
peace and security, the United Nations and the world
community face three rising challenges: failing States,
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
The world saw in Afghanistan the graphic
dangers of State failure, where order breaks down, law
is undermined and anarchy takes over. We in the
international community must accept our share of the
blame for allowing that country to disintegrate. Al
Qaeda and their evil creed were only too willing to take
advantage. But we delude ourselves if we believe that
the chaos in Afghanistan over much of the last decade
is unique. In too many areas of the world, our fellow
citizens are forced to live under the rule of gangs,
without the security and freedoms which we all should
be able to take for granted.
If we are serious about the concept of an
international community, then, as Members of the
United Nations, we must accept our responsibility to
help prevent States from failing and to restore order
where States have already collapsed.
The United Kingdom's own experience in
Afghanistan, as the International Security Assistance
12

Force (ISAF) lead nation, working with the United
Nations, shows what can be done; but we all know that
much more needs to be done. We need a much more
structured and methodical approach to this growing
problem of failed and failing States.
But the tools are there. At Monterrey in March
and at Johannesburg earlier this month, the world
community has built on the Millennium Development
Goals to reduce poverty among the world's most
disadvantaged people. We are backing this commitment
with action. Between 1996 and 2006 the United
Kingdom will have doubled its development assistance.
Together with the Doha Round of the World
Trade Organization (WTO), we have within our grasp a
new era of sustainable economic growth and prosperity,
a stable political future for the developing world and a
much more secure global environment.
But people cannot be freed from poverty unless
they are also free from fear. Security is not an option; it
is a necessity. Three years ago over half of Sierra
Leone was under the control of rebels; over half the
population was displaced; countless civilians had been
murdered, abducted or horribly mutilated; a spiral of
sickness and hunger was taking over. Now, thanks to
United Nations and British intervention to end that
decade-long civil war, people are returning home and
rebuilding their shattered lives. But long-term
commitment is necessary in situations like that.
As we found in Afghanistan, when we deal with
failing States, we have to tackle the second challenge
to international law and justice — that of global
terrorism — as well.
All the nations of the world, and all its people —
black, white, Buddhist, Christian, Jew, Muslim, Hindu
and Sikh — have a common interest in defeating
terrorism. There must be no hiding places for terrorism
or for terrorists; no hiding places for their money; and
no semantic hiding places either. The distinction some
claim between terrorists and freedom-fighters is false
and dangerous. Their victims enjoy no such distinction.
There must be no such distinctions either in
international law.
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) created
new obligations on all of us. The United Kingdom has
been honoured to chair the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. There has been an overwhelmingly
positive response. But, as we recall those who lost their
lives on 11 September last year, we cannot relax our
collective determination.
Alongside the threats from failing States and
from terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction poses the greatest current threat to global
security, and nowhere is the case for universal support
for the enforcement of United Nations law stronger
than in the field of weapons of mass destruction.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention comprise
one of the world's most significant bodies of
international law. For the past three decades, this
corpus of law has ensured — with one infamous
exception — that no States have resorted to these, the
world's worst weapons.
That exception is Iraq. For two decades, Saddam
Hussein's regime has defied and frustrated every
attempt to enforce the international rule of law. Iraq is
the only country to be condemned by the United
Nations for breaching the Convention on Chemical
Weapons. Iraq has fought wars of aggression against
two neighbours, and has launched missile attacks
against five countries in the region. Iraq has used
poison gas against its own people. Saddam Hussein has
persistently mocked the authority of the United
Nations. No country has deceived every other country
in the world as systematically and cynically as Iraq.
And no country presents as fundamental a challenge to
the United Nations as Iraq.
Every society, from the smallest village to the
global community represented here in the General
Assembly, must have rules, and every member of that
community must accept responsibility for respecting
and maintaining those rules. Without this, the very
concept of community breaks down. So those of us
who believe in an active international community
cannot stand by and do nothing while Iraq continues to
defy the will of the United Nations. All of us who
believe in the United Nations have to make up our
minds now about how to deal with Iraq. The authority
of the United Nations itself is at stake.
We cannot let Iraq do grave damage to this
Organization and the international order which it
represents. We cannot let Iraq go on defying a decade
of Security Council resolutions. If we do, we will find
that our resolutions are dismissed by aggressors
everywhere as mere words. We have spent 57 years
13

building this Organization beyond a talking shop. We
cannot now let that work be undone.
There are times when hard choices have to be
made. On Iraq, we have now reached such a moment. If
we fail to deal with this challenge, the United Nations
itself will be seriously weakened. And that would make
the world a much more dangerous place.
As President Bush spelled out in his powerful
speech to the Assembly here on Thursday, we have to
be resolute in the face of Iraq's defiance and secure the
will of the United Nations. We must require Iraq to re-
admit inspectors, with unfettered access. We have not
just an interest but a responsibility to ensure that Iraq
complies fully with international law. We have to be
clear to Iraq and to ourselves about the consequences
which will flow from a failure by Iraq to meet its
obligations.
And yes, in dealing with the threat posed by Iraq
we must also tackle those other international
challenges outlined so eloquently by Kofi Annan in his
address.
Over the past year we have seen a further
deterioration in security in Israel and in the occupied
territories. There has never been a greater need for
international involvement in the Middle East peace
process to secure the outcome we all want to see: two
States, Israel and Palestine living side by side within
secure and recognized borders, based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).
In Kashmir, we should continue to urge both
India and Pakistan to act with restraint, and to seek to
resolve that long-running conflict.
At the end of the cold war we had all hoped that
future generations would be able to enjoy a world
where cooperation rather than conflict was the
hallmark of international affairs. That goal is still
within reach, if we are united in tackling State failure,
in the war against terrorism and in confronting those
threats of weapons of mass destruction.
The tasks facing the founders of this institution
were no less intimidating. Yet their combination of
high values and hard-headed realism created the
greatest instrument in history for the avoidance of war.
Our founders' achievement has been formidable. But
the Organization now faces new and emerging threats.
We have to confront those threats and be ever alive to
the challenges which are out there to peace and justice
across the world. All of us who believe in those
principles of international law and justice have a duty
to ensure that they are both upheld and enforced.










﻿I
congratulate Mr. Kavan on his election as President of
the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. I also
extend my best wishes to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan in this first year of his second term in office.
Two days ago, we commemorated the first
anniversary of a terrible event that focused the
collective global consciousness on international
terrorism. Terrorism did not start on 11 September. It
was on that day that it brazenly announced itself on the
global stage, flaunting its immunity from distance and
power.
15

As a country exposed to the depredations of
terrorism for decades, India empathized with the pain
of the American people, admired their resilience in
coming to terms with the consequences and supported
the bold decision to counter-attack terrorism at its very
source.
The international community has taken some
collective decisions in the global effort to combat
terrorism and to choke off its lifelines. Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) contains the essence of
these decisions. The Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee should now move beyond information
compilation and legal assistance to enforcing
compliance by States known to be sponsoring,
sheltering, funding, arming and training terrorists.
In our South Asian region, nuclear blackmail has
emerged over the past few months as a new arrow in
the quiver of State-sponsored terrorism. Dark threats
were held out that actions by India to stamp out cross-
border terrorism could provoke a nuclear war. To
succumb to such blatant nuclear terrorism would mean
forgetting the bitter lessons of the 11 September
tragedy.
As far as India is concerned, we have repeatedly
clarified that no one in our country wants a war,
conventional or otherwise. Nor are we seeking any
territory. But absolutely everyone in India wants an end
to the cross-border terrorism which has claimed
thousands of innocent lives and denied entire
generations their right to a peaceful existence with
normal economic and social activity. We are
determined to end it with all the means at our
command. Let there be no doubt about that in any
quarter.
Yesterday we heard the extraordinary claim in
this Assembly that the brutal murder of innocent
civilians in Jammu and Kashmir is actually a freedom
struggle and that the forthcoming elections in that state
are a farce, since they cannot be a substitute for a
plebiscite demanded over 50 years ago. It requires an
effort of acrobatic logic to believe that the carnage
among innocents is an instrument for freedom and that
elections are a symbol of deception and repression. If
the elections are a mere fraud, why are terrorists being
trained and infiltrating India at the command of the
Inter-Services Intelligence Agency of Pakistan to kill
election candidates and to intimidate voters?
If Pakistan claims to be a crucial partner in the
international coalition against terrorism, how can it
continue to use terrorism as an instrument of State
policy against India?


How can the international coalition condone
Pakistan-directed killings of thousands of innocent
civilians  women and children included  to
promote a bizarre version of self-determination? Those
who speak of underlying or root causes of terrorism
offer alibis to the terrorists and absolve them of
responsibility for their heinous actions, such as the 11
September attacks on the United States or the 13
December attack on our Parliament.
Yesterday we heard yet another patently false and
self-serving claim that in India Muslims and other
minorities are the target of Hindu extremists. With 150
million Muslims, India has the second largest Muslim
population in the world; greater than that of Pakistan.
We are proud of the multi-religious character of our
society. Equal respect for all faiths and non-
discrimination on the basis of religion are not just part
of our Constitutional obligations, but, as the whole
world knows, they are the signature theme of India's
civilization and culture.
We have to recognize that the developmental
divide between the North and the South is becoming
wider and deeper by the day. The challenges that face
us are stark, and there is no alternative to having all
countries of the world join hands to face them together.
Over the last decade, 10 million people have been
joining the ranks of the poor each year. A quarter of the
world's population lives in extreme poverty.
We have to find US$ 24 billion annually for
investment in poor countries, if we are to achieve the
World Food Summit goal of halving hunger by 2015.
The continuation of widespread poverty, at a time
when unimaginable wealth is concentrated in a small
social layer, is totally unacceptable. The twenty-first
century has all the means to end this sad legacy of the
past centuries. What is lacking is the political will
among the developed countries to sincerely and
speedily address the legitimate developmental needs of
the developing countries, especially the least developed
ones.
16

Casting an even longer shadow over this grim
developmental canvas is global climate change, from
which the poor will most suffer, though they
contributed least to it. The recent floods and forest fires
in Europe are a forewarning that the countries of Asia
and Africa are not the only victims of the fury of a
degraded environment. The Earth's atmosphere and
biosphere know no national boundaries. The choice
before the global community is stark: Either we take
urgent steps to protect the environment or be prepared
for far worse natural calamities.
Early this month, the Johannesburg Summit for
Sustainable Development debated some of the linkages
between poverty, trade, environment, national,
international and corporate governance and global
financial flows. We emerged from the Summit with
some encouraging outcomes, but these fell well short
of the demands of our time.
It has become a categorical imperative to
understand and address man's developmental needs in
their totality, and not in isolated parts. It is
disconcerting that the highways of development are
jammed with the noisy and unruly traffic of
materialism and its brash cousin, consumerism. Human
values have become mute bystanders in most political,
economic and social activities.
The result of this imbalance between our material
and non-material needs can never be happy for
mankind. On the contrary, if we are guided by
compassion, care, feeling for our fellow human beings,
cooperation and other human values, we are bound to
get the right solutions to every problem on our planet.
Humanity is crying out for a harmonious
integration of the economic, social, political,
environmental and spiritual dimensions of
development. This task calls for the closest possible
cooperation among nations and communities, with a
readiness to accept the best from every cultural and
spiritual tradition around the globe. The United Nations
needs to take up newer and bigger initiatives in this
direction.
In this Assembly, less than a year ago, and in the
United States Congress the year before, I had extended
India's offer to coordinate a comprehensive global
development dialogue. I reiterate that offer today. If we
are to achieve the development goals we have promised
ourselves by 2015, we need such a dialogue urgently.
As we come together once again at the United
Nations, at a time of new and diverse challenges, we
should reflect on our collective commitment to the
Charter, its purposes and principles. There is a growing
perception, particularly among the weaker and poorer
countries, that responses to issues of far-reaching
impact often seem arbitrary and contradictory.
A common destiny is at stake. The world needs
collective multilateralism. It needs the United Nations,
the coming together and working together of all its
nations in the development of a common and collective
perspective.
Conflicts arise when there is no spirit of
democracy within and among nations. A genuinely
democratic framework enables us to respect alternative
points of view, to value diversity and to fashion
solutions responsive to the aspirations of people.
India's own experience as a hugely populated and
diverse nation shows how complex problems can be
addressed within a constitutional and democratic
framework.
These values need to be assiduously nurtured in
our societies, so that at least a future generation is rid
of the scourge of poverty, intolerance, obscurantism
and religious extremism.
Democratic societies are far less prone to
ideologies based on violence or militarist yearnings,
since they do not have their fingers permanently on the
trigger of a gun. We have to be vigilant against threats
to democracy worldwide arising from forces that are
opposed to it, be they rooted in fundamentalist political
ideologies or extremist religious dogmas.
All of us are aware of the challenges. Most of us
are agreed that a stable global order has to rest on the
four strong pillars of peace, security, sustainable
development and democracy. We have to ensure that
each of these pillars is strong and resilient.
We are conscious of our collective responsibility.
It is the leap from this theoretical understanding to its
practical realization that we have often failed to
execute. We should not fail again. Our future
generations will not forgive us if we do.








﻿I would like to congratulate
my friend Mr. Jan Kavan on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly and to wish him
success. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership and his dedication to right what is wrong
and to light the lamps of hope.
The eleventh of September gave rise to a new
world. We find ourselves facing a new confrontation:
borderless, merciless, indiscriminate and inhumane.
The target this time was the United States — a United
States that in the past helped so many nations defend
their freedoms and their liberty. Now the United States
has been challenged again to defend our freedom by
protecting its own and to safeguard our lives by
securing its own.
The attack on the World Trade Center precipitated
a new division in our epoch and in the years to come —
a divide created by groups that preach and cause death
and agony. On the wrong side of the divide are those
who are trying to destroy the free world, which is
diversified and heterogeneous, cherishing the right to
every thought and religion as well as the principle that
every human being has the right to be different and yet
to prosper and live in security.
10

The front from Bin Laden to Saddam Hussein is a
menace to us all. It will not enable peace, nor will it
permit freedom — for all people or for their own
people. In countries that harbour terror, women are
discriminated against, men are oppressed, civil and
human rights are violated, and the poor cannot escape
from their poverty They force us to defend our
inalienable right to look ahead with hope. They
imposed on us a war of self-defence — the defence of
pluralism and of the promise of science. They reject the
incredible technologies that may carry us from the
limits of land to the discovery of uncharted provinces.
The culture of death forces us to defend the culture of
life, to win battles that we did not initiate, to triumph in
this uninvited war.
We never imagined that it could be dangerous to
walk our streets, to fly our skies, to breathe the air or to
drink the water. We cannot agree to this. We cannot
allow dark forces — which, as we are aware, could
destroy the lives of innocent people on a whim — to
possess weapons of mass destruction. We shall not turn
our lives into a series of sleepless nights and
nightmarish days.
We do not have the right to ignore the danger. We
do not have the option to postpone it; it is imminent.
We have to win as soon as possible.
Terror is destined to lose. It will be defeated
because it carries no hope. It respects neither human
beings nor the values of humanity.
Science and technology made the economy
global, and science and technology globalized terror as
well. Now strategy also is globalized, because ballistic
ranges have replaced geographic distances, because
non-conventional warheads have replaced measurable
explosives, because terrorism transcends frontiers and
fronts. Terrorists do not respect the rule of law. They
do not answer to independent judges or relate to
elected leaders. They mock international lines. They
destroy universal norms. They shed blood. They
introduced dullness and stopped affluence. Nothing is
to be expected from them but death.
Terror creates poverty more than poverty creates
terror. Terror leads to backwardness. We have to offer
the economic potential to open prospects and horizons
for all nations, poor and rich. New opportunities can
bring enfranchisement. We have to close ranks to
prevent distorted dreams from becoming a raging
typhoon that reaches all four corners of the globe. We
have experienced in our own country the terrible
effects of terrorism.
Babies were shot in the arms of their mothers.
People at prayer were killed while praying. Yes, it hurt
us, but it did not change our goals. We mourn, but we
did not bury peace.
It harmed the Palestinians in the United States
and in other countries. It prevented the occupation
from ending. It introduced additional problems and did
not solve a single existing problem.
Alas, the Middle East is still replete with
national, religious and territorial disputes. The land is
small; the agony is great. But the real tragedy is that
without terror we could already have resolved these
disputes. Terror entrenched them. Terror changed
priorities — security before policy. It affected
resources — arming young men, for example, instead
of desalinating vital water. If it continues, battlefields
will create deserts of sorrow and days of darkness.
Campuses of learning will be replaced by camps of
violence.
But this is neither a decree of heaven nor the
verdict of man. It can, it should, it will be different.
South Africa, Ireland, Yugoslavia and the Congo
achieved more by talking than by shooting, more by
dialogue than by dispute. We offered the Palestinians a
comprehensive solution without the terror — a solution
that was close to their national aspirations. We related
to their desire to be free, to be equal, to be
independent. We agreed that they would have their land
in accordance with United Nations resolutions. But
terror postponed their destiny. Terror postponed our
willingness to end control over their lives. Smoking
guns replaced the torches of peace.
Now we are following the profound debate taking
place among the Palestinians. We respect it, because
debate is the beginning of democracy. When
democracy prevails, peace undoubtedly will arrive. The
Fatah organization apparently issued a call that
contains some new approaches. I shall quote one of
them:
“We will build an independent State of
Palestine and a political system in accordance
with the principles of democracy, the rule of law,
with an independent judicial system, separation
of power, respect for human rights, civil liberties
and a market economy.”


We look upon these words as the dawn of a
different season; we hope that it is spring. Reducing
violence will shorten political distances. Political
horizons are, in my judgement, within reach. Israel
accepts President Bush's vision. That vision is
supported by the Quartet; it is endorsed by Arab
countries; it outlines a political goal and a timetable. It
can be considered as both a road map and a calendar.
What is needed now are wheels to propel the vehicles
of peace. An economic wheel is needed in order for us
to move to a global market economy that leads to
science-based industry. A market economy can open
gates and skies. An ecological wheel is needed to let
air and water flow cleanly. Pollution is not national; we
have to work together to control it. Ecology has
changed history. In the past, bloodshed was about real
estate, and real estate created divisions, demarcation
and, unfortunately, wars as well. In our era, the battle is
not for real estate but for air, for water and for energy;
it is about the fertility of the land, rather than its size.
“Non-real” estate is not marked, nor can it be divided.
Either we respect it unanimously, or we will be
victimized by its loss.
Then there is the cultural wheel. Three
civilizations were born in the Middle East. They were
made manifest in the Bible, in the New Testament and
in the Koran. We read them in different languages, yet
we pray to the same heavens. The descendants of
Abraham should behave like a family — with tolerance
and solidarity. Spiritual leaders should pray for peace,
but they also need to preach it, call upon it and
contribute to it.
The political wheel should not rotate in the same
misguided orbit as in the past. We have been through
five wars in five decades — Palestinians, Egyptians
and Jordanians lost generations of young people. We
paid heavily with young blood as a result of three terror
campaigns. The time has come to comprehend that the
real triumph is in the harvest of peace, not in the seeds
of another war. When we replace the war maps with
peace maps, we will discover that the differences were
minimal. The wars were appalling. We shall see that
the promised land could have become the land of
promise a long time ago.
Without wars, our region will be able to bloom
again. We can separate politically into two States and
coordinate one economy. That will enable us to take
advantage of the exceptional invitation that came from
both the United States and a united Europe to partake
in their economic opportunities.
Tourism can flourish when terrorism has ended.
Islands of high-tech excellence can be established.
Millions of trees can be planted to produce a new
climate. We can make green our arid lands. We can
become contributors, not dependants.
The call of the future cannot be harmonized with
the voices of the past. Only new solutions can evoke a
grandeur equal to the past. We do not have the right to
suspend it in the face of our children. Young Israelis
and young Palestinians are entitled to a new life — a
life of their own. While fighting terror, let us not fight
people. While seeking freedom, let us not extend
subjugation.
I should like to direct a comment to Syria. The
same principle that enabled us both to participate in the
Madrid conference a decade ago is still valid.
A word to Lebanon: Israel is committed to the
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Israel respects its need
for real political independence. Lebanon should not
permit Hezbollah to destroy its own country. Hezbollah
is not a party, it is a dangerous agenda. Lebanon should
immediately free Israeli prisoners and prisoners of war.
The people of the Middle East should let bygones
be bygones. Let us return to our traditions, where
prophets, not terrorists, told the future. Let us return to
our landscape, where the blue skies did not surrender to
the heavy clouds of despair; to a time when justice
promised equal opportunities for individuals and for
nations. Let us join, together, the march of mankind
towards new discoveries that will make life more
purposeful and may bring security to posterity.
We were born in the cradles of hope, not in the
tombs of despair. We guard our spiritual heritage, and
it is not antithetical to building a new Middle East. The
world is new.
I should like to conclude with an old verse from
our scriptures:
“The Lord led Adam through the Garden of
Eden and said to him, ‘All I created, I created for
you. Beware lest you spoil and destroy my world,
for if you spoil it, there is no one to repair it after
you'.”
We are here to repair.











﻿Mr. President, may I
begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency and assure you of New Zealand's
cooperation during your term of office.
13

The opening of this, the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, came just one day after the
anniversary of the terrorist attack of 11 September
2001, which shocked this city and the international
community. The premeditated and callous mass murder
of 3,000 people from 79 different countries was a sharp
warning to us of the ongoing threats to peace and
stability in our world. It was to protect humanity
against such threats that the nations of the world came
together in 1945 to establish this Organization in the
belief that collective action was necessary to guarantee
global peace.
Today, in the second year of a new millennium,
the need to act multilaterally is greater than ever
before. Terrorism, weapons of mass destruction,
environmental degradation, people-smuggling, drug-
trafficking, diseases such as HIV/AIDS and the
unsustainable depletion of our natural resources are all
global matters that require a collective response.
We can be proud that a year ago the response by
the United Nations to a new and unprecedented level of
terrorism was immediate, united and effective. The
primary victim of the attack, the United States, sought
and secured international cooperation that achieved the
incapacitation of the Al Qaeda terrorist organization
and the removal of the Taliban regime that had hosted
it. It was a model for international unity of purpose and
multilateral action. It was a lesson that should not be
forgotten as this Organization tackles other problems
confronting humanity.
New Zealand has worked wholeheartedly under
the mandate provided by the United Nations to defeat
terrorism. We have introduced legislation to deny
terrorist organizations funding and resources in line
with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). We have
sought to assist our neighbours in the Pacific to do the
same. We have committed peacekeeping personnel to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
combat forces under Operation Enduring Freedom in
Afghanistan. But we are also aware that actions to
suppress terrorism must be accompanied by measures
to tackle the causes of terrorism. Injustice, lack of
opportunity, hopelessness, desperation and the failure
of legitimate channels to redress grievances all give
rise to resort to terrorist actions.
The failure to resolve differences between Israeli
and Palestinian people in the Middle East continues to
be a catalyst for recruitment into terrorism. The
Secretary-General, in opening this session, spelled out
the basis for resolving the dispute. He referred to land
for peace, an end to terror and to occupation, and to
two States, Israel and Palestine, with secure and
recognized borders. Both peoples are destined to live
side by side. Both will benefit from an end to violence
and a negotiated settlement. But agreement requires
good faith from each side and a determined effort by
the international community. We fully endorse the
Secretary-General's renewed call for an international
peace conference. Progress on this issue is now more
vital than ever.
The situation in Iraq is also a threat to world
peace, but we must look for solutions that will resolve
and do not exacerbate that threat. No nation can be
exempt from the requirement to comply with the
resolutions passed by this Organization. That is
necessary if the rule of law is to apply internationally.
No nation can be allowed to commit aggression or to
use weapons of mass destruction against its own
people. The requirement to comply with United
Nations resolutions is not the instruction of one
country to Iraq; it is collective instruction that should
have the unanimous endorsement of all Member
countries.
Iraq's non-compliance with Security Council
resolutions is a challenge to the entire United Nations
membership. The United Nations must meet this
challenge. How the situation is resolved matters to us
all, not least the countries of the region itself.
Those who can exercise influence over Iraq
should do so to avoid the need for resort to other
actions. The response chosen by the Security Council
must, however, take into account the need not to
impose further costs on ordinary Iraqi people innocent
of any wrongdoing. The response should not involve
actions that undermine, rather than strengthen, the war
against terrorism.
The United Nations has shown that collective
action can save lives and help rebuild nations. We will
soon welcome the world's newest nation, East Timor,
into the United Nations, and we should celebrate the
success of the United Nations peacekeeping mission
and Transitional Administration in that country. I
congratulate Sergio Vieira de Mello, the Secretary-
General's former Special Representative, on his role,
and I thank those countries that contributed so much to
14

giving hope and opportunity to the people of that small
country.
New Zealand has had a battalion of peacekeepers
deployed in East Timor since September 1999, and also
has peacekeepers serving in 12 other countries. We are
proud that they have performed their role with
professionalism and respect for the people in whose
countries they operate. Notwithstanding the small size
of our population, New Zealand currently is the
twenty-second-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping personnel.
The promotion of human rights is another area
where multilateral action by the international
community is essential. In the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and in the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, the United Nations has set
out universal standards for the observance of human
rights. There is no justification for any country to
deviate from those human rights standards. It is a mark
of shame that States Members of this Organization
continue to breach basic human rights and a disgrace
that other countries too often act as apologists for the
offending regimes.
An important landmark in the last year has been
the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. As the culmination of
longstanding efforts by non-governmental
organizations, Governments and the international
community as a whole, it offers the prospect of
bringing justice to the victims of the most horrific
crimes known to humankind and bringing their
perpetrators to justice. It will serve as a deterrent where
none has existed before. We have listened carefully to
those who argue that the Court is not necessary and
that it unduly jeopardizes their peacekeepers, but we
cannot agree. The status quo, relying on domestic
jurisdiction alone, has failed humankind throughout
history and has borne witness to appalling crimes. The
new regime has carefully built-in safeguards to protect
the innocent.
We were dismayed by the actions of the Security
Council in July. At that time, we challenged both the
legitimacy and the substance of the Council's action.
We do not believe that it was consistent with the Rome
Statute or that the Council is able to arrogate to itself
the power to change treaty relationships.
A further issue on which greater progress must be
made is that of disarmament. The fact that humanity
survived the nightmare of potential nuclear destruction
during the cold war cannot be allowed to make us
complacent about ongoing threats from weapons of
mass destruction.
We welcome the Treaty of Moscow and the
agreement between Russia and the United States to cut
the number of strategic nuclear weapons each country
deploys. These reductions, however, are not a
substitute for irreversible cuts in, and the total
elimination of, those weapons.
In some respects even greater danger is posed by
short-range tactical nuclear weapons. There is a real
risk that these could be launched by accident or in
confusion, with no time available for communication
between opposing sides.
Over the last year, two significant events have
made our world a most dangerous place. The first is the
emergence of international terrorist groups that have
shown their willingness to use weapons of mass
destruction — biological, chemical or nuclear —
should they gain access to them.
The second is the situation in South Asia, where
the world recently came close to direct conflict
between two countries with nuclear capability. The
international community has not done enough to reduce
those risks.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has
not been brought into effect. Progress towards the
implementation of undertakings made by nuclear-
weapon States at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference has stalled. Nations have not taken
sufficient steps to stop the production of fissile
material and to reduce stocks.
In this and in many other areas much more needs
to be done to address growing problems that affect all
of us. The awful toll of HIV/AIDS, slowness in
response to global warming and the growth in the
smuggling and trafficking of people are but three
further examples.
It is essential that we renew our commitment to
multilateralism as the best way to address global
problems. That requires not simply money but, must
importantly, political will. It is not a case of putting
global interests ahead of national interests. Global
15

interests are national interests. The United Nations is
our most valuable international organization, but we
need to do more to enhance its relevance, value and its
unique authority. All of us are stakeholders in its
success.







﻿One year has passed since the tragic events
that took place on 11 September 2001 in the United
States of America shook the world and demonstrated
the magnitude and brutality of the global threat of
international terrorism. During the past year the world
became fully aware of the challenges that humankind
was facing as we entered the twenty-first century. It
was a year during which the international community
came together and began to take decisive action against
terrorism.
While paying tribute to the memory of all of the
victims of the terrorism that has left a bloody trail
throughout the world, we must now take stock of the
initial results of the joint anti-terrorist campaign and,
most important, outline our objectives in strengthening
the foundations of international security and stability.
The most important outcome of the coming
together of States to achieve common goals 
unprecedented since the Second World War  is clear
today. A broad international anti-terrorist coalition has
been established and is actively functioning; it has
already demonstrated its effectiveness in Afghanistan,
a country that international terrorists of various
affiliations had transformed into their own personal
lair. Our common objective is not only to preserve the
experience of interaction acquired within the
framework of the coalition  avoiding such unilateral
actions as might undermine it  but also to transform
the anti-terrorist alliance into a supportive mechanism
of effective security and cooperation for the new
millennium.
The United Nations must certainly be a pivotal
element of such a mechanism. Indeed, the United
Nations is called upon to continue to guarantee that, in
combating new threats and challenges, the efforts of
20

the international community rest on a solid basis of
international law.
We must acknowledge  and the past year has
been very instructive in this regard  that a great deal
of hard work awaits us. It will be possible to put
insurmountable obstacles in the way of fanatics and
extremists who spread death and destruction only if we
can reach general agreement on core issues relating to
the world order. In this context, the role of the United
Nations is, indeed, irreplaceable.
The fact that the process of implementing the
fundamental anti-terrorist resolution  Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001)  is under way is of
critical importance. That resolution is binding on all
States, and we must now seek to achieve its
unconditional implementation by all States.
A priority task in the war on terrorism is the
strengthening of its international legal framework. First
and foremost, there is a need to ensure the genuinely
universal character of existing anti-terrorist
conventions.
Having ratified the 1999 Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, Russia is
now completing the process of accession to those
international instruments. At the same time, we are
seriously concerned about the lack of real progress in
negotiating a comprehensive convention on combating
terrorism and a convention on the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism.
The well-known differences in the approaches of
States to the provisions of such instruments could
certainly be fully reconciled. They should not
overshadow the objective, which is pressing for all of
us, of establishing a legal basis to counter terrorism in
all its manifestations  a basis that would be in
keeping with the realities of today's world. Russia is
continuing to make resolute efforts to achieve that
objective.
It is the obligation of all States to protect the
rights and freedoms of their citizens, the most
important of these being the right to life. But it is
precisely the lives of ordinary people that are
threatened by terrorists, and each year new names are
added to the list of victims. The international
community can no longer tolerate this. It is our
obligation to provide our citizens with the right to
reliable protection against terrorism.
Such an objective can be achieved only if all
States agree on a range of specific measures under
United Nations auspices. There is now a need to draw
up an effective code to protect human rights against
terrorism. Some of these measures have already been
discussed by the international community, including in
this forum. Others will require consideration in a
broader context. The most important consideration,
however, is that we should agree on a unified system of
values and measures shared by all States.
The results of the war against terrorism will be
tangible only if we act in concert at all levels  global,
regional and national. The anti-terrorist cooperation
mechanisms aimed at preventing the spread of
terrorism in Central Asia, including those within the
framework of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, are
gaining momentum and thus provide clear evidence of
that fact. There is a great deal of potential in the new
partnership between Russia and the countries of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The field of anti-terrorism is an integral part of
our continuous dialogue and cooperation with the
leading countries of the world, including the United
States, China, India and the States members of the
European Union. We are confident that the
development of such interaction at many levels will
promote a climate of confidence, security and
cooperation in all parts of the world.
The stability and credibility of the emerging
international system of the twenty-first century will
depend directly on the maintenance and strengthening
of strategic stability. This fundamental objective was
advanced by the signing, by the Presidents of Russia
and of the United States, at their May meeting in
Moscow, of the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty,
which was a specific, major contribution by the leading
nuclear Powers to nuclear disarmament.
It is also very important to ensure the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
danger of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or
their components falling into the irresponsible hands of
terrorists increases international terrorism's potential to
cause devastation. This means that there is a need to
step up efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery vehicles.
21

By acting jointly and responsibly, we have
already achieved a great deal. When we speak about
the establishment of new regimes for the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and for
arms control, we by no means wish to imply a
renunciation of regimes and agreements already in
effect. They are our shared protective mechanism  a
mechanism that is very reliable and has stood the test
of time. Unjustified removal of the key elements of the
international legal framework of non-proliferation can
aggravate the international military and strategic
situation and undermine global security.
Furthermore, we should universalize' the most
important agreements on non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and on comprehensive nuclear test ban. The
missile sphere needs a sustainable negotiating process
aimed at concluding an international arrangement on a
global regime of missile and missile technology non-
proliferation.
The prevention of the deployment of weapons in
outer space forms an integral part of the non-
proliferation process. Together with a number of our
partners we suggest that a comprehensive agreement be
worked out aimed at preserving outer space as a zone
free from any kind of weapons. We are confident that
this proposal serves the interests of all States, and
expect that it will enjoy wide support.
Since its establishment, the United Nations has
been engaged in the settlement of regional conflicts.
Those so-called local problems have long turned into
one of the main threats to international stability.
Terrorism, political extremism, and economic and
social degradation are their customary companions.
Certainly, the primary responsibility in any settlement
rests with the relevant parties, but multilateral
mechanisms have also repeatedly demonstrated their
effectiveness in the restoration of peace and concord. A
tangible progress made with the United Nations visible
involvement in the post-Taliban reconstruction of
Afghanistan is one of our common accomplishments.
We can add to this the adoption by the United Nations
Security Council of major practical decisions in
support of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East and the resolution of crises in a number of African
countries.
And yet, we are still far from a radical decrease in
the number and intensity of armed conflicts. Hard
work, requiring great human as well as material and
financial resources, is awaiting us. But the most
important here is the presence of a strong political will
to implement the provisions of the United Nations
Charter pertaining to the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Experience shows that no matter how complex
international crises and conflicts may be, whatever
challenges and threats they may be fraught with, they
can be settled with the aid of United Nations
instruments and on the basis of international law. This
fully applies to the situation around Iraq, which has
long required political settlement in strict compliance
with the Security Council resolutions.
The entire international community benefits from
a steady enhancement of the leading role of our
Organization in peacemaking. We cannot relax our
attention to this task.
At all times and throughout the world, terrorism
and extremism have tried to justify themselves with
continuous social and economic instability and poverty.
While recognizing the existence of these serious
problems we should state most resolutely that terrorism
does not and will not have any justification. At the
same time, the creation of a sustainable and fair global
financial and economic structure would, certainly, help
combat many dangerous challenges to mankind. The
latest major international forums  the International
Conference on Financing for Development
in Monterey, World Food Summit in Rome,
World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg  adopted decisions designed to uproot
the causes of the most threatening disparities in the
world. The next step is to implement the agreements
we have reached.
Equally sweeping are the tasks that face us in the
field of environmental protection. Natural disasters that
afflicted many regions of our planet this summer have
demonstrated again that the solution of environmental
issues cannot be put off unless we want to endanger the
very survival of future generations. This sphere also
depends on multilateral efforts that exclude the egoism
of individual States.
The initiative of Russian President Vladimir V.
Putin on holding in autumn 2003 a World Conference
on Climate Change in Moscow is designed to
coordinate our efforts in this field.
22

A year ago, the Russian Federation called on the
international community from the podium of the
United Nations General Assembly to create a global
system of counteraction to present-day threats and
challenges that would be aimed at tackling real issues
in the sphere of security and at meeting the vital
interests of each and every State. This system would
provide for long-term international stability and
sustainable development.
To be efficient, such a system needs a generally
recognized coordinating centre capable of rallying the
international community. And we do have such a
centre  the United Nations with its unique
legitimacy, universality and experience. Our common
task is to unite around the United Nations to provide it
with the necessary potential and resources and to
develop as much as possible its internal reserves.
Today, we can state with satisfaction that the
global system is already evolving and the beginning of
this process is largely successful. We suggest that an
additional impetus should be given to this process and
a resolution to encourage a most prompt creation of a
global system of counteraction to present-day threats
and challenges should be adopted at this session of the
General Assembly. By doing so, we will direct all
States towards the joint elaboration of its general shape
and parameters. This is even more relevant because
some of its parameters are already visible.
It is apparent that the system to be created must
be:
ñ Global, as modern challenges in the context of
globalization pose a universal threat, and should
be addressed at the global level.
ñ Comprehensive in scope, as each of the modern
threats bears a huge destructive potential and all
such problems without exceptions should be
embraced by the system.
ñ Holistic in approach, as quite often the new
threats and challenges are directly interrelated.
ñ Universal in participation.
Finally, the system should become a reflection of
the international rule of law, as its power will be built
on principles and regulations of international law, the
United Nations Charter above all.
We bear grave responsibility to future
generations, and the model of world order we will
establish is destined to influence the life on our planet
for decades. As for Russia, we have made our choice.
This is the choice in favour of a democratic, multi-
polar world order, which would guarantee sustainable
development and equal security for all States; a world
order formed on the basis of the extensive structure of
multilateral institutions integrated within the
framework of the United Nations.
We hope that the decisions of this General
Assembly session will mark an important stage of this
process.



﻿We meet one year and one day
after a terrorist attack brought grief to my country and
brought grief to many citizens of our world. Yesterday,
we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible
morning. Today we turn to the urgent duty of
protecting other lives without illusion and without fear.
We have accomplished much in the last year — in
Afghanistan and beyond. We have much yet to do — in
Afghanistan and beyond. Many nations represented
here have joined in the fight against global terror, and
the people of the United States are grateful.
The United Nations was born in the hope that
survived a world war — the hope of a world moving
towards justice, escaping old patterns of conflict and
fear. The founding Members resolved that the peace of
the world must never again be destroyed by the will
and the wickedness of any man. We created the United
Nations Security Council so that, unlike the League of
Nations, our deliberations would be more than talk, our
resolutions would be more than wishes. After
generations of deceitful dictators, broken treaties and
squandered lives, we dedicated ourselves to standards
of human dignity, shared by all, and to a system of
security defended by all.
Today, these standards, and this security, are
challenged.
Our commitment to human dignity is challenged
by persistent poverty and raging disease. The suffering
is great, and our responsibilities are clear. The United
States is joining with the world to supply aid where it
reaches people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and
the prosperity it brings, and to bring medical care
where it is desperately needed.
As a symbol of our commitment to human
dignity, the United States will return to the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). This organization has been
reformed, and America will participate fully in its
mission to advance human rights, tolerance and
learning.
Our common security is challenged by regional
conflicts — ethnic and religious strife that is ancient,
but not inevitable. In the Middle East, there can be no
peace for either side without freedom for both sides.
America stands committed to an independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Like all other people, Palestinians
deserve a government that serves their interests and
listens to their voices. My nation will continue to
encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities
as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the
conflict.
Above all, our principles and our security are
challenged today by outlaw groups and regimes that
accept no law of morality and have no limit to their
violent ambitions. In the attacks on America a year
ago, we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies.
This threat hides within many nations, including my
own. In cells and camps, terrorists are plotting further
destruction and are building new bases for their war
against civilization. And our greatest fear is that
terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions
when an outlaw regime supplies them with the
technologies enabling them to kill on a massive scale.
In one place, in one regime, we find all these
dangers, in their most lethal and aggressive forms —
exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations
was born to confront. Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded
Kuwait without provocation. And the regime's forces
were poised to continue their march to seize other
countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein
been appeased instead of stopped, he would have
endangered the peace and stability of the world. Yet,
this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition
forces and the will of the United Nations.
In order to suspend hostilities and to spare
himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of
commitments. The terms were clear to him, and to all.
And he agreed to prove that he is complying with every
one of those obligations. He has proven instead only
his contempt for the United Nations and for all his
pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions
and by his cruelties, Saddam Hussein has made the
case against himself.
In 1991, Security Council resolution 688 (1991)
demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once the
repression of its own people, including the systematic
repression of minorities, which the Council said,
“threaten[ed] international peace and security in the
region”.
This demand goes ignored. Last year, the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq
continues to commit extremely grave violations of
human rights and that the regime's repression is all
pervasive. Tens of thousands of political opponents and
7

ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest
and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by
beating, burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation
and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands;
children in the presence of their parents; and all of
these horrors are concealed from the world by the
apparatus of a totalitarian State.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through its resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991),
demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait
and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this
promise. Last year the Secretary-General's high-level
coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti, Saudi,
Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini,
and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for — more
than 600 people. One American pilot is among them.
In 1991, the United Nations Security Council,
through resolution 687 (1991), demanded that Iraq
renounce all involvement with terrorism and permit no
terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq's regime
agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), Iraq continues to
shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct
violence against Iran, Israel, and Western
Governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for
murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Emir
of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq's
Government openly praised the attacks of 11
September. Al-Qaida terrorists have escaped from
Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq.
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and to
stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and
long-range missiles, and to prove to the world it has
done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq
has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge.
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had
no biological weapons. After a senior official in its
weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the
regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of
litres of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for
use in Scud missile warheads, aerial bombs and aircraft
spray tanks. United Nations inspectors believe Iraq has
produced two to four times the amount of biological
agents it declared and has failed to account for more
than three metric tons of material that could be used to
produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is
expanding and improving facilities that were used for
the production of biological weapons.
United Nations inspections also reveal that Iraq
likely maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard and other
chemical agents, and that the regime is rebuilding and
expanding facilities capable of producing chemical
weapons.
And in 1995, after four years of deception, Iraq
finally admitted that it had had a crash nuclear
weapons programme prior to the Gulf war. We know
now that, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq
would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later
than 1993.
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important
information about its nuclear programme: weapons
design, procurement logs, experiment data, an
accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of
foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear
scientists and technicians. It retains physical
infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq
has made several attempts to buy high-strength
aluminium tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear
weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would
be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And
Iraq's State-controlled media have reported numerous
meetings between Saddam Hussein and his nuclear
scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued
appetite for these weapons.
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles
with ranges beyond the 150 kilometres permitted by the
United Nations. Work at testing and production
facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range
missiles that can inflict mass death throughout the
region.
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the
world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Those
sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the
regime's compliance with Security Council resolutions.
In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy
food. Saddam Hussein has subverted that programme,
working around the sanctions to buy missile
technology and military materials. He blames the
suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even
as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for
himself and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to
comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for
the hunger and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens.
In 1991, Iraq promised United Nations inspectors
immediate and unrestricted access to verify Iraq's
commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass
8

destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke that
promise, spending seven years deceiving, evading and
harassing United Nations inspectors before ceasing
cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991
ceasefire, the Security Council twice renewed its
demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with
inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of its
obligations. The Security Council again renewed that
demand in 1994 and twice more in 1996, deploring
Iraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security
Council renewed its demand three more times in 1997,
citing flagrant violations, and three more times in
1998, calling Iraq's behaviour totally unacceptable.
And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again.
As we meet today, it has been almost four years
since the last United Nations inspector set foot in
Iraq — four years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to
build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. We know
that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder
even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to
assume that he stopped when they left? The history, the
logic and the facts lead to one conclusion. Saddam
Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger. To
suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To
assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of
millions and the peace of the world in a reckless
gamble. And that is a risk we must not take.
We have been more than patient. We have tried
sanctions. We have tried the carrot of oil-for-food and
the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam
Hussein has defied all those efforts and continues to
develop weapons of mass destruction. The first time we
may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is
when, God forbid, he uses one. We owe it to all our
citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that
day from coming.
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the
authority of the United Nations and a threat to peace.
Iraq has answered a decade of United Nations demands
with a decade of defiance. All the world now faces a
test and the United Nations a difficult and defining
moment. Are Security Council resolutions to be
honoured and enforced or cast aside without
consequence? Will the United Nations serve the
purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant?
The United States helped found the United
Nations. We want the United Nations to be effective
and respected and successful. We want the resolutions
of the world's most important multilateral body to be
enforced, and right now those resolutions are being
unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our
partnership of nations can meet the test before us by
making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose
and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction,
long-range missiles and all related material.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all support for terrorism and act to
suppress it, as all States are required to do by Security
Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease
persecution of its civilian population, including Shia,
Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans and others — again, as
required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or
account for all Gulf war personnel whose fate is still
unknown. It will return the remains of any who are
deceased, return stolen property, accept liability for
losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait and fully
cooperate with international efforts to resolve those
issues, as required by Security Council resolutions.
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will
immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food
programme. It will accept United Nations
administration of funds from that programme, to ensure
that the money is used fairly and promptly for the
benefit of the Iraqi people.
If all those steps are taken, it will signal a new
openness and accountability in Iraq. And it could open
the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a
Government that represents all Iraqis — a Government
based on respect for human rights, economic liberty
and internationally supervised elections.
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi
people. They have suffered too long in silent captivity.
Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a
great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it. The
security of all nations requires it.
Free societies do not intimidate through cruelty
and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the
world with mass murder. The United States supports
political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq.
9

We can harbour no illusions, and that is important
today to remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in
1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He has fired ballistic
missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Israel.
His regime once ordered the killing of every person
between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish
villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians
and 40 Iraqi villages.
My nation will work with the Security Council to
meet our common challenge. If Iraq's regime defies us
again, the world must move deliberately and decisively
to hold Iraq to account. We will work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions. But the purposes
of the United States should not be doubted. The
Security Council resolutions will be enforced, and the
just demands of peace and security will be met, or
action will be unavoidable, and a regime that has lost
its legitimacy will also lose its power.
Events can turn in one of two ways.
If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people
of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. The
regime will have new power to bully, dominate and
conquer its neighbours, condemning the Middle East to
more years of bloodshed and fear. The region will
remain unstable, with little hope of freedom, and
isolated from the progress of our times. With every step
the Iraqi regime takes towards gaining and deploying
the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront
that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regime
were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies, then
the attacks of 11 September would be a prelude to far
greater horrors.
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome
this danger, we can arrive at a very different future.
The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They
can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a
democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the
Muslim world. These nations can show by their
example that honest government, respect for women,
and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph
in the Middle East and beyond. We will show that the
promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our
time.
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have
been set before us. We must choose between a world of
fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and
do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand up for
our security and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States
of America will make that stand. Representatives to the
United Nations have the power to make that stand as
well.




﻿I would like to join in thanking
the outgoing President of the General Assembly for the
diligent manner in which he managed the affairs of the
Assembly. I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for taking over the leadership of the
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session. We hope that you
will have a successful tenure in your stewardship of
this important body.
Allow us to also welcome Switzerland and East
Timor to membership of the United Nations.
Two years ago, the world's political leaders met
at this place and, through the historic United Nations
Millennium Declaration, reaffirmed our faith in the
United Nations Organization and its Charter as
indispensable foundations of a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. That an unprecedented
number of heads of State and Government had gathered
at the United Nations to make that commitment to
cooperation among the peoples of the world — to
peace, prosperity and justice throughout our
universe — gave hope to the billions throughout the
world who know the painful meaning of oppression by
10

another, of war and violent conflict, of poverty and
injustice.
None of those who spoke from this podium knew
that a year after they had pledged to use their energies
and talents to provide a meaningful life for all, peace in
this country and the rest of the world would be brutally
challenged by the murderous terrorist attack of 11
September. We meet a day after the anniversary of that
fateful 11 September. We have a collective duty to
reaffirm our united resolve to create a world free of the
fear of terrorism. We have a common task to ensure
that this Organization truly lives up to its obligations to
do all the things that make for peace. We have a solemn
obligation to give real meaning to the message of hope
we proclaimed in the Millennium Declaration. It may
be that future generations will say that if we have
learned anything at all from the horrendous events of
11 September, it is that the General Assembly should
dedicate its efforts to the accomplishment of these
tasks.
In keeping with that perspective, we have come to
the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
report that the peoples of Africa have risen to those
challenges by forming the African Union. Our Union is
based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. It results from the transformation of
the Organization of African Unity, which championed
the cause of the unity and independence of Africa for
nearly 40 years. The African Union is Africa's
practical and determined response to its past and
present, in favour of peace and stability, democracy
and human rights, cooperation, development,
prosperity and human dignity. Its programme for the
socio-economic revitalization of our continent is the
New Partnership for Africa's Development, which must
help us to eradicate poverty and underdevelopment
throughout Africa and, within the context of the
African Union, end Africa's humiliation as an object of
charity.
Clearly, the objectives of the African Union and
the programme enunciated in the New Partnership
essentially, and of necessity, seek to advance the aims
contained in the Millennium Development Goals.
Naturally, the United Nations — as an Organization
seized of the task to address the critical issues of peace,
human rights and poverty eradication within the
framework of sustainable development — will forever
be central to the success of the African Union and the
accomplishment of the goals of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development. Accordingly, on behalf of
the united peoples of Africa, we are honoured and
privileged to commend to this Organization both the
African Union and the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. We are convinced that with the support
of the United Nations, we will transform this into an
African century.
We are happy that there are encouraging peace
processes in Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan, with the Comoros already
having held successful elections. We are particularly
pleased because these positive developments will
create the possibility for millions of our fellow
Africans to reaffirm the sanctity of human life and
security and to engage in the important tasks of
rebuilding their countries to bring about a better life for
all.
As part of our commitment to wage a sustained
struggle to realize the long-deferred hopes of the
peoples of Africa, we have agreed to the establishment
of various institutions, including a peer-review
mechanism, which must help us ensure that we honour
our commitments to democracy, human rights and good
governance. I am confident that the United Nations will
work closely with the African Union and that this
premier Organization of the peoples of the world will
use its vast and invaluable experience to ensure that the
African Union delivers on the important and pressing
duty of achieving sustainable development in each and
every country on our continent.
Together, the agencies of the United Nations and
the organs of the African Union must give priority to
such matters as human resources development and
capacity-building, modernizing Africa's economy,
dealing decisively with the intolerable debt burden,
ensuring access of our products to the markets of the
developed world, spreading the emancipation and
empowerment of women, combating communicable
and other diseases — including AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis — and fighting against environmental
degradation.
At the end of August and the beginning of this
month, the people of South Africa and Africa were
honoured to host the World Summit for Sustainable
Development. A number of far-reaching decisions were
taken at that important Summit to ensure that we will
bequeath to the next generations a better, humane and
equitable world based on what we agree are the
11

inseparable pillars of sustainable development:
economic development, social development and
environmental protection. Delegates from around the
world enshrined the decisions they took in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development
to ensure that the billions of people who have placed
their fate on our collective shoulders have a concrete
programme of action to realize the goals contained in
Agenda 21 and other documents adopted by the world
community of nations during the last 10 years.
The Johannesburg Summit confronted the stark
reality that billions of people across the world are poor,
and it boldly confirmed the need for us to collaborate
for a shared human prosperity through sustainable
development. We agree that this goal can be achieved
because we are inspired by the knowledge that the
resources needed exist within the global community.
Indeed, Member States have already committed
themselves to make available the means necessary for
the implementation of our plans, especially finance,
technology and capacity-building.
It is critically important that we implement
everything we agreed, acting with the necessary sense
of urgency. Again, this we will do together, under the
leadership of the United Nations, while we continue to
strengthen the multilateral system of global governance
as the only viable international response to all our
challenges. Fundamentally, this is the only credible
response to the challenge of globalization and the need
to enhance human solidarity to meet our common
needs.
It has been our privilege to chair the Non-Aligned
Movement for the past four years. During that time, the
Movement has ensured constant dialogue between the
countries of the North and South, which has advanced
the commonality of interest between States, confirming
the view that the future of all humanity is interlinked.
We are pleased that the views of the Movement have
helped to inform the advance towards a better life for
all, to which we have all committed ourselves by word
and deed.
In February next year, Malaysia will assume the
responsibility of guiding our Movement as it responds
to the changed and changing global environment. I am
certain that this will add new strength to the Non-
Aligned Movement in the interests of all humanity,
especially the poor of the world. As before, the Non-
Aligned Movement is committed to the peaceful
resolution of all conflicts, including those pertaining to
Palestine and Israel, as well as Iraq, in keeping with the
resolutions of the United Nations. These are urgent
tasks to which the Organization must respond.
In conclusion, let me recall that two years ago in
the Millennium Declaration more than 150 heads of
State or Government resolved that “we believe that the
central challenge we face today is to ensure that
globalization becomes a positive force for all the
world's people” (resolution 55/2, para. 5). Through
both our global and our regional programmes we can
and must ensure that globalization indeed becomes a
valuable process which will bring about sustainable
development and prosperity for all.
From this fifty-seventh session of the General
Assembly must surely issue the unequivocal message
that the peoples of the world are united in their resolve
to sustain the message of hope by advancing the goals
of peace, of democracy, of prosperity and of
sustainable development.





