Please allow me warmly to congratulate Mr. Hunte, on
his assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jan Kavan for his valuable contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
I also take this opportunity to express my
heartfelt condolences on the recent tragic deaths in
Baghdad of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
other United Nations staff members.
The twenty-first century is about to complete its
third year, with hope and distress coexisting side by
28

side. Peace and development remain the overriding
themes of the times and the shared aspirations of
people of all races, colours and nationalities. The
concept of democracy and equality has planted deep
roots in the hearts of the people. The shared
confrontation of global challenges through stronger
coordination and cooperation has become the
consensus of the international community.
Countries are increasingly closer in their
economic relations. Advanced means of
communications have made it possible to share
information in real time. With their interests closely
connected and intertwined, countries are finding
themselves more and more like passengers in the same
boat. Regional cooperation has grown substantially in
both depth and scope, with cooperation mechanisms
taking shape at various levels. Regional economic
integration is forging ahead in many parts of the world.
There are, however, many worrisome aspects of
the international situation. Local wars and conflicts
continue to emerge sporadically. Although the Iraq war
is over, peace remains elusive, with no end of suffering
in sight for the Iraqi people. With the situation between
Israel and Palestine still experiencing ups and downs,
the Middle East peace process remains a long, uphill
journey. In Africa, wars are still raging in some
countries.
Non-traditional security concerns such as
terrorism, drug-trafficking, arms proliferation, the
spread of diseases and environmental degradation have
become more pronounced. Given modern conditions,
they can easily spread within regions or even across the
world, making the security situation of human
communities even more complicated.
Humankind still confronts severe challenges in its
development. In the past 30 years, the number of least
developed countries has doubled, reaching 50, which
accounts for one quarter of the United Nations
membership. The ever-widening gap between the North
and South and the aggravated disparity between the
rich and the poor have become a major factor breeding
new conflicts and wars and undermining regional
stability.
At a moment like this, people are inevitably
pondering the same question: in the interest of world
peace and common development, what kind of new
world order should we establish in the twenty-first
century?
China is of the view that the future well-being of
humankind hinges on closer international cooperation
and a multipolar world. We should promote democracy
in international relations. Multipolarization does not
mean back-pedalling into the age of spheres of
influence or a replay of the now long-gone rivalry of
major Powers. It simply means bringing about a new
regime of international relations under which all
countries — big or small, rich or poor, strong or
weak — are treated as equals, and under which no
country has the right to impose its will on others.
We should cultivate a new security concept based
on the principles of mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. Security should be
maintained through cooperation, and disputes should
be resolved peacefully through dialogue. The frequent
use of force and the threat of its use should be avoided.
The practice of building one’s own security at the
expense of others should be rejected.
We should support diversity in the process of
development. Our world is a place of many colours and
styles. A single musical note cannot make a melody,
nor does a phonetic alphabet make a language. Human
wisdom has produced so many civilizations, allowing
us to follow different paths of development and a
variety of values. It is through the exchanges,
emulations and integrations of diverse cultures that
human reason and wisdom shine brilliantly.
We should dedicate ourselves to the
empowerment of developing countries in their large
numbers. The developing countries, which make up
three quarters of the world’s population, should
become a key pillar of a multipolar world. Without
their extensive participation on an equal footing, there
will be no democracy in international relations or a fair
and rational world order. Without their economic
revitalization, there can be no common development of
all humankind to speak of.
We should step up multilateral cooperation.
Multilateral cooperation in various forms should
become the principal vehicle in the handling of
international affairs. Countries should join hands in
taking on global challenges through globalized
cooperation.
In a multipolar world, countries should respect
and consult with one another politically, strive for
common development by helping one another
economically, prosper together by drawing on one
29

another’s cultural strengths and jointly maintain
security through mutual trust, thus working hand in
hand to realize the peace and prosperity of humankind.
More than half a century ago, our forefathers
gathered to give birth to the United Nations. The past
58 years have seen the Organization’s notable
accomplishments in preserving peace in regions and
around the world and in promoting human development
and progress. The spirit of the United Nations
Charter — characterized by such words as “to live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours”
and “to promote social progress and better standards of
life in large freedom” — has been widely accepted in
the international community.
The United Nations has become the most
universal, most representative and most authoritative
international organization in the world today. This is
what history affirms and what reality mandates.
China maintains that in the current situation the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
should be adhered to and earnestly abided by with a
view to realizing democracy, the rule of law in
international relations and the mutually advantageous
coexistence of the countries of the world.
In handling affairs affecting regional or
international peace, all Member States are obliged to
maintain the leading role and authority of the United
Nations and its Security Council. China is in favour of
an important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s post-
war arrangements and reconstruction and supports the
restoration of sovereignty to the Iraqi people at an early
date.
China also supports the United Nations carrying
out the necessary reforms to enhance its role and
effectiveness in the light of changing circumstances.
The United Nations is a microcosm of our world.
The world’s hope rests on a strong United Nations. In
order to build a better future for humankind, it is
incumbent upon us first to turn the United Nations into
a forum for cooperation instead of an arena of
recrimination. No country is entirely populated by
saints and therefore no country should have the right to
throw the stones of prejudice.
To that end, we should forsake all the old
baggage of arrogance, estrangement and narrow-
mindedness and let harmony, understanding and
tolerance ring out loudly as the undiminished themes of
this great Hall. The ocean is made great by all the
rivers it takes in. Let that be the motto of all Member
States.
Development is the foundation for world peace
and human progress. We stand for stronger
international cooperation and the achievement of
common development.
The current state of affairs — in which the gap
between the North and the South has been widening
without pause, with some countries of the South
languishing in dire poverty — must be changed without
further delay. The key lies in establishing a fair and
equitable new world economic order in response to the
requirements of economic globalization.
An open and fair multilateral trading regime
should be established and improved. The principles of
mutual understanding and mutual accommodation
should be followed to bring about due progress in
multilateral trade talks. Close attention should be given
to reforming and improving the international financial
system, setting up a financial early-warning mechanism
and enhancing the capacity of countries to prevent and
deal with financial crises.
Stronger South-South cooperation and North-
South exchanges should be promoted. The developing
countries should step up their cooperation and
coordination and gradually change their
disadvantageous position in the economic globalization
process. This coming December, the second ministerial
conference of the China-Africa Cooperation Forum
will be held in Addis Ababa, where the two sides will
work together to deepen their equality-based and
mutually beneficial cooperation and open up a new
horizon in South-South cooperation.
The developed countries should also shoulder
their duties and responsibilities by giving greater
support to the developing countries in the areas of
market access, funding, technology transfer, debt relief
and trade terms.
All human communities make an organic whole
when it comes to development. When hundreds of
millions of fellow human beings are suffering from
cold and hunger, the rich countries should not nor
cannot enjoy their riches by themselves for long. The
striking contrast in wealth is eroding the very dignity
that all human beings share. Upon the monstrous gap
30

between the North and South cannot stand the great
edifice of future prosperity.
While addressing the development issue, it is
necessary to highlight the need for a harmonious
development of the economy and society.
At present, humankind’s further development is
being increasingly hampered by excessive population
growth, environmental degradation, energy depletion,
the decline and demise of indigenous cultures, and
other constraints. Sustainable development can be truly
realized only when there is harmony, mutual
complementarity and mutual promotion between the
economy and society, and between their development
and nature.
In the first half of the year, SARS struck a
number of regions and countries, which testifies yet
again to the crucial importance of public health in the
context of development. While countries should
strengthen their public health systems, the world in
general should enhance its capacity to deal with major
diseases and disasters through an improved globalized
contingency response mechanism.
The Chinese Government supports the proposal
made by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
certain countries at the fifty-sixth World Health
Assembly for the establishment of a global fund
against SARS and is ready to contribute to it. We call
on all countries to support the United Nations in its
relevant activities, including incorporating public
health into United Nations development programmes
and other action plans and promoting regional and
international cooperation in this regard.
Last fall, the Communist Party of China convened
its 16th National Congress, which called for the
building, during the first two decades of the twenty-
first century, of a society that is well off in all respects.
This past spring, a new Chinese Central Government
was elected at the 10th National People’s Congress —
thus a smooth leadership transition was realized.
In the first half of the year, the people of China
put up a heroic fight against SARS and won a
resounding victory. Many friendly countries and
personalities in the world, together with the World
Health Organization and other United Nations
agencies, have rendered us valuable support and
assistance, for which I wish to express our heartfelt
gratitude.
China has kept its economic growth in high gear.
The first two quarters saw the nation’s gross domestic
product grow by 8.2 per cent over the corresponding
period of last year, and foreign trade grow by 39 per
cent. China’s economic efficiency has improved
markedly, and its reforms on all fronts are progressing
in an orderly way.
Needless to say, China is a developing country. It
still has a long way to go before all its citizens can live
a comfortable, even affluent life. Development,
therefore, remains China’s top priority.
China’s development requires a peaceful
international and surrounding environment. We will
continue to pursue an independent foreign policy of
peace and will seek to play a constructive role in
regional and international affairs.
China will continue to push for friendship and
good-neighbourliness in the interest of peace and
tranquillity in the region. Based on our support for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula on which peace and
stability should be maintained, we initiated and
sponsored the three-party Beijing talks and the first
round of six-party talks. China remains committed to
resolving the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
peacefully through dialogue and the building of a
lasting peace there.
To develop, China needs the world, and a
prosperous world also needs China. The market and
cooperation potential unleashed by a rapidly
developing China could bring fresh and immeasurable
opportunities to the region and to the world at large.
We desire peace, stability and development. We
aspire to equality, mutual benefit and a win-win result
for all. Conforming to the tide of history, China has
opted for the path of peaceful development, linking its
rejuvenation with that of the region, with the interests
of the majority of countries, and with the lofty cause of
peace and development for humanity. We hereby
pledge our continued and ever-greater contribution to
world prosperity and progress.





﻿I wish to
begin by congratulating the President, on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session and wish him every success with his work. I
also wish to thank his predecessor, President Kavan,
for the dedication with which he presided over the
fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
I also wish to endorse the statements made by the
Italian presidency on behalf of the European Union.
This year is a special one for Germany’s work
within the United Nations. History is both a reminder
and a guide for us. Thirty years ago, on 18 September
1973, the United Nations welcomed Germany back into
the fold of the family of nations. My predecessor,
Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt, paved the way for
that move. His standing as an anti-fascist inspired
confidence for Germany. His passionate commitment to
internationalism went far beyond the policy of détente
in the then East-West conflict.
In 1980 he made an urgent appeal to the
community of States with a report entitled “North-
South, A Programme for Survival”. He wrote:
“The globalization of the dangers resulting from
wars, chaos and self-destruction calls for a
domestic policy that goes far beyond national
borders.”
We are strongly committed to this task, and I
think that we Germans are not the only ones who are
committed to it, because, as I said, history is our guide.
It guides us towards intensive international
cooperation, of course under the auspices of the United
Nations, that we must strengthen through courageous
reforms. It guides us towards a universal order based
on the rule of law and human dignity, on good,
responsible governance and prosperity that is truly
shared by all people. It also guides us towards security
and peace through comprehensive prevention. We must
act resolutely by pursuing an effective multilateral
strategy wherever peace is threatened and human rights
are violated. But we must act just as resolutely to
prevent conflict and create stable structures so that
people can lead their lives in freedom and tolerance
with one another.
Thirty years ago, Germany was a country with
limited sovereignty, divided by the Iron Curtain. Today,
Germany is a sovereign nation, a civil Power in the
heart of a united Europe. We live in a common area of
freedom, the rule of law, prosperity and social
responsibility. This goes to show that development
towards justice and peace is indeed possible and we
shall not cease to support endeavours to that end
anywhere in the world, be it in the Middle East, in
Africa or in any other crisis area. Bearing in mind our
own history, we are indeed assuming responsibility for
a cooperative policy of peace. This we do by
employing economic, political and humanitarian
means.
But we are also assuming military responsibility,
shoulder to shoulder with our partners in NATO and
the European Union, where there is absolutely no other
way to secure peace and protect human beings. Today,
more than 9,000 members of the German armed forces
and police are deployed on international peace
missions. Our top priority is our commitment to peace
in Afghanistan. Germany is willing to maintain its
commitment there in the long term and we are ready to
increase it beyond its present scope. The basis for such
commitment is the Charter of the United Nations.
In the Unification Treaty, Germany vowed that it
would only deploy its armed forces within the
framework of this Charter. The Charter provides us
with “the necessary building blocks to ensure that our
common humanity is an inclusive one, built on values
such as tolerance and dignity”. These were the words
of Sergio Vieira de Mello, who on 19 August 2003 fell
victim to an underhanded criminal attack in Baghdad.
He was killed along with 22 others, including many
members of the United Nations staff working for the
people of Iraq and their hopes of a better future.
We are deeply affected by their deaths and must
honour them by taking on their legacy. Our response
must be to strengthen the role and commitment of the
United Nations in Iraq. Only the United Nations can
guarantee the legitimacy required to enable the people
of Iraq to speedily rebuild their country under an
independent, representative Government. Germany
stands ready to support such a process. We are ready to
24

provide humanitarian, technical and economic
assistance and could also train Iraqi security personnel.
International terrorism, failing States and the
dangers posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction all threaten our joint security. The obvious
question is: What must be done to truly enhance
security? We must capture the terrorists and their
masters and destroy their infrastructure. There can be
no doubt that we must prevent any further proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We must strengthen the
inspections regimes and pursue a policy of controlled
disarmament.
But as we know from history, as well as our own
experience, to follow any strategy focused narrowly on
the military and the police would be a recipe for
failure. Rather, what is needed is to address the root
causes of terrorism and insecurity. To combat
fanaticism, we must ensure social and material as well
as cultural security. That can only be achieved on the
basis of a broad concept of security. If we want to
outlaw infamy we must put an end to lawlessness. That
is the core task, indeed, of the international courts of
justice and especially the International Criminal Court.
In order to win hearts and minds for freedom,
peace and an open society, we must help people to
acquire a greater stake in society, build better lives for
them and provide them with a secure environment.
Afghanistan is a good example of this. There, the
international community succeeded in liberating the
Afghan people from the scourge of the Taliban and
al Qaeda.
At the same time, the Petersberg Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Bonn under the auspices of the
United Nations, created a political framework for
rebuilding the country. This process needs our
continued support. There must also be sustained
international commitment to the task of strengthening
security. In the long run, the fight against terrorism can
be won only if people see that it produces tangible
benefits in their everyday lives. They need to
experience at first hand that being once again part of
the international community means not only greater
freedom and more security, but also entails better
development opportunities and a greater stake in
society.
There is no doubt that we have already made
major strides towards realizing our common goals
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. More
countries than ever before now have democratic
Governments. Our concerted efforts have enabled more
people than ever before to put poverty behind them.
But we must note that the gap between the world’s rich
and poor has still not been closed and the fight against
hunger, injustice and oppression is still far from won.
For this reason, eradicating poverty remains an
imperative of our policy for peace and stability.
There has been a drastic reduction in the number
of wars fought between States. In the Balkans, for
example, resolute action by NATO and the United
Nations enabled us to put an end to certain wars and
prevent others from breaking out in the first place.
Nevertheless, our world has become — and not just
since the barbaric terrorist attacks in New York and
Washington or indeed Bali, Casablanca, Moscow or
Djerba — a dramatically more insecure place. New
threats that no country in the world can tackle
effectively on its own, make international cooperation
more vital than ever before. Such threats also require
new strategies and that is why we are all called upon to
review whether the instruments available to the United
Nations are still appropriate for tackling these new
challenges. We all have a responsibility to ensure that
people and their rights are also protected in situations
other than inter-State wars. They must be protected
from genocide and the consequences of random
violence as well. A political commitment to
comprehensive prevention must further strengthen the
United Nations monopoly on the use of force as well as
the institutions of international law.
Within the United Nations we need to muster the
strength to launch overdue institutional reforms. My
Government fully and wholeheartedly supports the
proposals made by the Secretary-General. We must
agree how to ensure in the future an even better
allocation of abilities, skills and scarce resources. I
also share the view of the Secretary-General that the
legitimacy of the Security Council depends on how
well it represents all nations and all regions. It is true
that the Council must be reformed and enlarged. First
and foremost, it must also include more representatives
of the developing countries. Let me reiterate that in the
context of such reform Germany is ready to assume
greater responsibility.
The world of the twenty-first century offers us, its
inhabitants, ample scope for change, for better or
worse. Given the wealth of opportunities and the
immense dangers ahead, we have no choice but to
25

strive for greater international partnership and expand
and strengthen multilateralism. We will only be able to
make our world a more secure place if we can also
make it more fair and equitable. It was for that very
purpose, after all, that the international community
created the United Nations. That is its mandate. Let us
join together to make the United Nations even stronger.
Let us make sure that it can fulfil its mandate to
maintain international peace and security and that it
can achieve greater justice for all.





﻿Sergio
Vieira de Mello was the pride of the United Nations.
Murdered on 19 August along with his colleagues, he
will remain in our memories. Let us dedicate this
session to that great servant of the world and of peace.
The United Nations has just emerged from one of
the most serious challenges in its history. Respect for
the Charter and the use of force were at the heart of the
debate. The war, which was launched without the
Security Council's authorization, has undermined the
multilateral system.
Having come to terms with that crisis, our
Organization can now continue to move forward; for it
is above all in this forum   the melting pot of the
international order   that we must exercise our
responsibilities to the world of today as well as to
future generations.
In an open world no one can live in isolation, no
one can act alone in the name of all and no one can
accept the anarchy of a society without rules. There is
no alternative to the United Nations. But in order to
meet today's challenges, this fundamental choice,
expressed by the Charter, requires a far-reaching
reform of our Organization.
Multilateralism is crucial, because it ensures the
participation of all in the management of world affairs.
It is a guarantee of legitimacy and democracy,
especially when decisions must be made with respect to
the use of force or to the laying down of universal
norms.
15

Multilateralism is effective. In Monterrey and
Johannesburg, it allowed us to transcend North-South
confrontation and to open the way to promising
partnerships, in particular with the African continent.
Multilateralism is modern, because it alone makes
it possible to comprehend contemporary problems
globally and in all of their complexity.
First, let me touch on the settlement of conflicts
that threaten international peace and security.
In Iraq, the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqis,
who must have sole responsibility for their destiny, is
essential for stability and reconstruction. It is up to the
United Nations to lend its legitimacy to that process. It
is also up to the United Nations to assist with the
gradual transfer of administrative and economic
responsibilities to the Iraqi institutions, according to a
realistic timetable, and to help the Iraqis draft a
constitution and hold general elections.
Finally, it is up to the United Nations to entrust a
mandate to a multinational force, commanded,
naturally, by the main troop contributor   that is, the
United States   in order to ensure the security of Iraq
and of all those helping to rebuild the country.
Thus the international community and the Iraqi
people, united around a common project, will together
put an end to the tragic decades of that great country's
history.
In the Middle East, ravaged by despair and
hatred, only strong political will on both sides to
implement the law as stipulated by the United Nations
can pave the way for a just and lasting solution.
The international community must restore a
dynamic for peace. It must involve itself in the
implementation of the road map. That should be the
objective of the upcoming meeting of the Quartet, to be
held at the ministerial level. France believes that the
idea of a monitoring mechanism is as relevant as ever,
and that the convening of an international conference is
a goal to be attained as quickly as possible.
Given the present tense situation, France calls on
the parties not to succumb to the temptation of a test of
strength and of a futile radicalization.
Another major challenge is the fight against
international terrorism. This fight is well under way,
under the auspices of the Security Council and within
the context of our treaties. The horror of 11 September
cemented our common resolve. This threat strikes at
the very heart of our democracies and our societies. We
are using force to combat terrorism, but that is not
enough. It will re-emerge again and again if we allow
extremism and fanaticism to flourish   if we fail to
realize that it seeks justification in the world's
unresolved conflicts and economic and social
imbalances.
Given the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, we reject the policy of fait accompli. We
must stand united to guarantee the universality of
treaties and the effectiveness of non-proliferation
regimes. In order to ensure compliance, we must also
develop our means of action. France has proposed the
creation of a permanent corps of inspectors under the
authority of the Security Council. Let us give fresh
impetus to this policy. Let us convene a summit
meeting of the Security Council to outline a true plan
of action of the United Nations against proliferation.
At this time, let us demand that North Korea
completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle its
military programme. Let us demand that Iran sign and
implement, unconditionally and without delay, a
strengthened nuclear safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Sustainable development poses yet another
challenge, because half of humankind is living in
conditions of insecurity or extreme poverty. Will we be
able to globalize solidarity, as our peoples demand, in
response to the inevitable globalization of the
economy?
We agree on the objectives. We are bound by the
Millennium Goals. But, in order to attain those goals,
strong political impetus remains necessary. I propose
that heads of State and Government meet in New York
in 2005 for a preliminary progress review. I hope that
this session of the General Assembly will confirm the
determination of States to overcome the failure of
Cancun and to ensure the success of the Doha
Development Round.
In order to carry out the missions entrusted to it
and to remedy its blatant shortcomings, the United
Nations must evolve. Three watchwords, I believe,
must guide us: democracy, authority, effectiveness.
Thanks to the Secretary-General, progress has been
made, and new avenues are opening up. It is now up to
States to move forward without further ado and to put
16

an end to the adverse consequences of the stalemate
over reforms.
The United Nations is suffering from the current
weakness of the General Assembly. And yet, it is here
that a debate should be organized and a consensus
crafted regarding solutions to major problems. A
culture of confrontation must give way to a culture of
action aimed at achieving our common goals, which we
should determine together.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security rests with the Security Council. It is
therefore essential to its legitimacy that its composition
reflect the state of the world. It must be expanded to
include new permanent members, because the presence
of major countries is necessary. France, naturally, is
thinking of Germany and of Japan, but also of some
leading countries of Asia, Africa and America. We also
need new elected members, to make the Council even
more representative. With the decisive impetus of the
five permanent members, we all need to resume
discussions, mindful of the general interest.
Such reform should be accompanied by a
strengthening of the Council's authority. It is the
Council that should set the bounds with respect to the
use of force. No one can claim the right to use force
unilaterally and preventively. Conversely, in the face of
mounting threats, States must be assured that the
Council has at its disposal the appropriate means of
evaluation and of collective action, and that it has the
will to act.
We all are very committed to the sovereignty of
States. But its scope can and should be limited in the
case of serious violations of human rights and of
humanitarian law. The Security Council is taking steps
in that direction, and France supports this development.
Meanwhile, crimes against humanity are being
suppressed more effectively with the establishment of
the International Criminal Court, whose jurisdiction is
universal. This historic step forward must be
accompanied by a strengthening of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, under a
commission equipped to discharge its duties and its
mission.
We now realize that globalization demands
stronger economic, social and environmental
governance. To that end, France proposes the creation
of a new political forum representative of the present
economic state of today's world in all its diversity.
That council would be responsible for providing the
necessary impetus to international institutions, for
improving their coordination and for anticipating and
tackling global problems more effectively.
Effectiveness also depends on increased financial
resources. France calls for two changes.
First, the trend towards increasing voluntary
contributions at the expense of mandatory
contributions must be reversed. Failing that, we will
end up with a pick-and-choose United Nations, which
is an outdated vision and a harmful one.
Secondly, we need to make progress in
mobilizing funds for development and development
assistance. France wants to meet the official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent by the
year 2012. But this effort, together with that of the
European Union, will obviously not suffice to release
the necessary funds needed to finance the Millennium
Goals each year. France therefore supports the
innovative concept of an international financial facility.
I would also like us to give pragmatic, speedy
consideration to international solidarity levies, a kind
of tax on the wealth generated by globalization and
given over to development.
To advance on these issues, I completely approve
of the Secretary-General's intention to gather around
him a committee of independent wise men and women
responsible for submitting proposals.
Against the risk of a world without order
delivered up to violence, let us work to establish the
rule of international law. Against the injustice and
suffering of a world of widening inequalities   even
though it has never been so rich   let us choose
solidarity. Against the chaos of a world shaken by
ecological disasters, let us call for a sharing of
responsibility around a United Nations environmental
organization. Against the barbarity of a world in which
fundamental rights are all too often held up to ridicule,
where the integrity of mankind is under threat, where
indigenous peoples   the heirs to an irreplaceable
heritage   vanish amid silence and indifference, let us
uphold the demands of ethics. Against the peril of a
clash of civilizations, finally, let us insist on the equal
dignity of cultures, respect for diversity and the value
of dialogue.
17

With the Charter adopted in the name of the
Peoples of the United Nations, the founders proclaimed
their faith in these ideals. Let us seek to be worthy of
them. Let us establish the United Nations at the heart
of this planetary democracy that is so vital in our day
and age.


﻿I begin by paying a tribute to Dr.
Akila Al-Hashimi, a senior member of the Iraqi
Governing Council, who died earlier today.
I had the privilege of meeting Dr. Al-Hashimi
earlier this year in London and later in Baghdad, and I
was struck by her courage and her dedication to the
Iraqi people. Dr. Al-Hashimi was murdered by those
who would deny the Iraqi people the democratic,
prosperous future they so richly deserve. The best
service that we can render her memory is to defeat the
terrorists and to ensure that her vision of a peaceful,
free Iraq prevails.
Of course, we owe this service to all those who
have fallen in the cause of peace in Iraq. Sergio Vieira
de Mello and the United Nations personnel who were
killed or injured in the blast in Baghdad on 19 August
were committed to bringing the ideals of the United
Nations to the people of Iraq. They paid the ultimate
sacrifice for their dedication. We mourn their loss, but
we will not weaken in our resolve to help the Iraqi
people rebuild their country on the principles of justice
and security.
What, I think, makes Iraq so important was the
way in which it tested the role and purpose of this
institution over more than a dozen years. Throughout
that period, the international community remained in
agreement that the regime of Saddam Hussein posed a
Chapter VII threat to international peace and security
by its proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its unparalleled defiance of the will of
the United Nations. Yet, earlier this year, sadly, we
divided on when and what action was necessary to deal
with the Iraqi threat.
Of course, I acknowledge the controversy over
the military action which the United Kingdom, the
United States and others took and the heavy
responsibilities we now bear, but I firmly believe that
the decisions we took were the right ones. The
authority of the United Nations was at stake. Having
given Saddam Hussein’s regime a final opportunity to
comply with the United Nations, what would have
happened if we had simply turned away? Would the
world be a safer place today? Would Iraq be a better
place today? Would the United Nations be a stronger
institution today? The answer to each of those
questions is no. Saddam Hussein would have been
emboldened by our failure to act; every dictator would
have been encouraged to follow his example; and the
authority of this United Nations would have been
gravely weakened.
Yet, whatever the arguments of the spring, we
have now to come together again for a common
purpose. As the Security Council has recognized in its
three resolutions 1472 (2003), 1483 (2003) and 1500
(2003), we have a shared interest in helping Iraqi
citizens to embrace the rights and freedoms which they
have been denied so long and for which this institution
was founded. Yes, the security situation does present
formidable challenges. Terrorists who despise freedom
are seeking to plunge Iraq into chaos. They have
inflicted terrible blows on the Iraqi people, coalition
soldiers and international aid workers, but ultimately
they will fail.
And let us also not lose sight of what has been
achieved and what is taking shape. Saddam Hussein’s
reign of terror is over. The apparatus of torture and
oppression which claimed hundreds of thousands of
31
 
lives is at an end. Instead, we have the beginnings of a
representative Government run by Iraqis for Iraqis;
new ministries providing daily services to the people; a
free press; the freedom for members of all religious
communities to worship as they wish; hospitals and
schools in operation; bustling traffic on the streets and
highways; and a start to real economic regeneration.
We shall stay in Iraq as long, but only as long, as
it is necessary to meet our clear responsibilities and to
restore sovereignty to the Iraqi people as quickly as we
can in an orderly manner. I hope very much that we can
agree a new Security Council resolution to strengthen
the United Nations role in Iraq. In managing this
transition, we should be guided by three central
principles: first, the transfer of powers must reflect
realities on the ground in Iraq, particularly the need to
ensure security; secondly, the Iraqi institutions must be
sufficiently robust to take on increasing responsibilities;
and thirdly, the exercise of executive powers and
responsibilities must be based on good governance,
involving representative Iraqi authorities and coherent
constitutional arrangements. In other words, the timetable
should be driven by the needs of the Iraqi people and their
capacity progressively to assume democratic control,
rather than by fixing arbitrary deadlines.
Iraq is, sadly, not the only territory in the Middle
East where the international community faces great
challenges. Three months ago, we all had high hopes
about the work of the Quartet of the United Nations,
the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United States in Israel and the occupied territories. It is
tragic that these hopes were blown apart on 19 August
by the terrorist atrocity in Jerusalem, which came only
a few hours after the terrorist atrocity against the
United Nations in Baghdad, but the international
community has to stay united on both the means and
the ends in the Middle East. There are no alternatives
to the road map and there can be no alternatives to the
outcome the entire world wishes to see — two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. This can be the only fitting memorial to the
thousands who have died on both sides since the
beginning of this appalling conflict.
The breadth of the issues being tackled by the
United Nations and its agencies demonstrates the
continued relevance of this institution. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee has given the United Nations a
focus for its work following  September two years
ago, but we must now build upon that work, giving the
Committee the expertise and the remit to reinforce the
capacity of Member States to tackle and to overcome
terrorism.
We also know that proliferation is one of the
greatest threats we face alongside terrorism. Much
good work on proliferation is being done by United
Nations agencies, particularly the International Atomic
Energy Agency, but it is extraordinary that the Security
Council itself has not addressed the issue of
proliferation for over 10 years. In our judgement, it is
time that it did.
Problems of internal conflict, on the other hand,
are regularly on the Security Council’s agenda. The
United Nations has unrivalled expertise and experience
in this area and has achieved great things in countries
as far apart as East Timor and Sierra Leone, but nation-
building is a collaborative effort, requiring the
resources and commitment of Member States if the
United Nations peace-building is to be effective. We
therefore need new mechanisms to help prevent
conflicts and then to help States before they collapse.
We must also make a real success of the
Millennium Declaration. We have to overcome the
setback of Cancún and secure a positive outcome to the
Doha Round.
These and other shared problems require
collective responses, as our Secretary-General so
eloquently said here in his speech on Tuesday. A key to
this is to ensure that the United Nations itself remains
an effective global forum capable of delivering results.
The Secretary-General posed some difficult questions
two days ago. I welcome his initiative to seek the
advice of a distinguished group to make proposals on
reform. I welcome, too, his parallel commitment to
modernizing the United Nations and its agencies.
For our part, the United Kingdom is committed to
making the Security Council more representative. The
issue is not whether but how to do this. A bigger and
more representative Council, however, will not of itself
make it easier to make the tough choices which it has
to face so often. The most important ingredient is the
political will and determination of the members of the
Council to take effective action.
The most important part of the Secretary-
General’s speech on Tuesday was about the choices
now confronting the United Nations. He was right
about those. We have indeed come to a fork in the road.
32
 
Down one route lies a world in which the United
Nations strengthens its role as the collective instrument
for protecting our peace and security; down the other
route lies a world in which collective action becomes a
synonym for “inaction”. We must not take this second
route. The Secretary-General’s speech was a challenge
to all of us. We all share a world in which international
terrorists strike down the innocent, regardless of faith
or nationality, and we are all less secure when weapons
of mass destruction are in reckless hands. We do not
have the luxury simply of rejecting unilateralism, while
proposing no multilateral means of confronting and
dealing with these threats.
The British Government is profoundly
committed, as it always has been, to the ideals of the
United Nations. To us, the importance of this
Organization has always been its ability to put those
high ideals into effect. We will work wholeheartedly
with the Secretary-General and the international
community to ensure that the United Nations retains
and strengthens both its idealism and its effectiveness.












﻿Mr. President, we
congratulate you on your election to the presidency of
the fifty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. We wish you every success in our shared
endeavours. You will have our fullest cooperation in
your efforts.
As we gather here, in the wake of the many
momentous events over the past year, it is inevitable
that we should ponder some fundamental questions
about the role and relevance of the United Nations.
The United Nations was charged by its Charter
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war.” The Charter also speaks of our collective
determination “to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security.” There was an implicit
conviction that the United Nations would be stronger
than the sum of its constituent Member States. Its
unique legitimacy flows from a universal perception
that it pursues a larger purpose than the interests of one
country or a small group of countries.
This vision of an enlightened multilateralism has
not materialized. There have been difficulties and
deficiencies in ensuring a world free from strife, a world
without war. The United Nations has not always been
successful in preventing conflicts or in resolving them.
During the past year, the United Nations
encountered new challenges. We saw the extraordinary
inability of the five permanent members of the Security
Council to agree on action in respect of Iraq, in spite of
complete agreement on basic objectives. Most recently,
the brutal terrorist attack on the United Nations Office
in Baghdad struck a body blow at the United Nations’
humanitarian efforts there.
Looking back at events over recent years, we can
analyse the successes and failures of the United
Nations in this or that crisis. But it would be more
purposeful to reflect on our own commitment to
multilateralism, the extent of its applicability in the
real world of today, and the manner in which it can be
exercised through the United Nations. The reality is
that an international institution like the United Nations
can only be as effective as its Members allow it to be.
Our reflections on the United Nations should
focus on three key aspects:
First, we need to introspect on some of the
assumptions that have been made over the years
concerning the will and reach of the United Nations. In
the euphoria after the Cold War, there was a misplaced
notion that the United Nations could solve every
problem anywhere. Its enthusiasm and proactive stance
on many issues reflected laudable intentions. But we
soon realized that the United Nations does not possess
magical powers to solve every crisis in all parts of the
globe or to change overnight the motivation of leaders
and communities around the world. //We need to
clearly recognize, with a sense of realism, the limits to
what the United Nations can achieve, and the changes
of form and function required for it to play an optimal
role in today’s world. We need to clearly recognize,
with a sense of realism, the limits to what the United
Nations can achieve, and the changes that it needs to
make to its form and function to play an optimal role in
today’s world.
Secondly, the Iraq issue has inevitably generated
a debate on the functioning and the efficacy of the
Security Council and of the United Nations itself. Over
the decades, the United Nations membership has grown
enormously. The scope of its activities has expanded
greatly, with new specialized agencies and new
programmes. But in the political and security
dimensions of its activities, the United Nations has not
kept pace with the changes in the world. For the
Security Council to represent genuine multilateralism
in its decisions and actions, its membership must
reflect current world realities. Most United Nations
Members today recognize the need for an enlarged and
restructured Security Council, with more developing
countries as permanent and non-permanent members.
The permanent members guard their exclusivity. Some
States with weak claims want to ensure that others do
not enter the Council as permanent members. This
combination of complacency and negativism has to be
countered with a strong political will. The recent crises
should serve as a warning to us that until the Security
Council is reformed and restructured, its decisions
cannot truly reflect the collective will of the
community of nations.
Thirdly, even after such reform, the Security
Council would have to develop suitable decision-
making mechanisms that ensure better representation of
the collective will of the international community. How
can multilateralism be genuinely implemented? A
single veto is an anachronism in today’s world. On the
other hand, the requirement of unanimity can sabotage
imperative actions. A simple-majority vote may not be
15
 
sufficiently representative for major and serious issues.
Should we aim for the highest common factor, or
should we settle for the lowest common denominator?
Democratic countries could use their national
experience to provide feasible models for mechanisms
and determine the extent of support required based on
the impact of action to be taken.
The Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the
urgent need for reform of the institutions and processes
of the United Nations. We encourage his efforts in this
direction. We should seek to implement these reforms
within a specified time frame.
The Iraq issue continues to present a major
challenge to the United Nations. At this point in time,
it is not very productive to linger on the past. Our
thoughts and concerns should be about the suffering of
the people of Iraq. It is imperative that the people of
Iraq should be empowered to determine their own
future and to rebuild their nation.
The immediate priorities are ensuring security
and stability, restoration of basic facilities and
infrastructure and a road map of political processes for
a representative Iraqi Government. It is clear that the
United Nations has a crucial role to play in the process
of political and economic reconstruction of that
country. This has been acknowledged both by those
who had opposed military action and by those who did
not seek specific United Nations endorsement for it.
One issue on which the United Nations showed
remarkable unanimity after 11 September was global
terrorism. Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003) were unequivocal in condemning all
forms of terrorism and in calling for united action
against support, shelter, sponsorship, arming, training
and financing of terrorism or terrorists.
Unfortunately, the solidarity that was voiced has
not translated into coherent and effective action.
Terrorist acts continue to shatter our peace, from
Mombasa to Moscow and from Baghdad to Bali. India
has had more than its share of terrorism in various
parts of the country. The global coalition against
terrorism has registered successes in Afghanistan, but
has not been able to extend this elsewhere. Some of its
members are themselves part of the problem. We are
sometimes led to enter into semantic arguments over
the definition of terrorism. The search for root causes
or imaginary freedom struggles provides alibis for
killing innocent men, women and children.
There is much that the United Nations can do to
carry forward the war against international terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee should develop
measures to ensure compliance by Member States of
their obligations under Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003). We should have credible
multilateral instruments to identify States that
contravene these resolutions. Multilateral mechanisms
must be created to detect and choke off international
financial flows to terrorists and terrorist organizations.
A much better international system of
information exchange and intelligence sharing needs to
be devised to prevent terrorists from evading capture
simply by crossing national borders. No State should
be allowed to profess partnership with the global
coalition against terror, while continuing to aid, abet
and sponsor terrorism. To condone such double
standards is to contribute to multiplying terrorism.
Yesterday, the President of Pakistan chose this
august Assembly to make a public admission for the
first time that Pakistan is sponsoring terrorism in
Jammu and Kashmir. After claiming that there is an
indigenous struggle in Kashmir, he has offered to
encourage a general cessation of violence within Kashmir,
in return for reciprocal obligations and restraints.
We totally refuse to let terrorism become a tool of
blackmail. Just as the world did not negotiate with al
Qaeda or the Taliban, we shall not negotiate with
terrorism. Were we to do so, we would be betraying the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, who defied a most
ferocious campaign of violence and intimidation
sponsored from across our borders and participated in
an election, which has been universally hailed as free
and fair. This was an unequivocal expression of both
determination and self-determination.
When the cross-border terrorism stops, or when
we eradicate it, we can have a dialogue with Pakistan
on the other issues between us.
While on this subject, I would also like to point
out to the President of Pakistan that he should not
confuse the legitimate aspiration for equality of nations
with outmoded concepts of military parity.
We should be particularly concerned at the
various recent revelations about clandestine transfers of
weapons of mass destruction and their technologies.
We face the frightening prospect of these weapons and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists. Surely
16
 
something needs to be done about the helplessness of
international regimes in preventing such transactions,
which clearly threaten international security. The same
regimes expend considerable energy in imposing a
variety of discriminatory technology-denial restrictions
on responsible States.
Our preoccupation with terrorism should not
dilute our commitment to tackle the non-military
threats to human and international security. We have to
sustain the fight against trafficking in narcotic drugs,
human beings and small arms, the pandemic of
HIV/AIDS, diseases like malaria and tuberculosis that
beset developing countries and the degradation of our
common environment. Food security, energy security
and health security are important goals.
The countries of the North and of the South —
the developed, developing and transition economies —
must resume their dialogue to build a better world for
the present and future generations. For the agenda of
globalization, Cancún was a disappointment.
Significant progress was made at Johannesburg
towards the realization of sustainable development, but
the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change remains stalled and the Convention on
Biological Diversity has not yielded any tangible
benefits to the world’s poor.
International economic relations continue to be
characterized by inequities and inequalities.
Globalization has helped sections of the international
economy, including some developing countries; however,
large communities have been left outside its pale. It has
engendered economic crises and instability in several
developing countries and sharply increased poverty.
Poverty is multidimensional. It extends beyond
money and income to education, health care, skills
enhancement, political participation at all levels from
the local to the global, access to natural resources,
clean water and air, and advancement of one’s own
culture and social organization.
Poverty alleviation requires resources on a far
greater scale than now available. Globalization itself
places constraints on Governments of developing
countries in raising public resources for poverty
alleviation. The promise of the climate change and
biodiversity treaties to raise significant resources for
investment and technology transfer is as yet unrealized.
The resources of multilateral and bilateral development
agencies are limited by the failure of industrialized
countries to enhance development budgets.
Therefore, if the current regimes of globalization
and sustainable development are to be expanded — or
even to survive — they must be directly harnessed to
provide the necessary resources for poverty alleviation.
In fact, all international agreements and initiatives
affecting developing countries have to be evaluated by
their impact on poverty.
Developing countries need to coordinate their
positions in international negotiations to promote the
adoption of regimes which would help alleviate
poverty. The India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue
Forum, which was established earlier this year, is an
effort in this direction.
We in the developing countries do not have the
luxury of time. Political compulsions force us to meet
the aspirations of our people quickly, even as we
subject ourselves to newer and more rigid international
standards and norms. We owe it to our future generations
to make strong efforts to meet the Millennium
Development Goals. There is a mutuality of interest in
this between the developed and the developing
countries. Global interdependence today means that
economic disasters in developing countries could
create a backlash in developed countries. We hope the
world will act in this spirit of enlightened self-interest.





﻿I would like to congratulate
His Excellency, the Foreign Minister of Saint Lucia,
upon his assumption of the Presidency of the General
Assembly, and wish him much success.
Until just one month ago, every person in this hall
and every Member of this Organization joined us in the
hope that the Middle East peace process might finally
be back on track, and that a resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict might be on the horizon. The
establishment of a new Palestinian Government
promised an end to terror and a new beginning.
This glimmer of hope was darkened on 19 August
by the extremists who blew up a bus full of Jewish
families on their way home from prayers at the Western
Wall, the holiest site in the Jewish religion. Twenty-
three people, young and old, mothers and babies in
their cradles, were slaughtered in that attack. That
attack was carried out by Hamas, a terrorist
organization, which, under the road map, should have
been dismantled by the Palestinian Authority. Failure
to dismantle Hamas and other extremist organizations
has brought our diplomatic efforts to a standstill.
Rather than acting to fulfil its obligation, the
Palestinian Authority has chosen the route of inaction,
and complicity in terror.
We cannot allow this to continue. We must restore
hope that we can build a better future for our children.
The infrastructure of terror must be dismantled so that
we can put our peace efforts back on track. There is no
time other than now. There is no other way.
For many years it was thought that terrorism in
the Middle East was Israel’s problem, not the world’s.
Today, the world knows otherwise. Today, it is not only
Israel that mourns the loss of its loved ones, including
women and children and babies, at the hands of the
terrorists. Sadly, we have been joined by peoples from
across the globe — from Mombassa to Casablanca and
from Moscow to Bali. Even the United Nations, which
for so many has been a symbol of peace and goodwill,
is not immune.
28
 
Gathered here today in New York, just two short
years after 11 September, the community of nations
knows that those who seek to advance their political
agendas through killing innocents are ready to strike at
anyone or anything that represents the values of
freedom and human life.
Terrorism has declared war on us all. Israel has
often stood alone in this battle. A country that has
suffered more than any other from terrorism, we have
always understood the danger it poses to democracy
and freedom everywhere, even when others refused to
see this, and condemned us for our actions. We have
always understood that terrorism, no matter what cause it
claims to serve, seeks only to destroy, rather than to build.
There can be no neutrality in the war against
terrorism and there can be no immunity for those who
engage in it. Abstaining is not an option. This is not a
war of choice. Terrorism will not be eliminated until
the world unites against it. Our only choice is to win.
Every member of the international community must
take concrete and proactive measures to cut off all
channels of financial, moral and political support to
this common enemy.
States Members of this institution that sponsor
terrorists and give them shelter are accomplices in the
acts of terror themselves. They must be held
accountable for their crimes. It is no coincidence that
States that sponsor terrorism, like Iran and Syria, are
also striving to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
Their hostility to freedom and the rule of law puts the
very future of humanity in jeopardy.
I know that many in this place see Yasser Arafat
as the symbol of the Palestinian struggle. Tragically,
for his people and for ours, he is one of the world’s
icons of terror. In the 10 years since Arafat made a
commitment to Israel and the world that he would no
longer use terror, 1,126 Israelis have been killed and
thousands wounded in 19,000 separate Palestinian
terrorist attacks. In relative numbers, this would be the
same as 11,000 French or 56,000 Americans dying
from terrorism in the same period of time.
This carnage must stop. Its impact on both
societies is devastating. Yasser Arafat bears direct
responsibility for this terrible suffering. He has led his
people along the path of terror — from hijackings to
suicide bombings — for more than 30 years, always
preferring Israeli pain over Palestinian gain. He has
been — and he remains — the greatest obstacle to
peace between our peoples. For as long as he controls
the levers of power, no moderate leadership can
emerge. To vote for Arafat, like we saw in this
Assembly just last week, is to vote against the
Palestinian people. When Arafat wins, terrorism wins,
and we all lose. Instead of rallying around Arafat, the
international community must rally around the genuine
interests of the Palestinian people. They must do so
now, before he leads them even further down the path
of terror and destruction.
When a responsible and empowered Palestinian
leadership finally emerges — a leadership ready to join
the war on terror — it will find us a willing partner for
peace. Israel is committed to the vision for Middle East
peace laid out by United States President George Bush
on 24 June 2002. Israel will not compromise on the
safety of its citizens, but we will go the extra mile, as
we have proven before, to bring peace and security to
both our peoples.
We are ready to work with the Palestinians and
with the international community to make this vision a
reality. For this to happen, the Palestinian leadership
must take the moral and strategic decision to abandon
terrorism once and for all, and make peacemaking
possible. They must guide their people to build their
own society, rather than seek to destroy ours. They,
too, must understand that it is not poverty that breeds
terror but terror that breeds poverty.
We cannot stop only at dismantling the
infrastructure of terror. We must also build an
infrastructure of peace. It is up to political and moral
leaders everywhere to foster an environment which
rejects extremism and empowers the peacemakers. This
is particularly so in the Arab and Muslim world, where
incitement against Israel closes hearts and minds to the
possibility of peace.
Leaders must guide their people away from the
culture of hate, and replace it with a culture of
tolerance. Concrete expressions of cooperation and
exchange must be built in media and government,
education, science and business, to reinforce the
message of tolerance and acceptance.
For the sake of our collective future, voices of
moderation must be heard. For the sake of our
collective future, Israel and the Arab nations must learn
to live together side by side, to overcome our conflicts
just as the nations of Europe have learned to overcome
theirs. Israel is living among its Arab neighbours. We
29
 
believe in a common future of peace and prosperity
with them. My many meetings with Arab leaders over
the last few days have encouraged me to believe that
together we can make our region a better place.
This culture of peace must permeate not only the
borders of the Middle East, it must permeate the walls
of the United Nations as well. In the past, the United
Nations has shown us that it can play a positive role.
This Assembly was key to the founding of the State of
Israel, 55 years ago. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are our guideposts to
negotiations and peace.
To play such a constructive role in the future, the
United Nations must reform. It must move away from
the partisan hostility that has taken over its Middle East
agenda. For more than three decades, this Assembly
has passed every year a litany of resolutions designed
to discredit Israel, challenge its interests, and promote
the will of its greatest enemies.
In my hand I am holding a collection of the
decisions of the fifty-seventh General Assembly on the
Middle East — 175 pages filled not with hope, but with
the negative agendas of the past. No other country has
suffered such unjustified attack and consistent
discrimination within the United Nations system. The
time has come to end this campaign of diplomatic
incitement. For the sake of Israelis and Palestinians —
for the sake of the United Nations and peace itself — I
call on this body to rise above the tired politics of
yesterday, and adopt a new, courageous agenda for
tomorrow.
I call on the General Assembly to abandon the
automatic adoption of anti-Israel resolutions and to
find ways of making itself relevant once again to the
interests of the people it claims to serve. I call on this
Assembly to fulfil its historic mission and help
promote what unites us, not what divides us.
On the morning of 1 February of this year, Israel
lost its first astronaut in the Space Shuttle Columbia
disaster — a skilled and courageous pilot whom I knew
personally, a child of Holocaust survivors, a national
hero. Colonel Ilan Ramon embodied the spirit of our
nation. He was a man of courage and action, dedicated
to the well-being of his people. Just as he sought to
contribute to the advancement of his fellow man, he
met his death, together with colleagues from the United
States and India, on a scientific mission in the name of
humanity as a whole.
Israel’s place in such endeavours of international
cooperation and accomplishment is no coincidence. In
the 55 years since the State of Israel was established,
recognized and welcomed into the family of nations,
our achievements in the fields of science and
technology, the arts and literature and agriculture and
medicine have come to rank with the best in the world.
Our international cooperation programme is celebrated
in over a hundred countries around the globe, sharing
skills, experience and knowledge for the benefit of
millions of people. We extend this hand of friendship
to all the nations of the world. We welcome our
improving relations with Europe, just as we remain
committed to promoting closer ties with the nations of
Africa, Asia and the Americas.
The Zionist vision of Israel’s founders was to
bring into the world a State in our ancient homeland to
serve as a haven from persecution for our people, a
place where the Jewish people could fulfil its right to
self-determination in the modern era and a bastion of
democracy and opportunity for all its citizens. Our
founders also made a promise not just to the people of
Israel, but also to the people of the Middle East as a
whole — to pursue peace and to work for the common
advancement of our region.
I know personally the profound meaning of this
historic undertaking. I came to Israel as a young
refugee from Tunisia. I serve as one of hundreds of
thousands of immigrants to whom Israel has granted
promise and protection, freedom and opportunity,
through the values and institutions of democracy.
I stand here today to reaffirm, before the nations
of the world, the commitment of my country to peace.
Peace for the people of Israel is both a moral and
historic imperative. “Shalom” — the word for peace in
Hebrew — is central to our language and our heritage.
It is how we say “hello” and it is how we say
“goodbye”. It is a name we give to our children. It is
my own family name.
It was our prophet Isaiah, who brought this
message of peace to the world centuries ago, when he
said: “And they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares and their spears into pruning hooks.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn war any more”.
Israel’s historic record is clear. Whenever a true
partner for peace has emerged, he has been met with
Israel’s extended hand. This was true when President
30
 
Anwar Sadat of Egypt came to Jerusalem in 1977 and it
was true when King Hussein of Jordan signed the
Peace Treaty with us in 1994. The same is true today.
Israel stands ready to complete the circle of peace with
all its neighbours — real peace, not just peace for the
headlines, but peace which brings an end to violence
and hostility and positive change for the citizens of our
region.
From this great rostrum — a rostrum shared by
all humanity — I call on the leaders of Syria and
Lebanon, of Iran and of the Palestinian people to
abandon once and for all their hostility towards us and
to join us in building a better future for our children.
This evening, I shall return to Jerusalem, the
eternal capital of the Jewish people, to join with them
in celebrating Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
According to our tradition, this is a time when God
determines the fate of each and every individual for the
coming year. These are days of reflection and prayer.
May all our prayers for peace and for life be answered,
and may the actions and deeds of all the States and
peoples represented here in this Hall bring to mankind
peace and all the blessings that life can offer.




﻿The General Assembly
is meeting in the shadow of the tragedy last month in
which United Nations staff were killed or injured in
Baghdad. New Zealand unreservedly condemns such
brutal and calculated acts of terror. The United Nations,
after all, was in Iraq to improve the conditions of Iraqi
people and to assist the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty.
We mourn the loss of all those who perished. In
particular, I pay tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello, who
worked so effectively in the world’s trouble spots,
including Timor-Leste, where New Zealand worked
alongside him and developed huge admiration for his
ability and determination.
This was not the first occasion on which the
employees of the international community have been
targeted, although it was the worst. History suggests
that it will not be the last.
To do its work effectively, the United Nations
must interact with local communities, not operate from
behind barbed wire and concrete barriers. Its
employees are mainly unarmed civilians. We, the States
Members of the United Nations, must do more to
protect those whom we employ to work on our behalf.
Nine years ago New Zealand was at the forefront
in creating the Convention for the Safety of United
7

Nations and Associated Personnel. It was opened for
signature in 1995. Regrettably, only one third of the
membership has since become a party to it. We urge all
countries to do so now.
New Zealand believes that the Convention should
be widened to cover all situations where United
Nations and other associated personnel are engaged in
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other assistance-
related activities.
Over the last year we have witnessed terrorist
attacks, including in Casablanca, Riyadh and Jakarta,
as well as in Baghdad.
Next month is the first anniversary of the terrorist
attack in Bali, in which more than 200 people lost their
lives. And two years ago this city itself was the victim
of the 9/11 attacks, which took 3,000 lives.
International terrorism remains the primary threat to
the security and well-being of people across the world.
If we are to defeat terrorism, regional cooperation
is imperative. In the Asia Pacific region, a concerted
response to terrorism is now at the centre of the
Association of South-east Asian Nations Regional
Forum agenda and is becoming increasingly important
in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
The Pacific Islands Forum is responding
collectively to security challenges, including terrorism,
transnational crimes and challenges to national
integrity and independence.
An effective campaign against terrorism requires
international collaboration on intelligence, military,
social and economic measures.
New Zealand is aware that while we focus on the
symptoms of terrorism, the international community
must work together to tackle the conditions that foster
it. We welcome the Norwegian initiative to strengthen
analysis of the causes of terrorism. There are simply no
ends that can justify the death and the maiming of
vulnerable and innocent people.
New Zealand has, since 1972, supported the
development of a comprehensive international regime to
outlaw terrorism. I hope that the General Assembly will
be able to move forward on this issue and conclude the
comprehensive and nuclear terrorism conventions.
In combating terrorism, however, we should
avoid undermining the very values we are seeking to
uphold. The fight against terrorism should not become
an excuse to justify actions that do not conform to
international standards of humanity.
New Zealand is the current Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum, which it hosted last month. Leaders
strongly endorsed the Regional Assistance Mission to
the Solomon Islands — a concrete example of the
region working together to assist one of its members to
restore security, stability and progress to its people.
New Zealand joined with the other members of
the Pacific Islands Forum in responding to a request
from the Solomon Islands Government for police and
military assistance to end the actions of armed
criminals responsible for the deterioration in the social
and economic conditions in the Solomon Islands. A
police-led operation has been working successfully to
restore the rule of law and economic stability.
In failed or weak States, Governments often lack the
capacity or will to exercise territorial control. That can
create a power vacuum for terrorist organizations and
criminals to exploit and maintain safe havens, training
facilities and bases for launching terrorist operations.
The Regional Assistance Mission has gone
exceptionally well to date and has received strong
support from the people of the Solomon Islands. It is a
Pacific solution to a Pacific problem. Cooperation and
commitment by Pacific States to respond to regional
security needs, under the umbrella of the Pacific Islands
Forum, is a model that other regions could adopt.
The statements of support from the Secretary-
General and the Security Council for this regional
action, taken in accordance with the Charter, are
welcome. We would urge the United Nations to assist
where it can the process of rebuilding the social
structure and the economy of that country.
New Zealand is working to enhance and
complement existing security capabilities within the
Pacific region. We are engaged in a number of
activities, including establishing border security
systems and drafting model legislation to address
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
The international community must retain an
ongoing commitment to Afghanistan, where President
Karzai’s Government continues to face significant
challenges. Improving security outside Kabul will be a
crucial element in bringing political stability to
Afghanistan.
8

It is in the interests of us all to assist in the
restoration of Afghanistan — not only for the well-
being of the Afghan people, but also so that terrorists
cannot operate freely within its borders.
Earlier this week, New Zealand assumed
leadership of the Provincial Reconstruction Team in
Bamian Province. I am pleased that we could
demonstrate support for the Afghanistan Transitional
Government in this way.
The shared nightmare of all States is that
weapons of mass destruction or the materials from
which they can be constructed will find their way into
the terrorist arsenal. The possibility of nuclear weapons
in the hands of terrorists is a worst-case scenario with
horrific implications. We must do everything we can to
prevent this from happening.
The possible acquisition of nuclear weapons by
terrorist groups increases as the numbers and types of
these weapons, and the States that possess them,
continue to expand. For these and other reasons the
elimination of these weapons is vital.
New Zealand calls on all countries to commit and
to adhere to multilateral disarmament and arms control
treaties.
North Korea’s proclaimed nuclear weapons
programme is a major concern. We urge North Korea to
resume its cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and its commitment to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The current
multilateral dialogue process is a positive way forward.
We commend China for facilitating this.
Iran, too, must heed the strong message of the
international community and take the urgent steps
required to restore confidence that its nuclear
intentions are peaceful.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is equally
about nuclear disarmament. The commitment given by
the nuclear-weapon States to give up their nuclear
weapons, reaffirmed unequivocally at the NPT Review
Conference in 2000, must be honoured.
The nuclear Powers have a particular responsibility
in this respect. They must lead by example against
proliferation. Meaningful steps toward permanent
disarmament would add to their moral authority in
demanding that others must not develop nuclear
weapons capability.
The invasion of Iraq has had a profound impact
on this Organization. We regret that differences of view
could not be resolved in the Security Council.
The reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration of its
sovereignty and the rebuilding of political and social
structures to guarantee the Iraqi people a better life are
now the critical issues. We welcome initiatives to push
forward the political and constitutional process.
The passage of Security Council resolutions 1483
(2003) and 1500 (2003) recognizes the vital role of the
United Nations and the need for the international
community to be fully engaged in reconstruction
efforts. While responsibility for security must
inevitably rest with coalition forces, multilateralism
offers the best prospect and the greatest legitimacy for
the process of transition back to Iraqi self-rule.
New Zealand has announced substantial
contributions to reconstruction and humanitarian relief
work. These include the deployment of a New Zealand
Defence Force light engineer group to work on
humanitarian and reconstruction tasks alongside a
United Kingdom engineer regiment in southern Iraq.
We have helped with demining operations and have
made contributions through United Nations agencies,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations.
New Zealand continues to view the United
Nations as the best hope we have to collectively pursue
the principles enshrined in the Charter. The strength of
the United Nation is that it brings all countries of the
world together on an equal footing to address common
problems. Millions of people around the world have had
their lives improved by the actions of the United Nations.
East Timor is but one recent example of its effectiveness
when it is supported by a common will to act.
At the same time, we all recognize the need to
reform the Organization. In opening this session, the
Secretary-General called on us to consider whether the
rules and instruments of this multilateral institution
continue to serve us well. We have been discussing the
reform of the Security Council for more than a decade
now. It is time to make an institution designed in an
earlier age, for a smaller number of nations more
representative and responsive to the 191 current
Members of the United Nations. We welcome the
establishment of a panel to address key issues
fundamental to the Organization’s future role. Member
States will need to put aside self-interest and
9

differences to reach agreement on the panel’s findings
and to translate those into action.
Fifty-eight years ago, the United Nations was
created in the aftermath of the death and devastation
that had resulted from two world wars. The vision of
its founders was that of an organization that would
establish rules to govern international behaviour, with
procedures to enforce them through collective action. The
United Nations was bestowed with a unique legitimacy
and unique authority to resolve conflict. Whatever its
shortcomings, it remains an indispensable organization.
The challenge before us is to create the structures
and provide the political will that will enable it to
deliver the peaceful, just and prosperous world that is
the hope and expectation of humanity.





﻿Once again,
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this
representative audience. At the outset, however, I
should like to wish the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly fruitful work — work to
successfully harmonize the actions of peoples and
States; work on behalf of peace, security and progress.
Those purposes were set out in the Charter of the
United Nations by our predecessors, but, as we can see,
they are still relevant. Even now, they provide a solid,
long-term foundation for the activities of the United
Nations. And, although the structure and the functions
of the Organization took shape in an international
environment fundamentally different from ours, time
has only reaffirmed their universal importance. Today,
the instruments of the United Nations are not merely in
demand; they are, as life itself has shown, simply
irreplaceable in crucial situations.
That has been made abundantly clear by the
following important fact: despite sharp differences
concerning how to resolve the Iraq crisis, the situation
is ultimately returning to the legal sphere of the United
Nations. Russia’s position in that regard is consistent
and clear. Only direct United Nations participation in
Iraq’s reconstruction will enable Iraq’s people to decide
their future. And only with active and — I want to stress
this — practical United Nations assistance in Iraq’s
economic and civil transformation will Iraq assume a
truly new and worthy place in the world community.
It is clear that, in recent years, the United Nations
has increasingly been obliged to carry out
fundamentally new tasks and to tackle threats that are
different from, but just as serious as, those it faced
before. Three years ago, at the 2000 Millennium
Summit, I said here that the common enemy of the
United Nations was terrorism. Was Russia’s voice
heeded then? Did everyone understand the seriousness
of the threat, and were our joint actions adequate? The
events of 11 September proved that, unfortunately, they
were not.
To us in Russia, however, the style of the
murderers who committed terrorist acts in Moscow, in
Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia and in New York, as
well as against United Nations staff in Baghdad, has
long been painfully familiar. That style is identical
everywhere, and the fact that the inciters of terror are
easily recognizable — with regard to both the events of
August this year and the terrorist attacks of previous
years — only attests to the global nature of this threat.
It is true that now we are listening to one another.
And we understand that the United Nations must
become — and is indeed becoming — the basis for a
global anti-terrorist coalition. Here, I wish to take
particular note of the Security Council’s Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Terrorism is a challenge to the
planet’s security and to its economic future. Therefore,
the Committee must become a real and practical
instrument for effectively fighting the terrorist threat.
I should like to focus in particular on the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations. That area
consumes the lion’s share of the Organization’s energy,
time and resources, but it does not always appear in the
headlines, nor is it always familiar to the citizens of the
more prosperous States. But it is precisely that area of
United Nations work that is so fundamental and
irreplaceable. The United Nations is helping millions
of destitute people throughout the world — victims of
hunger, of disease and of conflict — to survive and not
to lose hope. That work is exceptionally important; it
lends indisputable political and moral authority to the
entire Organization. And it is here that the
interrelationship between the moral and political content
of international activities is particularly evident.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all
staff members of the United Nations, all non-
governmental organizations and, of course, the many
volunteers who are participating in this noble work.
Because we understand how valuable the
Organization’s humanitarian mission is, Russia views it
as a major political endeavour. We are already
contributing to this work, and we are committed to
increasing our contribution. Over the past three years,
Russia has forgiven a total of $27.2 billion in debt of
5
 
developing countries, and we are currently granting
significant tariff preferences to such countries.
For the first time in many years, as our country
has grown, it has become a donor to the United Nations
World Food Programme. The horrors of starvation are
well known to us from our own history. As a result of
the civil war of the past century and the forced
collectivization of the 1920s and 1930s, millions of
people died of starvation in the Volga region, in Northern
Caucasus and in other parts of our country. Hunger
became a national tragedy for the peoples of Ukraine as
well. We consider it our moral and ethical duty to
expand our participation in food aid programmes.
Russia intends to work actively to resolve acute
environmental problems. A milestone will be achieved
in that area by the World Conference on Climate
Change, scheduled to convene next week in Russia’s
capital, Moscow. We also believe it is essential that a
global system be established to monitor and neutralize
dangerous infectious diseases, and we consider the
work done by the Global Fund to be a real
demonstration of international solidarity in fighting the
spread of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria.
Of course, the United Nations, like any system
with a complex structure, needs to be improved. But
the Organization’s past and current problems have never
been problems of only the Organization per se; they have
always been created by — and they continue to reflect —
contradictions in the very system of international
relations, particularly the system of international law.
After all, politicians, including those represented in the
United Nations, including the Security Council, do not
always have at their disposal adequate and effectively
functioning legal instruments — instruments that would
enable them to deal effectively with the international and
regional crises that arise. International law must, of
course, be fluid and living, reflecting the realities of
the contemporary world. I believe that many of the
processes that are under way within the United Nations
also attest to the constant changes that are taking place
in the world. Such changes dictate a logic of evolution
in the United Nations.
Members of the Organization know very well
that, as a rule, all of the achievements of the United
Nations are shared successes, and that our failures are
shared miscalculations. Such knowledge, however,
brings with it great responsibility. First and foremost,
we must be extremely careful about interfering with the
fabric — the mechanisms — of the work of the United
Nations. Clearly, behind any such decision there should
be more than general political rhetoric — mere words
about so-called fair policies.
I am convinced that any attempt to modernize
United Nations instruments must be preceded by
serious analysis and careful calculation. Such an
approach should be taken, first and foremost, with
regard to the principal international legal instruments.
After all, guaranteeing that they remain effective is the
only way to avoid a legal vacuum. As long as the
norms of international law remain unchanged and
operative, we must observe them. We must ensure
continuity of security guarantees for States and for the
world as a whole.
We must analyse United Nations structures and
mechanisms and try to understand which have proved
effective and productive, as well as which have done
the job they were intended to do and which now remain
unused. We should remember that much of the
potential of the United Nations has still to be tapped.
There are many resources that we are only now
learning how to use.
I would like in particular to comment on the need
to enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council. I
am convinced that, given the deep-rooted nature of the
current differences of opinion and the importance of
ensuring that the Council remain effective, we must
work gradually and very cautiously.
We believe that at this stage we should be guided
above all by the broadest possible agreement on all
aspects of the expansion of the Council, as well as by
the need to ensure that it maintains its current high
status and the legitimacy born of agreed actions. After
all, the Security Council, as the Charter makes clear,
acts on behalf of the United Nations. The Security
Council is endowed with a specific mechanism for
harmonizing political will and for protecting the
national interests of a great variety of States, and,
through this, the interests of the entire international
community.
It is true that we often hear that the developed
countries bear special responsibility for the destiny of
the world. Such leadership, however, entails major
obligations, primarily to ensure that the interests of the
international community as a whole are reflected.
Being a world Power means working together with the
world community. Being a truly strong, influential
6
 
State means seeing and helping to resolve the problems
of small and economically weak countries.
In that connection, I believe that it would be
useful to intensify the work that is being carried out by
the United Nations in cooperation with the regional
international structures. That will lead directly towards
increased economic prosperity in various parts of the
world, and thus contribute to the containment of
potential threats and the maintenance of a common
global strategic balance.
We welcome the emergence of regional centres
for coordination and cooperation in a united Europe.
We favour the strengthening of integration processes in
the Asia-Pacific region. And of course, we support the
work of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), as well as that of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, whose authority and effectiveness are
continuing to grow.
Russia is not the only country that is interested in
regional integration. Our CIS partners have also
demonstrated their practical commitment to that same
goal. This was reaffirmed during the recent CIS
summit. We consider the development of our
interaction with the European Union, which is
multifaceted in nature, to be important. Likewise, with
regard to security issues, we attach importance to the
search new forms of cooperation with the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We should counter current threats to civilization
only by means of collective responses whose legitimacy
is not in doubt. In this respect, we need a systemic vision
that combines political with, when necessary, military
measures. Such measures should be agreed upon in
advance, and be sensible and appropriate.
The need to improve the peacekeeping
mechanisms of the United Nations remains on the
Organization’s agenda. The United Nations must be
able to deploy peacekeeping — and, where necessary,
peace-enforcement — operations more quickly and
efficiently, in strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter. I should like to note that Russia, which has
always supported the peacekeeping functions of the
Organization, is prepared to step up its participation in
such operations, both under United Nations auspices
and in coalition operations authorized by the Security
Council.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems remains a serious challenge
to the modern world. The most dangerous challenge is
the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. We know what steps must be taken in order
to eliminate such threats. These include the further
universalization of the existing non-proliferation
regimes, the strengthening of international verification
instruments and the introduction of safe technologies in
nuclear energy production. In general, this requires the
renunciation by States of excessive arsenals and
military programmes that could undermine the political
and military balance and trigger an arms race.
Russia believes that it is extremely important to
prevent the militarization of outer space. We believe
that a comprehensive agreement should be elaborated
on this issue, and invite all countries possessing
potential in this area to join our initiative. The Russian
initiative to set up, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a global system to counter these new threats has
already been supported by the General Assembly. We
propose the adoption of a new resolution during this
session setting out specific further steps in this direction.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that the solid
structure of the United Nations has enabled it to
withstand all of the many crises of the second half of
the twentieth century. It has helped to overcome threats
of global confrontation and, most importantly, helped
to promote human rights. It has also helped to assert
the principles of mutual respect and good-neighbourliness
among States. The main thrust of the United Nations
approach is that humankind has no alternative but to
jointly construct a safer, fairer and more prosperous
world. That is our duty to succeeding generations. In
that important task we can have no better help than
such time-tested instruments as the work of the United
Nations, an Organization that, for half a century, took
decisions that were crucial for the entire world.
Russia is convinced that the United Nations must
maintain its central role in international affairs. This is
particularly relevant, and particularly important, for
resolving conflict situations. This is our choice and our
strategic position of principle.





﻿Twenty-four months ago, and
yesterday in the memory of America, the centre of New
York City became a battlefield, and a graveyard, and
the symbol of an unfinished war. Since that day,
terrorists have struck in Bali, in Mombassa, in
9

Casablanca, in Riyadh, in Jakarta, in Jerusalem,
measuring the advance of their cause in the chaos and
innocent suffering they leave behind.
Last month, terrorists brought their war to the
United Nations itself. The United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad stood for order and compassion. For that
reason, the terrorists decided it must be destroyed.
Among the 22 people who were murdered was Sergio
Vieira de Mello. Over the decades, that good and brave
man from Brazil gave help to the afflicted in
Bangladesh, Cyprus, Mozambique, Lebanon,
Cambodia, Central Africa, Kosovo and East Timor, and
was aiding the people of Iraq in their time of need.
America joins you, his colleagues, in honouring the
memory of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the memory
of all those who died with him in the service of the
United Nations.
By the victims they choose and by the means they
use, the terrorists have clarified the struggle we are in.
Those who target relief workers for death have set
themselves against all humanity. Those who incite
murder and celebrate suicide reveal their contempt for
life itself. They have no place in any religious faith,
they have no claim on the world's sympathy, and they
should have no friend in this Hall.
Events during the past two years have set before
us the clearest of divides: between those who seek
order and those who spread chaos, between those who
work for peaceful change and those who adopt the
methods of gangsters, between those who honour the
rights of man and those who deliberately take the lives
of men, women and children without mercy or shame.
Between those alternatives there is no neutral
ground. All Governments that support terror are
complicit in a war against civilization. No Government
should ignore the threat of terror because to look the
other way gives terrorists the chance to regroup, recruit
and prepare. All nations that fight terror as if the lives
of their own people depended on it will earn the
favourable judgement of history.
The former regimes of Afghanistan and Iraq knew
those alternatives and made their choices. The Taliban
was a sponsor and servant of terrorism. When
confronted, that regime chose defiance, and that regime
is no more. Afghanistan's President, who is here today,
now represents a free people who are building a decent
and just society. They are building a nation fully joined
in the war against terror.
The regime of Saddam Hussain cultivated ties to
terror while it built weapons of mass destruction. It
used those weapons in acts of mass murder and refused
to account for them when confronted by the world. The
Security Council was right to be alarmed. The Security
Council was right to demand that Iraq destroy its
illegal weapons and prove that it had done so. The
Security Council was right to vow serious
consequences if Iraq refused to comply. And because
there were consequences   because a coalition of
nations acted to defend the peace and the credibility of
the United Nations   Iraq is free, and today we are
joined by the representatives of a liberated country.
Saddam Hussain's monuments have been
removed, and not only his statues. The true monuments
of his rule and his character   the torture chambers,
the rape rooms and the prison cells for innocent
children   are closed. And as we discover the killing
fields and mass graves of Iraq, the true scale of
Saddam's cruelty is being revealed.
The Iraqi people are meeting hardships and
challenges, like every nation that has set out on the
path of democracy. Yet, their future promises lives of
dignity and freedom, and that is a world away from the
squalid, vicious tyranny they have known. Across Iraq,
life is being improved by liberty. Across the Middle
East, people are safer because an unstable aggressor
has been removed from power. Across the world,
nations are more secure because an ally of terror has
fallen.
Our actions in Afghanistan and Iraq were
supported by many Governments, and America is
grateful to each one. I also recognize that some of the
sovereign nations of the Assembly disagreed with our
actions. Yet, there was and there remains unity among
us on the fundamental principles and objectives of the
United Nations. We are dedicated to the defence of our
collective security and to the advance of human rights.
Those permanent commitments call us to great work in
the world, work that we must do together. So, let us
move forward. First, we must stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq as they build free and stable
countries. The terrorists and their allies fear and fight
this progress above all because free people embrace
hope over resentment and choose peace over violence.
The United Nations has been a friend of the
Afghan people, distributing food and medicine, helping
refugees return home, advising on a new constitution
10

and helping to prepare the way for nationwide
elections. NATO has taken over the United Nations
mandated security force in Kabul. American and
coalition forces continue to track and defeat al Qaeda
terrorists and the remnants of the Taliban. Our efforts
to rebuild that country go on. I have recently proposed
to spend an additional $1.2 billion for the Afghan
reconstruction effort, and I urge other nations to
continue contributing to that important cause.
In the nation of Iraq, the United Nations is
carrying out vital and effective work every day. By the
end of 2004, more than 90 per cent of Iraqi children
under age five will have been immunized against
preventable diseases such as polio, tuberculosis and
measles, thanks to the hard work and high ideals of
UNICEF. Iraq's food distribution system is operational,
delivering nearly a half million tons of food per month,
thanks to the skill and expertise of the World Food
Programme.
Our international coalition in Iraq is meeting its
responsibilities. We are conducting precision raids
against terrorists and holdouts of the former regime.
Those killers are at war with the Iraqi people. They
have made Iraq the central front in the war on terror.
And they will be defeated. Our coalition has made sure
that Iraq's former dictator will never again use
weapons of mass destruction. We are now interviewing
Iraqi citizens and analysing records of the old regime
to reveal the full extent of its weapons programmes and
its long campaign of deception. We are training Iraqi
police, border guards and a new army so that the Iraqi
people can assume full responsibility for their own
security.
At the same time, our coalition is helping to
improve the daily lives of the Iraqi people. The old
regime built palaces while letting schools decay, so we
are rebuilding more than a thousand schools. The old
regime starved hospitals of resources, so we have
helped to supply and reopen hospitals across Iraq. The
old regime built up armies and weapons while allowing
the nation's infrastructure to crumble, so we are
rehabilitating power plants, water and sanitation
facilities, bridges and airports. I have proposed to
Congress that the United States provide additional
funding for our work in Iraq, the greatest financial
commitment of its kind since the Marshall Plan.
Having helped to liberate Iraq, we will honour
our pledges to Iraq, and by helping the Iraqi people
build a stable and peaceful country we will make our
own countries more secure.
The primary goal of our coalition in Iraq is self-
government for the people of Iraq, reached by an
orderly and democratic process. That process must
unfold according to the needs of Iraqis, neither hurried
nor delayed by the wishes of other parties. And the
United Nations can contribute greatly to the cause of
Iraqi self-government.
America is working with friends and allies on a
new Security Council resolution, which will expand the
United Nation's role in Iraq. As in the aftermath of
other conflicts, the United Nations should assist in
developing a constitution, training civil servants and
conducting free and fair elections. Iraq now has a
Governing Council, the first truly representative
institution in that country. Iraq's new leaders are
showing the openness and tolerance that democracy
requires, and they are also showing courage. Yet every
young democracy needs the help of friends. Now the
nation of Iraq needs and deserves our aid, and all
nations of good will should step forward and provide
that support.
The success of a free Iraq will be watched and
noted throughout the region. Millions will see that
freedom, equality and material progress are possible at
the heart of the Middle East. Leaders in the region will
face the clearest evidence that free institutions and
open societies are the only path to long-term national
success and dignity. And a transformed Middle East
would benefit the entire world by undermining the
ideologies that export violence to other lands.
Iraq as a dictatorship had great power to
destabilize the Middle East. Iraq as a democracy will
have great power to inspire the Middle East. The
advance of democratic institutions in Iraq is setting an
example that others, including the Palestinian people,
would be wise to follow. The Palestinian cause is
betrayed by leaders who cling to power by feeding old
hatreds and destroying the good work of others. The
Palestinian people deserve their own State. They will
gain that State by embracing new leaders committed to
reform, to fighting terror and to building peace.
All parties in the Middle East must meet their
responsibilities and carry out the commitments they
made at Aqaba. Israel must work to create the
conditions that will allow a peaceful Palestinian State
to emerge. Arab nations must cut off funding and other
11

support for terrorist organizations. America will work
with every nation in the region that acts boldly for the
sake of peace.
A second challenge we must confront together is
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Outlaw regimes that possess nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and the means to deliver them
would be able to use blackmail and create chaos in
entire regions. Those weapons could be used by
terrorists to bring sudden disaster and suffering on a
scale we can scarcely imagine. The deadly combination
of outlaw regimes, terror networks and weapons of
mass murder is a peril that cannot be ignored or wished
away. If such a danger is allowed to fully materialize,
all words, all protests, will come too late.
Nations of the world must have the wisdom and
the will to stop grave threats before they arrive. One
crucial step is to secure the most dangerous materials at
their source. For more than a decade, the United States
has worked with Russia and other States of the former
Soviet Union to dismantle, destroy or secure weapons
and dangerous materials left over from another era.
Last year in Canada, the G-8 nations agreed to
provide up to 20 billion dollars, half of it from the
United States, to fight this proliferation risk over the
next ten years. Since then, six additional countries have
joined the effort. More are needed, and I urge other
nations to help us meet this danger.
We are also improving our capability to interdict
lethal materials in transit. Through our Proliferation
Security Initiative, eleven nations are preparing to
search planes, ships, trains and trucks carrying suspect
cargo and to seize weapons or missile shipments that
raise proliferation concerns. These nations have agreed
on a set of interdiction principles consistent with
current legal authorities, and we are working to expand
the Proliferation Security Initiative to other countries.
We are determined to keep the world's most destructive
weapons away from all our shores and out of the hands
of our common enemies.
Because proliferators will use any route or
channel that is open to them, we need the broadest
possible cooperation to stop them. Today I ask the
United Nations Security Council to adopt a new
antiproliferation resolution. That resolution should call
on all Members of the United Nations to criminalize
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to
enact strict export controls consistent with international
standards and to secure any and all sensitive materials
within their own borders. The United States stands
ready to help any nation draft these new laws and to
assist in their enforcement.
A third challenge we share is a challenge to our
conscience. We must act decisively to meet the
humanitarian crises of our time. The United States has
begun to carry out the Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief, aimed at preventing AIDS on a massive scale
and treating millions who have the disease already. We
have pledged 15 billion dollars over five years to fight
AIDS around the world.
My country is acting to save lives from famine as
well. We are providing more than 1.4 billion dollars in
global emergency food aid, and I have asked our
United States Congress for 200 million dollars for a
new famine fund so that we can act quickly when the
first signs of famine appear. Every nation on every
continent should generously add their resources to the
fight against disease and desperate hunger.
There is another humanitarian crisis, spreading,
yet hidden from view. Each year, an estimated eight to
nine hundred thousand human beings are bought, sold
or forced across the world's borders. Among them are
hundreds of thousands of teenage girls and others as
young as five who fall victim to the sex trade. This
commerce in human life generates billions of dollars
each year, much of which is used to finance organized
crime. There is a special evil in the abuse and
exploitation of the most innocent and vulnerable. The
victims of the sex trade see little of life before they see
the very worst of life   an underground of brutality
and lonely fear. Those who create these victims and
profit from their suffering must be severely punished.
Those who patronize this industry debase themselves
and deepen the misery of others, and Governments that
tolerate this trade are tolerating a form of slavery.
This problem has appeared in my own country
and we are working to stop it. The Protect Act, which I
signed into law this year, makes it a crime for any
person to enter the United States or for any citizen to
travel abroad for the purpose of sex tourism involving
children. The Department of Justice is actively
investigating sex tour operators and patrons, who can
face up to 30 years in prison. Under the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, the United States is using
sanctions against Governments to discourage human
trafficking.
12

The victims of this industry also need help from
Members of the United Nations. This begins with clear
standards and the certainty of punishment under the
laws of every country. Today, some nations make it a
crime to sexually abuse children abroad. Such conduct
should be a crime in all nations. Governments should
inform travellers of the harm this industry does and the
severe punishments that will fall on its patrons. The
American Government is committing $50 million to
support the good work of organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them shelter, medical treatment and the hope of
a new life. I urge other Governments to do their part.
We must show new energy in fighting back an old
evil. Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century after
slavery was officially ended in its last strongholds, the
trade in human beings for any purpose must not be
allowed to thrive in our time.
All the challenges I have spoken of this morning
require urgent attention and moral clarity. Helping
Afghanistan and Iraq to succeed as free nations in a
transformed region; cutting off the avenues of
proliferation; abolishing modern forms of slavery  
these are the kinds of great tasks for which the United
Nations was founded. In each case, careful discussion
is needed and, also, decisive action. Our good
intentions will be credited only if we achieve good
outcomes. As an original signer of the United Nations
Charter, the United States of America is committed to
the United Nations and we show that commitment by
working to fulfil the United Nations stated purposes
and by giving meaning to its ideals.
The founding documents of the United Nations
and the founding documents of America stand in the
same tradition. Both assert that human beings should
never be reduced to objects of power or commerce,
because their dignity is inherent. Both recognize a
moral law that stands above men and nations, but
which must be defended and enforced by men and
nations. And both point the way to peace   the peace
that comes when all are free. We secure that peace with
our courage and we must show that courage together.



﻿May I congratulate you, Sir,
for assuming the mantle of the presidency for this
session of the Assembly and thank the outgoing
President, Mr. Jan Kavan. I would also like to echo
what other speakers have said about the death of the
dedicated United Nations workers who lost their lives
in the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad last month, including Sergio Vieira de Mello,
an outstanding international civil servant.
When we met here last year, we were all
concerned about what would happen in Iraq. At the
same time, we were concerned about what role the
United Nations would play in the resolution of the Iraq
affair. Dramatic events since then have provided
answers to those questions. However, those dramatic
events have raised important and disturbing questions
about the very future of the United Nations. Central
among them is the question, does the United Nations
have a future as a strong and effective multilateral
organization enjoying the confidence of the peoples of
the world and capable of addressing the matters that
are of concern to all humanity?
Quite correctly, as we meet here this time, while
still preoccupied by the issue of the future of Iraq, I am
certain that none of us wants to rehash the debate that
took place on this matter in the period following the
last general debate in the General Assembly. While for
some time after that general debate we were concerned
to provide answers to questions about the role of the
United Nations in Iraq, today we have to answer
questions about the impact of the Iraq affair on the
future of the United Nations. Matters have evolved in
such a manner that to our limited understanding it
seems extremely difficult to resolve the issue of the
role of the United Nations in Iraq, unless we answer
the question about the future of the United Nations as a
legitimate expression of the collective will of the
peoples of the world and the principal guarantor of
international peace and security, among other global
issues.
Put differently, we could say that what is decided
about the role of the United Nations in Iraq will at the
same time decide what will become of the United
Nations in the context of its Charter and of the
important global objectives that have been set since the
Charter was adopted.
This is not a case of the tail wagging the dog;
rather, history has placed at our feet an urgent and
practical test case that obliges us to answer the
question: what do we, collectively, want the United
Nations to be? What do we do to distinguish the trees
from the forest? In that regard we must make the point
directly, that as South Africans, we are partners and
activists who campaign in favour of a strong and
effective United Nations. We do so because of the
place our country and people occupy in the
contemporary world.
We believe that everything that has happened
places an obligation on the United Nations to reflect on
a number of fundamental issues that are of critical
importance to the evolution of human society. We are
convinced that this General Assembly would
disappoint the expectations of the peoples of the world
and put itself in jeopardy if, for any reason whatsoever,
it did not address these issues.
We speak as we do because we represent the
people who are more sensitive to the imperatives of
what the world decides, given our experience during a
period when apartheid South Africa was correctly a
matter of focused and sustained interest by the United
Nations and the peoples of the world, including
ordinary folk, even in the most marginalized areas of
our globe.
This Organization, and all of us singly and
collectively, has spoken and frequently speaks about
the phenomenon of globalization. Correctly, we speak
of a global village driven by recognition of the fact of
the integration of all peoples within a common and
interdependent global society.
24

Certainly, humanity is more integrated today than
it was when the United Nations was established more
than fifty years ago. However, many have drawn
attention to the fact that, whereas objective social
processes have led to the emergence of the global
village, all of our political collectives have not yet
succeeded in designing the institutions of governance
made necessary by the reality of the birth of this global
village.
Correct observations have also been made that the
use of the image and concept of the village does not
imply that the residents of this village are equal. The
reality is that the same processes that bring all of us
closer together in a global village are simultaneously
placing the residents of the global village in different
positions. Some have emerged as dominant, and the
rest as the dominated, with the dominant being the
decision makers and the dominated being the recipients
and implementers of those decisions.
To the same extent that our political collectives
have not designed the institutions responsive to the
evolution of the global village, so have they failed to
respond to the imbalance in the distribution of power
inherent in contemporary global human society. We
speak here of power in all fields of human activity. Left
to its internal and autonomous impulses, the process of
globalization will inevitably result in the further
enhancement of the domination of the dominant and
the entrenchment of the subservience of the dominated,
however much the latter might resent such domination.
This will include the perpetuation of the
dominant positions by those who are dominant to
ensure the sustenance of their capacity to set the
agenda of the global village in the interest of their own
neighbourhoods within that village. Inherent within
this is, necessarily, reliance on the use of superior
power, of which the dominant dispose, to achieve the
objective of the perpetuation of the situation of an
unequal distribution of power.
In this situation, it is inevitable that the pursuit of
power in itself will assert itself as a unique legitimate
objective, apparently detached from any need to define
the uses of such power. This also signifies the
deification of force in all its forms as the final arbiter
in the ordering of human affairs.
However, from the point of view of the
disempowered, the struggle to ensure the use of such
power to address their own interests becomes a
strategic objective they cannot avoid. Necessarily this
means that power would have to be redistributed. That
would be done to empower the disempowered and to
regulate the use of power by those who are powerful.
Thus we come back to what I said earlier.
Because we are poor, we are partisan activists for a
strong, effective and popularly accepted United
Nations. We take those positions because there is no
way in which we could advance the interests of the
people, the majority of whom are poor, outside the
context of a strong, effective and popularly accepted
United Nations. An autonomous process of
globalization, driven by its own internal regularities,
can only result in the determination of our future
within the parameters set by those who enjoy the
superiority of power. The powerful will do this in their
own interests, which might not coincide with ours.
When this Organization was established 58 years
ago, its objectives and institutions necessarily reflected
both the collective global concerns as then perceived
and the then balance of power.
Among other things, our esteemed Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, has drawn attention to the
fact that the United Nations started off as an
Organization of 51 States and is now composed of 191
States. Undoubtedly, the perceived and real collective
global concerns of our day are, to some extent at least,
different from those that prevailed more than 50 years
ago, when the Organization was about a quarter of its
present size.
For more than a decade, this Organization has
been involved in discussions about its transformation.
Once more, the Secretary-General has reflected on this
challenge. The truth is that our discussions have gone
nowhere. Earlier this morning the Secretary-General
announced steps he will take to facilitate the adoption
of decisions that will help all of us to effect the
necessary and inevitable transformation of the United
Nations. We support the decisions he announced.
The global resolve to defeat such organizations as
al Qaeda has emerged out of our understanding that
international aggression should not necessarily be
expected to come from formal and recognized State
institutions. We have all come to understand that such a
threat coming from non-State institutions would
express itself as the most inhumane and despicable
terrorism, as was most painfully demonstrated on 11
September 2001.
25

Our collective experience   stretching from New
York and elsewhere in the United States on 11
September 2001; and reaching back to Nairobi and
Dar es Salaam, in Africa, earlier still; and, more
recently, to Bali, Indonesia; to Morocco; to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine; to Algeria, India, Russia
and elsewhere; and even our own country   tells us
that the United Nations, working in defence of the
collective interests of the peoples of the world, must
ensure that we act together to defeat the threat of
terrorism, collectively defined.
At the same time, we have to take on board the
conviction among some of our Member States that they
constitute special and particular targets of global
terrorism. Understandably, the argument is advanced
that it would be unreasonable and irrational to expect
such States not to act to deter such terrorist actions
against themselves. None of us can defend
international rules that prescribe that any one of us
should wait to be attacked knowing in specific ways
that we were going to be attacked by identified
terrorists, and then act against those who had attacked
us, with such horrendous costs as were experienced by
the United States during the 11 September attacks. I do
not imagine that any one of us would seek to impose
such a costly and unsustainable burden on any of our
Member States, which would also violate the self-
defence provisions of Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We also have no choice but to deal with the brute
reality that the reform process of the United Nations
and all its bodies, and other multilateral organizations,
has got to recognize the reality of the imbalance of
power, as represented by different countries and
regions. At the same time, we must proceed from the
position that such distribution of power is not
necessarily in the interests of the peoples of the world,
or even in the interests of those who today have the
power to determine what happens to our common
world. That includes acceptance of the fact that,
depending on the place we occupy in the global
community, we have different priorities. Among other
things, the rich are concerned about ways and means to
maintain the status quo, from which they benefit. In
practical terms that means that all matters that threaten
to destabilize the status quo must necessarily be
anathema to such people. Such matters will therefore
be an issue of principal concern to them. Necessarily
and understandably, they will then seek to get the rest
of the world to accept their assertion that the
maintenance of the status quo must be a universal
human preoccupation, precisely the kind of issue on
which the United Nations must take a united position.
On the other hand, the poor are interested in
changing their conditions for the better. Accordingly,
they will not accept the maintenance of the status quo,
which perpetuates their poverty. Accordingly, among
other things, the poor billions of the world will argue
for action by the United Nations to ensure the transfer
of resources to themselves, which will enable them to
extricate themselves from their condition of poverty
and underdevelopment, consistent with the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
the objectives of the Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development and other international
agreements. Inevitably, that will run counter to the
propositions of those who are more powerful than the
poor, namely, the Governments, peoples and countries
that keep them afloat with development assistance.
That will require   whether it is stated or not   that
the recipients of that assistance understand that such
assistance can dry up.
Important shifts in the global balance of power
and global objectives have taken place since the United
Nations was established, 58 years ago. The
Organization has not substantially changed, in terms of
its structures and mode of functioning, to reflect those
changes. That has served as a recipe for an inevitable
crisis, a disaster waiting to occur. And so as we meet
today we are confronted by global challenges that the
global Organization cannot solve. Impelled by the
urgent issues of the day, some of the powerful will not
wait for all of us to respond to the problems we have
raised, and which they face. They will act to solve
those problems; their actions will make the statement
that they do not need the United Nations to find
solutions to those problems. Simultaneously, that will
make the practical statement that the United Nations is
irrelevant to the solution of the most pending problems
of our day. The disempowered will continue to look to
the Organization, understanding, correctly, that they are
too weak to advance their interests singly outside the
collective voice of the United Nations. In that regard,
they expect that the United Nations will be informed by
its founding documents and other solemn decisions it
has taken since it was established, all of which have
been approved by successive sessions of the General
Assembly.
26

Global poverty and underdevelopment are the
principal problems that face the United Nations.
Billions across the world expect that the General
Assembly will address that challenge in a meaningful
manner. The masses of people of our world expect that
the statements we will make at this session of the
General Assembly as representatives of various
Governments will indicate a serious commitment to
implement what we say. The poor of the world expect
an end to violence and war everywhere. They want an
end to the killing that is taking too many Israeli and
Palestinian lives. They want Africans to stop killing
one another, continuing to convey the message that we
are incapable of living in peace among ourselves. They
desire the realization of the democratic objective
universally: that the people shall govern. They believe
that we are seriously committed to the objective of the
eradication of poverty and the provision of a better life
for all. They think that we mean it when we say that we
will not allow the process of globalization to result in
the further enrichment of the rich and the
impoverishment of the poor within and between
countries. They believe us when we say that our
collective future is one of hope, and not despair. They
are keenly interested to know whether our gathering,
the United Nations General Assembly, will produce
those results.
To collectively meet those requirements will
require that each and every one of us   both rich and
poor, the powerful and the disempowered   commit
ourselves practically to act in all circumstances in a
manner that recognizes and respects the fact that none
of us is an island sufficient unto ourselves. That
includes the most powerful. The latter face the
interesting challenge, important to themselves in their
national interests, that the poverty and
disempowerment of the billions will no longer serve as
a condition for their success and their possibility to
prosper in conditions of peace.
What we have said today may not be heard,
because we do not have the strength to have our voice
heard. Tomorrow we may be obliged to say, No more
water; the fire next time. As the fires burn, the United
Nations will die, consumed by the flames. So will the
hopes of the poor of the world die, as they did at
Cancun, Mexico, not so long ago. We must act together
to say in our words and in our actions, as countries and
as the United Nations, that there will be water next
time, and not fire.












﻿Please allow me warmly to congratulate Mr. Hunte, on
his assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jan Kavan for his valuable contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
I also take this opportunity to express my
heartfelt condolences on the recent tragic deaths in
Baghdad of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
other United Nations staff members.
The twenty-first century is about to complete its
third year, with hope and distress coexisting side by
28

side. Peace and development remain the overriding
themes of the times and the shared aspirations of
people of all races, colours and nationalities. The
concept of democracy and equality has planted deep
roots in the hearts of the people. The shared
confrontation of global challenges through stronger
coordination and cooperation has become the
consensus of the international community.
Countries are increasingly closer in their
economic relations. Advanced means of
communications have made it possible to share
information in real time. With their interests closely
connected and intertwined, countries are finding
themselves more and more like passengers in the same
boat. Regional cooperation has grown substantially in
both depth and scope, with cooperation mechanisms
taking shape at various levels. Regional economic
integration is forging ahead in many parts of the world.
There are, however, many worrisome aspects of
the international situation. Local wars and conflicts
continue to emerge sporadically. Although the Iraq war
is over, peace remains elusive, with no end of suffering
in sight for the Iraqi people. With the situation between
Israel and Palestine still experiencing ups and downs,
the Middle East peace process remains a long, uphill
journey. In Africa, wars are still raging in some
countries.
Non-traditional security concerns such as
terrorism, drug-trafficking, arms proliferation, the
spread of diseases and environmental degradation have
become more pronounced. Given modern conditions,
they can easily spread within regions or even across the
world, making the security situation of human
communities even more complicated.
Humankind still confronts severe challenges in its
development. In the past 30 years, the number of least
developed countries has doubled, reaching 50, which
accounts for one quarter of the United Nations
membership. The ever-widening gap between the North
and South and the aggravated disparity between the
rich and the poor have become a major factor breeding
new conflicts and wars and undermining regional
stability.
At a moment like this, people are inevitably
pondering the same question: in the interest of world
peace and common development, what kind of new
world order should we establish in the twenty-first
century?
China is of the view that the future well-being of
humankind hinges on closer international cooperation
and a multipolar world. We should promote democracy
in international relations. Multipolarization does not
mean back-pedalling into the age of spheres of
influence or a replay of the now long-gone rivalry of
major Powers. It simply means bringing about a new
regime of international relations under which all
countries — big or small, rich or poor, strong or
weak — are treated as equals, and under which no
country has the right to impose its will on others.
We should cultivate a new security concept based
on the principles of mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. Security should be
maintained through cooperation, and disputes should
be resolved peacefully through dialogue. The frequent
use of force and the threat of its use should be avoided.
The practice of building one’s own security at the
expense of others should be rejected.
We should support diversity in the process of
development. Our world is a place of many colours and
styles. A single musical note cannot make a melody,
nor does a phonetic alphabet make a language. Human
wisdom has produced so many civilizations, allowing
us to follow different paths of development and a
variety of values. It is through the exchanges,
emulations and integrations of diverse cultures that
human reason and wisdom shine brilliantly.
We should dedicate ourselves to the
empowerment of developing countries in their large
numbers. The developing countries, which make up
three quarters of the world’s population, should
become a key pillar of a multipolar world. Without
their extensive participation on an equal footing, there
will be no democracy in international relations or a fair
and rational world order. Without their economic
revitalization, there can be no common development of
all humankind to speak of.
We should step up multilateral cooperation.
Multilateral cooperation in various forms should
become the principal vehicle in the handling of
international affairs. Countries should join hands in
taking on global challenges through globalized
cooperation.
In a multipolar world, countries should respect
and consult with one another politically, strive for
common development by helping one another
economically, prosper together by drawing on one
29

another’s cultural strengths and jointly maintain
security through mutual trust, thus working hand in
hand to realize the peace and prosperity of humankind.
More than half a century ago, our forefathers
gathered to give birth to the United Nations. The past
58 years have seen the Organization’s notable
accomplishments in preserving peace in regions and
around the world and in promoting human development
and progress. The spirit of the United Nations
Charter — characterized by such words as “to live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours”
and “to promote social progress and better standards of
life in large freedom” — has been widely accepted in
the international community.
The United Nations has become the most
universal, most representative and most authoritative
international organization in the world today. This is
what history affirms and what reality mandates.
China maintains that in the current situation the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
should be adhered to and earnestly abided by with a
view to realizing democracy, the rule of law in
international relations and the mutually advantageous
coexistence of the countries of the world.
In handling affairs affecting regional or
international peace, all Member States are obliged to
maintain the leading role and authority of the United
Nations and its Security Council. China is in favour of
an important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s post-
war arrangements and reconstruction and supports the
restoration of sovereignty to the Iraqi people at an early
date.
China also supports the United Nations carrying
out the necessary reforms to enhance its role and
effectiveness in the light of changing circumstances.
The United Nations is a microcosm of our world.
The world’s hope rests on a strong United Nations. In
order to build a better future for humankind, it is
incumbent upon us first to turn the United Nations into
a forum for cooperation instead of an arena of
recrimination. No country is entirely populated by
saints and therefore no country should have the right to
throw the stones of prejudice.
To that end, we should forsake all the old
baggage of arrogance, estrangement and narrow-
mindedness and let harmony, understanding and
tolerance ring out loudly as the undiminished themes of
this great Hall. The ocean is made great by all the
rivers it takes in. Let that be the motto of all Member
States.
Development is the foundation for world peace
and human progress. We stand for stronger
international cooperation and the achievement of
common development.
The current state of affairs — in which the gap
between the North and the South has been widening
without pause, with some countries of the South
languishing in dire poverty — must be changed without
further delay. The key lies in establishing a fair and
equitable new world economic order in response to the
requirements of economic globalization.
An open and fair multilateral trading regime
should be established and improved. The principles of
mutual understanding and mutual accommodation
should be followed to bring about due progress in
multilateral trade talks. Close attention should be given
to reforming and improving the international financial
system, setting up a financial early-warning mechanism
and enhancing the capacity of countries to prevent and
deal with financial crises.
Stronger South-South cooperation and North-
South exchanges should be promoted. The developing
countries should step up their cooperation and
coordination and gradually change their
disadvantageous position in the economic globalization
process. This coming December, the second ministerial
conference of the China-Africa Cooperation Forum
will be held in Addis Ababa, where the two sides will
work together to deepen their equality-based and
mutually beneficial cooperation and open up a new
horizon in South-South cooperation.
The developed countries should also shoulder
their duties and responsibilities by giving greater
support to the developing countries in the areas of
market access, funding, technology transfer, debt relief
and trade terms.
All human communities make an organic whole
when it comes to development. When hundreds of
millions of fellow human beings are suffering from
cold and hunger, the rich countries should not nor
cannot enjoy their riches by themselves for long. The
striking contrast in wealth is eroding the very dignity
that all human beings share. Upon the monstrous gap
30

between the North and South cannot stand the great
edifice of future prosperity.
While addressing the development issue, it is
necessary to highlight the need for a harmonious
development of the economy and society.
At present, humankind’s further development is
being increasingly hampered by excessive population
growth, environmental degradation, energy depletion,
the decline and demise of indigenous cultures, and
other constraints. Sustainable development can be truly
realized only when there is harmony, mutual
complementarity and mutual promotion between the
economy and society, and between their development
and nature.
In the first half of the year, SARS struck a
number of regions and countries, which testifies yet
again to the crucial importance of public health in the
context of development. While countries should
strengthen their public health systems, the world in
general should enhance its capacity to deal with major
diseases and disasters through an improved globalized
contingency response mechanism.
The Chinese Government supports the proposal
made by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
certain countries at the fifty-sixth World Health
Assembly for the establishment of a global fund
against SARS and is ready to contribute to it. We call
on all countries to support the United Nations in its
relevant activities, including incorporating public
health into United Nations development programmes
and other action plans and promoting regional and
international cooperation in this regard.
Last fall, the Communist Party of China convened
its 16th National Congress, which called for the
building, during the first two decades of the twenty-
first century, of a society that is well off in all respects.
This past spring, a new Chinese Central Government
was elected at the 10th National People’s Congress —
thus a smooth leadership transition was realized.
In the first half of the year, the people of China
put up a heroic fight against SARS and won a
resounding victory. Many friendly countries and
personalities in the world, together with the World
Health Organization and other United Nations
agencies, have rendered us valuable support and
assistance, for which I wish to express our heartfelt
gratitude.
China has kept its economic growth in high gear.
The first two quarters saw the nation’s gross domestic
product grow by 8.2 per cent over the corresponding
period of last year, and foreign trade grow by 39 per
cent. China’s economic efficiency has improved
markedly, and its reforms on all fronts are progressing
in an orderly way.
Needless to say, China is a developing country. It
still has a long way to go before all its citizens can live
a comfortable, even affluent life. Development,
therefore, remains China’s top priority.
China’s development requires a peaceful
international and surrounding environment. We will
continue to pursue an independent foreign policy of
peace and will seek to play a constructive role in
regional and international affairs.
China will continue to push for friendship and
good-neighbourliness in the interest of peace and
tranquillity in the region. Based on our support for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula on which peace and
stability should be maintained, we initiated and
sponsored the three-party Beijing talks and the first
round of six-party talks. China remains committed to
resolving the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
peacefully through dialogue and the building of a
lasting peace there.
To develop, China needs the world, and a
prosperous world also needs China. The market and
cooperation potential unleashed by a rapidly
developing China could bring fresh and immeasurable
opportunities to the region and to the world at large.
We desire peace, stability and development. We
aspire to equality, mutual benefit and a win-win result
for all. Conforming to the tide of history, China has
opted for the path of peaceful development, linking its
rejuvenation with that of the region, with the interests
of the majority of countries, and with the lofty cause of
peace and development for humanity. We hereby
pledge our continued and ever-greater contribution to
world prosperity and progress.





﻿I wish to
begin by congratulating the President, on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session and wish him every success with his work. I
also wish to thank his predecessor, President Kavan,
for the dedication with which he presided over the
fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
I also wish to endorse the statements made by the
Italian presidency on behalf of the European Union.
This year is a special one for Germany’s work
within the United Nations. History is both a reminder
and a guide for us. Thirty years ago, on 18 September
1973, the United Nations welcomed Germany back into
the fold of the family of nations. My predecessor,
Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt, paved the way for
that move. His standing as an anti-fascist inspired
confidence for Germany. His passionate commitment to
internationalism went far beyond the policy of détente
in the then East-West conflict.
In 1980 he made an urgent appeal to the
community of States with a report entitled “North-
South, A Programme for Survival”. He wrote:
“The globalization of the dangers resulting from
wars, chaos and self-destruction calls for a
domestic policy that goes far beyond national
borders.”
We are strongly committed to this task, and I
think that we Germans are not the only ones who are
committed to it, because, as I said, history is our guide.
It guides us towards intensive international
cooperation, of course under the auspices of the United
Nations, that we must strengthen through courageous
reforms. It guides us towards a universal order based
on the rule of law and human dignity, on good,
responsible governance and prosperity that is truly
shared by all people. It also guides us towards security
and peace through comprehensive prevention. We must
act resolutely by pursuing an effective multilateral
strategy wherever peace is threatened and human rights
are violated. But we must act just as resolutely to
prevent conflict and create stable structures so that
people can lead their lives in freedom and tolerance
with one another.
Thirty years ago, Germany was a country with
limited sovereignty, divided by the Iron Curtain. Today,
Germany is a sovereign nation, a civil Power in the
heart of a united Europe. We live in a common area of
freedom, the rule of law, prosperity and social
responsibility. This goes to show that development
towards justice and peace is indeed possible and we
shall not cease to support endeavours to that end
anywhere in the world, be it in the Middle East, in
Africa or in any other crisis area. Bearing in mind our
own history, we are indeed assuming responsibility for
a cooperative policy of peace. This we do by
employing economic, political and humanitarian
means.
But we are also assuming military responsibility,
shoulder to shoulder with our partners in NATO and
the European Union, where there is absolutely no other
way to secure peace and protect human beings. Today,
more than 9,000 members of the German armed forces
and police are deployed on international peace
missions. Our top priority is our commitment to peace
in Afghanistan. Germany is willing to maintain its
commitment there in the long term and we are ready to
increase it beyond its present scope. The basis for such
commitment is the Charter of the United Nations.
In the Unification Treaty, Germany vowed that it
would only deploy its armed forces within the
framework of this Charter. The Charter provides us
with “the necessary building blocks to ensure that our
common humanity is an inclusive one, built on values
such as tolerance and dignity”. These were the words
of Sergio Vieira de Mello, who on 19 August 2003 fell
victim to an underhanded criminal attack in Baghdad.
He was killed along with 22 others, including many
members of the United Nations staff working for the
people of Iraq and their hopes of a better future.
We are deeply affected by their deaths and must
honour them by taking on their legacy. Our response
must be to strengthen the role and commitment of the
United Nations in Iraq. Only the United Nations can
guarantee the legitimacy required to enable the people
of Iraq to speedily rebuild their country under an
independent, representative Government. Germany
stands ready to support such a process. We are ready to
24

provide humanitarian, technical and economic
assistance and could also train Iraqi security personnel.
International terrorism, failing States and the
dangers posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction all threaten our joint security. The obvious
question is: What must be done to truly enhance
security? We must capture the terrorists and their
masters and destroy their infrastructure. There can be
no doubt that we must prevent any further proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We must strengthen the
inspections regimes and pursue a policy of controlled
disarmament.
But as we know from history, as well as our own
experience, to follow any strategy focused narrowly on
the military and the police would be a recipe for
failure. Rather, what is needed is to address the root
causes of terrorism and insecurity. To combat
fanaticism, we must ensure social and material as well
as cultural security. That can only be achieved on the
basis of a broad concept of security. If we want to
outlaw infamy we must put an end to lawlessness. That
is the core task, indeed, of the international courts of
justice and especially the International Criminal Court.
In order to win hearts and minds for freedom,
peace and an open society, we must help people to
acquire a greater stake in society, build better lives for
them and provide them with a secure environment.
Afghanistan is a good example of this. There, the
international community succeeded in liberating the
Afghan people from the scourge of the Taliban and
al Qaeda.
At the same time, the Petersberg Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Bonn under the auspices of the
United Nations, created a political framework for
rebuilding the country. This process needs our
continued support. There must also be sustained
international commitment to the task of strengthening
security. In the long run, the fight against terrorism can
be won only if people see that it produces tangible
benefits in their everyday lives. They need to
experience at first hand that being once again part of
the international community means not only greater
freedom and more security, but also entails better
development opportunities and a greater stake in
society.
There is no doubt that we have already made
major strides towards realizing our common goals
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. More
countries than ever before now have democratic
Governments. Our concerted efforts have enabled more
people than ever before to put poverty behind them.
But we must note that the gap between the world’s rich
and poor has still not been closed and the fight against
hunger, injustice and oppression is still far from won.
For this reason, eradicating poverty remains an
imperative of our policy for peace and stability.
There has been a drastic reduction in the number
of wars fought between States. In the Balkans, for
example, resolute action by NATO and the United
Nations enabled us to put an end to certain wars and
prevent others from breaking out in the first place.
Nevertheless, our world has become — and not just
since the barbaric terrorist attacks in New York and
Washington or indeed Bali, Casablanca, Moscow or
Djerba — a dramatically more insecure place. New
threats that no country in the world can tackle
effectively on its own, make international cooperation
more vital than ever before. Such threats also require
new strategies and that is why we are all called upon to
review whether the instruments available to the United
Nations are still appropriate for tackling these new
challenges. We all have a responsibility to ensure that
people and their rights are also protected in situations
other than inter-State wars. They must be protected
from genocide and the consequences of random
violence as well. A political commitment to
comprehensive prevention must further strengthen the
United Nations monopoly on the use of force as well as
the institutions of international law.
Within the United Nations we need to muster the
strength to launch overdue institutional reforms. My
Government fully and wholeheartedly supports the
proposals made by the Secretary-General. We must
agree how to ensure in the future an even better
allocation of abilities, skills and scarce resources. I
also share the view of the Secretary-General that the
legitimacy of the Security Council depends on how
well it represents all nations and all regions. It is true
that the Council must be reformed and enlarged. First
and foremost, it must also include more representatives
of the developing countries. Let me reiterate that in the
context of such reform Germany is ready to assume
greater responsibility.
The world of the twenty-first century offers us, its
inhabitants, ample scope for change, for better or
worse. Given the wealth of opportunities and the
immense dangers ahead, we have no choice but to
25

strive for greater international partnership and expand
and strengthen multilateralism. We will only be able to
make our world a more secure place if we can also
make it more fair and equitable. It was for that very
purpose, after all, that the international community
created the United Nations. That is its mandate. Let us
join together to make the United Nations even stronger.
Let us make sure that it can fulfil its mandate to
maintain international peace and security and that it
can achieve greater justice for all.





﻿Sergio
Vieira de Mello was the pride of the United Nations.
Murdered on 19 August along with his colleagues, he
will remain in our memories. Let us dedicate this
session to that great servant of the world and of peace.
The United Nations has just emerged from one of
the most serious challenges in its history. Respect for
the Charter and the use of force were at the heart of the
debate. The war, which was launched without the
Security Council's authorization, has undermined the
multilateral system.
Having come to terms with that crisis, our
Organization can now continue to move forward; for it
is above all in this forum   the melting pot of the
international order   that we must exercise our
responsibilities to the world of today as well as to
future generations.
In an open world no one can live in isolation, no
one can act alone in the name of all and no one can
accept the anarchy of a society without rules. There is
no alternative to the United Nations. But in order to
meet today's challenges, this fundamental choice,
expressed by the Charter, requires a far-reaching
reform of our Organization.
Multilateralism is crucial, because it ensures the
participation of all in the management of world affairs.
It is a guarantee of legitimacy and democracy,
especially when decisions must be made with respect to
the use of force or to the laying down of universal
norms.
15

Multilateralism is effective. In Monterrey and
Johannesburg, it allowed us to transcend North-South
confrontation and to open the way to promising
partnerships, in particular with the African continent.
Multilateralism is modern, because it alone makes
it possible to comprehend contemporary problems
globally and in all of their complexity.
First, let me touch on the settlement of conflicts
that threaten international peace and security.
In Iraq, the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqis,
who must have sole responsibility for their destiny, is
essential for stability and reconstruction. It is up to the
United Nations to lend its legitimacy to that process. It
is also up to the United Nations to assist with the
gradual transfer of administrative and economic
responsibilities to the Iraqi institutions, according to a
realistic timetable, and to help the Iraqis draft a
constitution and hold general elections.
Finally, it is up to the United Nations to entrust a
mandate to a multinational force, commanded,
naturally, by the main troop contributor   that is, the
United States   in order to ensure the security of Iraq
and of all those helping to rebuild the country.
Thus the international community and the Iraqi
people, united around a common project, will together
put an end to the tragic decades of that great country's
history.
In the Middle East, ravaged by despair and
hatred, only strong political will on both sides to
implement the law as stipulated by the United Nations
can pave the way for a just and lasting solution.
The international community must restore a
dynamic for peace. It must involve itself in the
implementation of the road map. That should be the
objective of the upcoming meeting of the Quartet, to be
held at the ministerial level. France believes that the
idea of a monitoring mechanism is as relevant as ever,
and that the convening of an international conference is
a goal to be attained as quickly as possible.
Given the present tense situation, France calls on
the parties not to succumb to the temptation of a test of
strength and of a futile radicalization.
Another major challenge is the fight against
international terrorism. This fight is well under way,
under the auspices of the Security Council and within
the context of our treaties. The horror of 11 September
cemented our common resolve. This threat strikes at
the very heart of our democracies and our societies. We
are using force to combat terrorism, but that is not
enough. It will re-emerge again and again if we allow
extremism and fanaticism to flourish   if we fail to
realize that it seeks justification in the world's
unresolved conflicts and economic and social
imbalances.
Given the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, we reject the policy of fait accompli. We
must stand united to guarantee the universality of
treaties and the effectiveness of non-proliferation
regimes. In order to ensure compliance, we must also
develop our means of action. France has proposed the
creation of a permanent corps of inspectors under the
authority of the Security Council. Let us give fresh
impetus to this policy. Let us convene a summit
meeting of the Security Council to outline a true plan
of action of the United Nations against proliferation.
At this time, let us demand that North Korea
completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle its
military programme. Let us demand that Iran sign and
implement, unconditionally and without delay, a
strengthened nuclear safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Sustainable development poses yet another
challenge, because half of humankind is living in
conditions of insecurity or extreme poverty. Will we be
able to globalize solidarity, as our peoples demand, in
response to the inevitable globalization of the
economy?
We agree on the objectives. We are bound by the
Millennium Goals. But, in order to attain those goals,
strong political impetus remains necessary. I propose
that heads of State and Government meet in New York
in 2005 for a preliminary progress review. I hope that
this session of the General Assembly will confirm the
determination of States to overcome the failure of
Cancun and to ensure the success of the Doha
Development Round.
In order to carry out the missions entrusted to it
and to remedy its blatant shortcomings, the United
Nations must evolve. Three watchwords, I believe,
must guide us: democracy, authority, effectiveness.
Thanks to the Secretary-General, progress has been
made, and new avenues are opening up. It is now up to
States to move forward without further ado and to put
16

an end to the adverse consequences of the stalemate
over reforms.
The United Nations is suffering from the current
weakness of the General Assembly. And yet, it is here
that a debate should be organized and a consensus
crafted regarding solutions to major problems. A
culture of confrontation must give way to a culture of
action aimed at achieving our common goals, which we
should determine together.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security rests with the Security Council. It is
therefore essential to its legitimacy that its composition
reflect the state of the world. It must be expanded to
include new permanent members, because the presence
of major countries is necessary. France, naturally, is
thinking of Germany and of Japan, but also of some
leading countries of Asia, Africa and America. We also
need new elected members, to make the Council even
more representative. With the decisive impetus of the
five permanent members, we all need to resume
discussions, mindful of the general interest.
Such reform should be accompanied by a
strengthening of the Council's authority. It is the
Council that should set the bounds with respect to the
use of force. No one can claim the right to use force
unilaterally and preventively. Conversely, in the face of
mounting threats, States must be assured that the
Council has at its disposal the appropriate means of
evaluation and of collective action, and that it has the
will to act.
We all are very committed to the sovereignty of
States. But its scope can and should be limited in the
case of serious violations of human rights and of
humanitarian law. The Security Council is taking steps
in that direction, and France supports this development.
Meanwhile, crimes against humanity are being
suppressed more effectively with the establishment of
the International Criminal Court, whose jurisdiction is
universal. This historic step forward must be
accompanied by a strengthening of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, under a
commission equipped to discharge its duties and its
mission.
We now realize that globalization demands
stronger economic, social and environmental
governance. To that end, France proposes the creation
of a new political forum representative of the present
economic state of today's world in all its diversity.
That council would be responsible for providing the
necessary impetus to international institutions, for
improving their coordination and for anticipating and
tackling global problems more effectively.
Effectiveness also depends on increased financial
resources. France calls for two changes.
First, the trend towards increasing voluntary
contributions at the expense of mandatory
contributions must be reversed. Failing that, we will
end up with a pick-and-choose United Nations, which
is an outdated vision and a harmful one.
Secondly, we need to make progress in
mobilizing funds for development and development
assistance. France wants to meet the official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent by the
year 2012. But this effort, together with that of the
European Union, will obviously not suffice to release
the necessary funds needed to finance the Millennium
Goals each year. France therefore supports the
innovative concept of an international financial facility.
I would also like us to give pragmatic, speedy
consideration to international solidarity levies, a kind
of tax on the wealth generated by globalization and
given over to development.
To advance on these issues, I completely approve
of the Secretary-General's intention to gather around
him a committee of independent wise men and women
responsible for submitting proposals.
Against the risk of a world without order
delivered up to violence, let us work to establish the
rule of international law. Against the injustice and
suffering of a world of widening inequalities   even
though it has never been so rich   let us choose
solidarity. Against the chaos of a world shaken by
ecological disasters, let us call for a sharing of
responsibility around a United Nations environmental
organization. Against the barbarity of a world in which
fundamental rights are all too often held up to ridicule,
where the integrity of mankind is under threat, where
indigenous peoples   the heirs to an irreplaceable
heritage   vanish amid silence and indifference, let us
uphold the demands of ethics. Against the peril of a
clash of civilizations, finally, let us insist on the equal
dignity of cultures, respect for diversity and the value
of dialogue.
17

With the Charter adopted in the name of the
Peoples of the United Nations, the founders proclaimed
their faith in these ideals. Let us seek to be worthy of
them. Let us establish the United Nations at the heart
of this planetary democracy that is so vital in our day
and age.


﻿I begin by paying a tribute to Dr.
Akila Al-Hashimi, a senior member of the Iraqi
Governing Council, who died earlier today.
I had the privilege of meeting Dr. Al-Hashimi
earlier this year in London and later in Baghdad, and I
was struck by her courage and her dedication to the
Iraqi people. Dr. Al-Hashimi was murdered by those
who would deny the Iraqi people the democratic,
prosperous future they so richly deserve. The best
service that we can render her memory is to defeat the
terrorists and to ensure that her vision of a peaceful,
free Iraq prevails.
Of course, we owe this service to all those who
have fallen in the cause of peace in Iraq. Sergio Vieira
de Mello and the United Nations personnel who were
killed or injured in the blast in Baghdad on 19 August
were committed to bringing the ideals of the United
Nations to the people of Iraq. They paid the ultimate
sacrifice for their dedication. We mourn their loss, but
we will not weaken in our resolve to help the Iraqi
people rebuild their country on the principles of justice
and security.
What, I think, makes Iraq so important was the
way in which it tested the role and purpose of this
institution over more than a dozen years. Throughout
that period, the international community remained in
agreement that the regime of Saddam Hussein posed a
Chapter VII threat to international peace and security
by its proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its unparalleled defiance of the will of
the United Nations. Yet, earlier this year, sadly, we
divided on when and what action was necessary to deal
with the Iraqi threat.
Of course, I acknowledge the controversy over
the military action which the United Kingdom, the
United States and others took and the heavy
responsibilities we now bear, but I firmly believe that
the decisions we took were the right ones. The
authority of the United Nations was at stake. Having
given Saddam Hussein’s regime a final opportunity to
comply with the United Nations, what would have
happened if we had simply turned away? Would the
world be a safer place today? Would Iraq be a better
place today? Would the United Nations be a stronger
institution today? The answer to each of those
questions is no. Saddam Hussein would have been
emboldened by our failure to act; every dictator would
have been encouraged to follow his example; and the
authority of this United Nations would have been
gravely weakened.
Yet, whatever the arguments of the spring, we
have now to come together again for a common
purpose. As the Security Council has recognized in its
three resolutions 1472 (2003), 1483 (2003) and 1500
(2003), we have a shared interest in helping Iraqi
citizens to embrace the rights and freedoms which they
have been denied so long and for which this institution
was founded. Yes, the security situation does present
formidable challenges. Terrorists who despise freedom
are seeking to plunge Iraq into chaos. They have
inflicted terrible blows on the Iraqi people, coalition
soldiers and international aid workers, but ultimately
they will fail.
And let us also not lose sight of what has been
achieved and what is taking shape. Saddam Hussein’s
reign of terror is over. The apparatus of torture and
oppression which claimed hundreds of thousands of
31
 
lives is at an end. Instead, we have the beginnings of a
representative Government run by Iraqis for Iraqis;
new ministries providing daily services to the people; a
free press; the freedom for members of all religious
communities to worship as they wish; hospitals and
schools in operation; bustling traffic on the streets and
highways; and a start to real economic regeneration.
We shall stay in Iraq as long, but only as long, as
it is necessary to meet our clear responsibilities and to
restore sovereignty to the Iraqi people as quickly as we
can in an orderly manner. I hope very much that we can
agree a new Security Council resolution to strengthen
the United Nations role in Iraq. In managing this
transition, we should be guided by three central
principles: first, the transfer of powers must reflect
realities on the ground in Iraq, particularly the need to
ensure security; secondly, the Iraqi institutions must be
sufficiently robust to take on increasing responsibilities;
and thirdly, the exercise of executive powers and
responsibilities must be based on good governance,
involving representative Iraqi authorities and coherent
constitutional arrangements. In other words, the timetable
should be driven by the needs of the Iraqi people and their
capacity progressively to assume democratic control,
rather than by fixing arbitrary deadlines.
Iraq is, sadly, not the only territory in the Middle
East where the international community faces great
challenges. Three months ago, we all had high hopes
about the work of the Quartet of the United Nations,
the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United States in Israel and the occupied territories. It is
tragic that these hopes were blown apart on 19 August
by the terrorist atrocity in Jerusalem, which came only
a few hours after the terrorist atrocity against the
United Nations in Baghdad, but the international
community has to stay united on both the means and
the ends in the Middle East. There are no alternatives
to the road map and there can be no alternatives to the
outcome the entire world wishes to see — two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. This can be the only fitting memorial to the
thousands who have died on both sides since the
beginning of this appalling conflict.
The breadth of the issues being tackled by the
United Nations and its agencies demonstrates the
continued relevance of this institution. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee has given the United Nations a
focus for its work following  September two years
ago, but we must now build upon that work, giving the
Committee the expertise and the remit to reinforce the
capacity of Member States to tackle and to overcome
terrorism.
We also know that proliferation is one of the
greatest threats we face alongside terrorism. Much
good work on proliferation is being done by United
Nations agencies, particularly the International Atomic
Energy Agency, but it is extraordinary that the Security
Council itself has not addressed the issue of
proliferation for over 10 years. In our judgement, it is
time that it did.
Problems of internal conflict, on the other hand,
are regularly on the Security Council’s agenda. The
United Nations has unrivalled expertise and experience
in this area and has achieved great things in countries
as far apart as East Timor and Sierra Leone, but nation-
building is a collaborative effort, requiring the
resources and commitment of Member States if the
United Nations peace-building is to be effective. We
therefore need new mechanisms to help prevent
conflicts and then to help States before they collapse.
We must also make a real success of the
Millennium Declaration. We have to overcome the
setback of Cancún and secure a positive outcome to the
Doha Round.
These and other shared problems require
collective responses, as our Secretary-General so
eloquently said here in his speech on Tuesday. A key to
this is to ensure that the United Nations itself remains
an effective global forum capable of delivering results.
The Secretary-General posed some difficult questions
two days ago. I welcome his initiative to seek the
advice of a distinguished group to make proposals on
reform. I welcome, too, his parallel commitment to
modernizing the United Nations and its agencies.
For our part, the United Kingdom is committed to
making the Security Council more representative. The
issue is not whether but how to do this. A bigger and
more representative Council, however, will not of itself
make it easier to make the tough choices which it has
to face so often. The most important ingredient is the
political will and determination of the members of the
Council to take effective action.
The most important part of the Secretary-
General’s speech on Tuesday was about the choices
now confronting the United Nations. He was right
about those. We have indeed come to a fork in the road.
32
 
Down one route lies a world in which the United
Nations strengthens its role as the collective instrument
for protecting our peace and security; down the other
route lies a world in which collective action becomes a
synonym for “inaction”. We must not take this second
route. The Secretary-General’s speech was a challenge
to all of us. We all share a world in which international
terrorists strike down the innocent, regardless of faith
or nationality, and we are all less secure when weapons
of mass destruction are in reckless hands. We do not
have the luxury simply of rejecting unilateralism, while
proposing no multilateral means of confronting and
dealing with these threats.
The British Government is profoundly
committed, as it always has been, to the ideals of the
United Nations. To us, the importance of this
Organization has always been its ability to put those
high ideals into effect. We will work wholeheartedly
with the Secretary-General and the international
community to ensure that the United Nations retains
and strengthens both its idealism and its effectiveness.












﻿Mr. President, we
congratulate you on your election to the presidency of
the fifty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. We wish you every success in our shared
endeavours. You will have our fullest cooperation in
your efforts.
As we gather here, in the wake of the many
momentous events over the past year, it is inevitable
that we should ponder some fundamental questions
about the role and relevance of the United Nations.
The United Nations was charged by its Charter
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war.” The Charter also speaks of our collective
determination “to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security.” There was an implicit
conviction that the United Nations would be stronger
than the sum of its constituent Member States. Its
unique legitimacy flows from a universal perception
that it pursues a larger purpose than the interests of one
country or a small group of countries.
This vision of an enlightened multilateralism has
not materialized. There have been difficulties and
deficiencies in ensuring a world free from strife, a world
without war. The United Nations has not always been
successful in preventing conflicts or in resolving them.
During the past year, the United Nations
encountered new challenges. We saw the extraordinary
inability of the five permanent members of the Security
Council to agree on action in respect of Iraq, in spite of
complete agreement on basic objectives. Most recently,
the brutal terrorist attack on the United Nations Office
in Baghdad struck a body blow at the United Nations’
humanitarian efforts there.
Looking back at events over recent years, we can
analyse the successes and failures of the United
Nations in this or that crisis. But it would be more
purposeful to reflect on our own commitment to
multilateralism, the extent of its applicability in the
real world of today, and the manner in which it can be
exercised through the United Nations. The reality is
that an international institution like the United Nations
can only be as effective as its Members allow it to be.
Our reflections on the United Nations should
focus on three key aspects:
First, we need to introspect on some of the
assumptions that have been made over the years
concerning the will and reach of the United Nations. In
the euphoria after the Cold War, there was a misplaced
notion that the United Nations could solve every
problem anywhere. Its enthusiasm and proactive stance
on many issues reflected laudable intentions. But we
soon realized that the United Nations does not possess
magical powers to solve every crisis in all parts of the
globe or to change overnight the motivation of leaders
and communities around the world. //We need to
clearly recognize, with a sense of realism, the limits to
what the United Nations can achieve, and the changes
of form and function required for it to play an optimal
role in today’s world. We need to clearly recognize,
with a sense of realism, the limits to what the United
Nations can achieve, and the changes that it needs to
make to its form and function to play an optimal role in
today’s world.
Secondly, the Iraq issue has inevitably generated
a debate on the functioning and the efficacy of the
Security Council and of the United Nations itself. Over
the decades, the United Nations membership has grown
enormously. The scope of its activities has expanded
greatly, with new specialized agencies and new
programmes. But in the political and security
dimensions of its activities, the United Nations has not
kept pace with the changes in the world. For the
Security Council to represent genuine multilateralism
in its decisions and actions, its membership must
reflect current world realities. Most United Nations
Members today recognize the need for an enlarged and
restructured Security Council, with more developing
countries as permanent and non-permanent members.
The permanent members guard their exclusivity. Some
States with weak claims want to ensure that others do
not enter the Council as permanent members. This
combination of complacency and negativism has to be
countered with a strong political will. The recent crises
should serve as a warning to us that until the Security
Council is reformed and restructured, its decisions
cannot truly reflect the collective will of the
community of nations.
Thirdly, even after such reform, the Security
Council would have to develop suitable decision-
making mechanisms that ensure better representation of
the collective will of the international community. How
can multilateralism be genuinely implemented? A
single veto is an anachronism in today’s world. On the
other hand, the requirement of unanimity can sabotage
imperative actions. A simple-majority vote may not be
15
 
sufficiently representative for major and serious issues.
Should we aim for the highest common factor, or
should we settle for the lowest common denominator?
Democratic countries could use their national
experience to provide feasible models for mechanisms
and determine the extent of support required based on
the impact of action to be taken.
The Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the
urgent need for reform of the institutions and processes
of the United Nations. We encourage his efforts in this
direction. We should seek to implement these reforms
within a specified time frame.
The Iraq issue continues to present a major
challenge to the United Nations. At this point in time,
it is not very productive to linger on the past. Our
thoughts and concerns should be about the suffering of
the people of Iraq. It is imperative that the people of
Iraq should be empowered to determine their own
future and to rebuild their nation.
The immediate priorities are ensuring security
and stability, restoration of basic facilities and
infrastructure and a road map of political processes for
a representative Iraqi Government. It is clear that the
United Nations has a crucial role to play in the process
of political and economic reconstruction of that
country. This has been acknowledged both by those
who had opposed military action and by those who did
not seek specific United Nations endorsement for it.
One issue on which the United Nations showed
remarkable unanimity after 11 September was global
terrorism. Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003) were unequivocal in condemning all
forms of terrorism and in calling for united action
against support, shelter, sponsorship, arming, training
and financing of terrorism or terrorists.
Unfortunately, the solidarity that was voiced has
not translated into coherent and effective action.
Terrorist acts continue to shatter our peace, from
Mombasa to Moscow and from Baghdad to Bali. India
has had more than its share of terrorism in various
parts of the country. The global coalition against
terrorism has registered successes in Afghanistan, but
has not been able to extend this elsewhere. Some of its
members are themselves part of the problem. We are
sometimes led to enter into semantic arguments over
the definition of terrorism. The search for root causes
or imaginary freedom struggles provides alibis for
killing innocent men, women and children.
There is much that the United Nations can do to
carry forward the war against international terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee should develop
measures to ensure compliance by Member States of
their obligations under Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003). We should have credible
multilateral instruments to identify States that
contravene these resolutions. Multilateral mechanisms
must be created to detect and choke off international
financial flows to terrorists and terrorist organizations.
A much better international system of
information exchange and intelligence sharing needs to
be devised to prevent terrorists from evading capture
simply by crossing national borders. No State should
be allowed to profess partnership with the global
coalition against terror, while continuing to aid, abet
and sponsor terrorism. To condone such double
standards is to contribute to multiplying terrorism.
Yesterday, the President of Pakistan chose this
august Assembly to make a public admission for the
first time that Pakistan is sponsoring terrorism in
Jammu and Kashmir. After claiming that there is an
indigenous struggle in Kashmir, he has offered to
encourage a general cessation of violence within Kashmir,
in return for reciprocal obligations and restraints.
We totally refuse to let terrorism become a tool of
blackmail. Just as the world did not negotiate with al
Qaeda or the Taliban, we shall not negotiate with
terrorism. Were we to do so, we would be betraying the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, who defied a most
ferocious campaign of violence and intimidation
sponsored from across our borders and participated in
an election, which has been universally hailed as free
and fair. This was an unequivocal expression of both
determination and self-determination.
When the cross-border terrorism stops, or when
we eradicate it, we can have a dialogue with Pakistan
on the other issues between us.
While on this subject, I would also like to point
out to the President of Pakistan that he should not
confuse the legitimate aspiration for equality of nations
with outmoded concepts of military parity.
We should be particularly concerned at the
various recent revelations about clandestine transfers of
weapons of mass destruction and their technologies.
We face the frightening prospect of these weapons and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists. Surely
16
 
something needs to be done about the helplessness of
international regimes in preventing such transactions,
which clearly threaten international security. The same
regimes expend considerable energy in imposing a
variety of discriminatory technology-denial restrictions
on responsible States.
Our preoccupation with terrorism should not
dilute our commitment to tackle the non-military
threats to human and international security. We have to
sustain the fight against trafficking in narcotic drugs,
human beings and small arms, the pandemic of
HIV/AIDS, diseases like malaria and tuberculosis that
beset developing countries and the degradation of our
common environment. Food security, energy security
and health security are important goals.
The countries of the North and of the South —
the developed, developing and transition economies —
must resume their dialogue to build a better world for
the present and future generations. For the agenda of
globalization, Cancún was a disappointment.
Significant progress was made at Johannesburg
towards the realization of sustainable development, but
the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change remains stalled and the Convention on
Biological Diversity has not yielded any tangible
benefits to the world’s poor.
International economic relations continue to be
characterized by inequities and inequalities.
Globalization has helped sections of the international
economy, including some developing countries; however,
large communities have been left outside its pale. It has
engendered economic crises and instability in several
developing countries and sharply increased poverty.
Poverty is multidimensional. It extends beyond
money and income to education, health care, skills
enhancement, political participation at all levels from
the local to the global, access to natural resources,
clean water and air, and advancement of one’s own
culture and social organization.
Poverty alleviation requires resources on a far
greater scale than now available. Globalization itself
places constraints on Governments of developing
countries in raising public resources for poverty
alleviation. The promise of the climate change and
biodiversity treaties to raise significant resources for
investment and technology transfer is as yet unrealized.
The resources of multilateral and bilateral development
agencies are limited by the failure of industrialized
countries to enhance development budgets.
Therefore, if the current regimes of globalization
and sustainable development are to be expanded — or
even to survive — they must be directly harnessed to
provide the necessary resources for poverty alleviation.
In fact, all international agreements and initiatives
affecting developing countries have to be evaluated by
their impact on poverty.
Developing countries need to coordinate their
positions in international negotiations to promote the
adoption of regimes which would help alleviate
poverty. The India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue
Forum, which was established earlier this year, is an
effort in this direction.
We in the developing countries do not have the
luxury of time. Political compulsions force us to meet
the aspirations of our people quickly, even as we
subject ourselves to newer and more rigid international
standards and norms. We owe it to our future generations
to make strong efforts to meet the Millennium
Development Goals. There is a mutuality of interest in
this between the developed and the developing
countries. Global interdependence today means that
economic disasters in developing countries could
create a backlash in developed countries. We hope the
world will act in this spirit of enlightened self-interest.





﻿I would like to congratulate
His Excellency, the Foreign Minister of Saint Lucia,
upon his assumption of the Presidency of the General
Assembly, and wish him much success.
Until just one month ago, every person in this hall
and every Member of this Organization joined us in the
hope that the Middle East peace process might finally
be back on track, and that a resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict might be on the horizon. The
establishment of a new Palestinian Government
promised an end to terror and a new beginning.
This glimmer of hope was darkened on 19 August
by the extremists who blew up a bus full of Jewish
families on their way home from prayers at the Western
Wall, the holiest site in the Jewish religion. Twenty-
three people, young and old, mothers and babies in
their cradles, were slaughtered in that attack. That
attack was carried out by Hamas, a terrorist
organization, which, under the road map, should have
been dismantled by the Palestinian Authority. Failure
to dismantle Hamas and other extremist organizations
has brought our diplomatic efforts to a standstill.
Rather than acting to fulfil its obligation, the
Palestinian Authority has chosen the route of inaction,
and complicity in terror.
We cannot allow this to continue. We must restore
hope that we can build a better future for our children.
The infrastructure of terror must be dismantled so that
we can put our peace efforts back on track. There is no
time other than now. There is no other way.
For many years it was thought that terrorism in
the Middle East was Israel’s problem, not the world’s.
Today, the world knows otherwise. Today, it is not only
Israel that mourns the loss of its loved ones, including
women and children and babies, at the hands of the
terrorists. Sadly, we have been joined by peoples from
across the globe — from Mombassa to Casablanca and
from Moscow to Bali. Even the United Nations, which
for so many has been a symbol of peace and goodwill,
is not immune.
28
 
Gathered here today in New York, just two short
years after 11 September, the community of nations
knows that those who seek to advance their political
agendas through killing innocents are ready to strike at
anyone or anything that represents the values of
freedom and human life.
Terrorism has declared war on us all. Israel has
often stood alone in this battle. A country that has
suffered more than any other from terrorism, we have
always understood the danger it poses to democracy
and freedom everywhere, even when others refused to
see this, and condemned us for our actions. We have
always understood that terrorism, no matter what cause it
claims to serve, seeks only to destroy, rather than to build.
There can be no neutrality in the war against
terrorism and there can be no immunity for those who
engage in it. Abstaining is not an option. This is not a
war of choice. Terrorism will not be eliminated until
the world unites against it. Our only choice is to win.
Every member of the international community must
take concrete and proactive measures to cut off all
channels of financial, moral and political support to
this common enemy.
States Members of this institution that sponsor
terrorists and give them shelter are accomplices in the
acts of terror themselves. They must be held
accountable for their crimes. It is no coincidence that
States that sponsor terrorism, like Iran and Syria, are
also striving to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
Their hostility to freedom and the rule of law puts the
very future of humanity in jeopardy.
I know that many in this place see Yasser Arafat
as the symbol of the Palestinian struggle. Tragically,
for his people and for ours, he is one of the world’s
icons of terror. In the 10 years since Arafat made a
commitment to Israel and the world that he would no
longer use terror, 1,126 Israelis have been killed and
thousands wounded in 19,000 separate Palestinian
terrorist attacks. In relative numbers, this would be the
same as 11,000 French or 56,000 Americans dying
from terrorism in the same period of time.
This carnage must stop. Its impact on both
societies is devastating. Yasser Arafat bears direct
responsibility for this terrible suffering. He has led his
people along the path of terror — from hijackings to
suicide bombings — for more than 30 years, always
preferring Israeli pain over Palestinian gain. He has
been — and he remains — the greatest obstacle to
peace between our peoples. For as long as he controls
the levers of power, no moderate leadership can
emerge. To vote for Arafat, like we saw in this
Assembly just last week, is to vote against the
Palestinian people. When Arafat wins, terrorism wins,
and we all lose. Instead of rallying around Arafat, the
international community must rally around the genuine
interests of the Palestinian people. They must do so
now, before he leads them even further down the path
of terror and destruction.
When a responsible and empowered Palestinian
leadership finally emerges — a leadership ready to join
the war on terror — it will find us a willing partner for
peace. Israel is committed to the vision for Middle East
peace laid out by United States President George Bush
on 24 June 2002. Israel will not compromise on the
safety of its citizens, but we will go the extra mile, as
we have proven before, to bring peace and security to
both our peoples.
We are ready to work with the Palestinians and
with the international community to make this vision a
reality. For this to happen, the Palestinian leadership
must take the moral and strategic decision to abandon
terrorism once and for all, and make peacemaking
possible. They must guide their people to build their
own society, rather than seek to destroy ours. They,
too, must understand that it is not poverty that breeds
terror but terror that breeds poverty.
We cannot stop only at dismantling the
infrastructure of terror. We must also build an
infrastructure of peace. It is up to political and moral
leaders everywhere to foster an environment which
rejects extremism and empowers the peacemakers. This
is particularly so in the Arab and Muslim world, where
incitement against Israel closes hearts and minds to the
possibility of peace.
Leaders must guide their people away from the
culture of hate, and replace it with a culture of
tolerance. Concrete expressions of cooperation and
exchange must be built in media and government,
education, science and business, to reinforce the
message of tolerance and acceptance.
For the sake of our collective future, voices of
moderation must be heard. For the sake of our
collective future, Israel and the Arab nations must learn
to live together side by side, to overcome our conflicts
just as the nations of Europe have learned to overcome
theirs. Israel is living among its Arab neighbours. We
29
 
believe in a common future of peace and prosperity
with them. My many meetings with Arab leaders over
the last few days have encouraged me to believe that
together we can make our region a better place.
This culture of peace must permeate not only the
borders of the Middle East, it must permeate the walls
of the United Nations as well. In the past, the United
Nations has shown us that it can play a positive role.
This Assembly was key to the founding of the State of
Israel, 55 years ago. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are our guideposts to
negotiations and peace.
To play such a constructive role in the future, the
United Nations must reform. It must move away from
the partisan hostility that has taken over its Middle East
agenda. For more than three decades, this Assembly
has passed every year a litany of resolutions designed
to discredit Israel, challenge its interests, and promote
the will of its greatest enemies.
In my hand I am holding a collection of the
decisions of the fifty-seventh General Assembly on the
Middle East — 175 pages filled not with hope, but with
the negative agendas of the past. No other country has
suffered such unjustified attack and consistent
discrimination within the United Nations system. The
time has come to end this campaign of diplomatic
incitement. For the sake of Israelis and Palestinians —
for the sake of the United Nations and peace itself — I
call on this body to rise above the tired politics of
yesterday, and adopt a new, courageous agenda for
tomorrow.
I call on the General Assembly to abandon the
automatic adoption of anti-Israel resolutions and to
find ways of making itself relevant once again to the
interests of the people it claims to serve. I call on this
Assembly to fulfil its historic mission and help
promote what unites us, not what divides us.
On the morning of 1 February of this year, Israel
lost its first astronaut in the Space Shuttle Columbia
disaster — a skilled and courageous pilot whom I knew
personally, a child of Holocaust survivors, a national
hero. Colonel Ilan Ramon embodied the spirit of our
nation. He was a man of courage and action, dedicated
to the well-being of his people. Just as he sought to
contribute to the advancement of his fellow man, he
met his death, together with colleagues from the United
States and India, on a scientific mission in the name of
humanity as a whole.
Israel’s place in such endeavours of international
cooperation and accomplishment is no coincidence. In
the 55 years since the State of Israel was established,
recognized and welcomed into the family of nations,
our achievements in the fields of science and
technology, the arts and literature and agriculture and
medicine have come to rank with the best in the world.
Our international cooperation programme is celebrated
in over a hundred countries around the globe, sharing
skills, experience and knowledge for the benefit of
millions of people. We extend this hand of friendship
to all the nations of the world. We welcome our
improving relations with Europe, just as we remain
committed to promoting closer ties with the nations of
Africa, Asia and the Americas.
The Zionist vision of Israel’s founders was to
bring into the world a State in our ancient homeland to
serve as a haven from persecution for our people, a
place where the Jewish people could fulfil its right to
self-determination in the modern era and a bastion of
democracy and opportunity for all its citizens. Our
founders also made a promise not just to the people of
Israel, but also to the people of the Middle East as a
whole — to pursue peace and to work for the common
advancement of our region.
I know personally the profound meaning of this
historic undertaking. I came to Israel as a young
refugee from Tunisia. I serve as one of hundreds of
thousands of immigrants to whom Israel has granted
promise and protection, freedom and opportunity,
through the values and institutions of democracy.
I stand here today to reaffirm, before the nations
of the world, the commitment of my country to peace.
Peace for the people of Israel is both a moral and
historic imperative. “Shalom” — the word for peace in
Hebrew — is central to our language and our heritage.
It is how we say “hello” and it is how we say
“goodbye”. It is a name we give to our children. It is
my own family name.
It was our prophet Isaiah, who brought this
message of peace to the world centuries ago, when he
said: “And they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares and their spears into pruning hooks.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn war any more”.
Israel’s historic record is clear. Whenever a true
partner for peace has emerged, he has been met with
Israel’s extended hand. This was true when President
30
 
Anwar Sadat of Egypt came to Jerusalem in 1977 and it
was true when King Hussein of Jordan signed the
Peace Treaty with us in 1994. The same is true today.
Israel stands ready to complete the circle of peace with
all its neighbours — real peace, not just peace for the
headlines, but peace which brings an end to violence
and hostility and positive change for the citizens of our
region.
From this great rostrum — a rostrum shared by
all humanity — I call on the leaders of Syria and
Lebanon, of Iran and of the Palestinian people to
abandon once and for all their hostility towards us and
to join us in building a better future for our children.
This evening, I shall return to Jerusalem, the
eternal capital of the Jewish people, to join with them
in celebrating Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
According to our tradition, this is a time when God
determines the fate of each and every individual for the
coming year. These are days of reflection and prayer.
May all our prayers for peace and for life be answered,
and may the actions and deeds of all the States and
peoples represented here in this Hall bring to mankind
peace and all the blessings that life can offer.




﻿The General Assembly
is meeting in the shadow of the tragedy last month in
which United Nations staff were killed or injured in
Baghdad. New Zealand unreservedly condemns such
brutal and calculated acts of terror. The United Nations,
after all, was in Iraq to improve the conditions of Iraqi
people and to assist the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty.
We mourn the loss of all those who perished. In
particular, I pay tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello, who
worked so effectively in the world’s trouble spots,
including Timor-Leste, where New Zealand worked
alongside him and developed huge admiration for his
ability and determination.
This was not the first occasion on which the
employees of the international community have been
targeted, although it was the worst. History suggests
that it will not be the last.
To do its work effectively, the United Nations
must interact with local communities, not operate from
behind barbed wire and concrete barriers. Its
employees are mainly unarmed civilians. We, the States
Members of the United Nations, must do more to
protect those whom we employ to work on our behalf.
Nine years ago New Zealand was at the forefront
in creating the Convention for the Safety of United
7

Nations and Associated Personnel. It was opened for
signature in 1995. Regrettably, only one third of the
membership has since become a party to it. We urge all
countries to do so now.
New Zealand believes that the Convention should
be widened to cover all situations where United
Nations and other associated personnel are engaged in
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other assistance-
related activities.
Over the last year we have witnessed terrorist
attacks, including in Casablanca, Riyadh and Jakarta,
as well as in Baghdad.
Next month is the first anniversary of the terrorist
attack in Bali, in which more than 200 people lost their
lives. And two years ago this city itself was the victim
of the 9/11 attacks, which took 3,000 lives.
International terrorism remains the primary threat to
the security and well-being of people across the world.
If we are to defeat terrorism, regional cooperation
is imperative. In the Asia Pacific region, a concerted
response to terrorism is now at the centre of the
Association of South-east Asian Nations Regional
Forum agenda and is becoming increasingly important
in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
The Pacific Islands Forum is responding
collectively to security challenges, including terrorism,
transnational crimes and challenges to national
integrity and independence.
An effective campaign against terrorism requires
international collaboration on intelligence, military,
social and economic measures.
New Zealand is aware that while we focus on the
symptoms of terrorism, the international community
must work together to tackle the conditions that foster
it. We welcome the Norwegian initiative to strengthen
analysis of the causes of terrorism. There are simply no
ends that can justify the death and the maiming of
vulnerable and innocent people.
New Zealand has, since 1972, supported the
development of a comprehensive international regime to
outlaw terrorism. I hope that the General Assembly will
be able to move forward on this issue and conclude the
comprehensive and nuclear terrorism conventions.
In combating terrorism, however, we should
avoid undermining the very values we are seeking to
uphold. The fight against terrorism should not become
an excuse to justify actions that do not conform to
international standards of humanity.
New Zealand is the current Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum, which it hosted last month. Leaders
strongly endorsed the Regional Assistance Mission to
the Solomon Islands — a concrete example of the
region working together to assist one of its members to
restore security, stability and progress to its people.
New Zealand joined with the other members of
the Pacific Islands Forum in responding to a request
from the Solomon Islands Government for police and
military assistance to end the actions of armed
criminals responsible for the deterioration in the social
and economic conditions in the Solomon Islands. A
police-led operation has been working successfully to
restore the rule of law and economic stability.
In failed or weak States, Governments often lack the
capacity or will to exercise territorial control. That can
create a power vacuum for terrorist organizations and
criminals to exploit and maintain safe havens, training
facilities and bases for launching terrorist operations.
The Regional Assistance Mission has gone
exceptionally well to date and has received strong
support from the people of the Solomon Islands. It is a
Pacific solution to a Pacific problem. Cooperation and
commitment by Pacific States to respond to regional
security needs, under the umbrella of the Pacific Islands
Forum, is a model that other regions could adopt.
The statements of support from the Secretary-
General and the Security Council for this regional
action, taken in accordance with the Charter, are
welcome. We would urge the United Nations to assist
where it can the process of rebuilding the social
structure and the economy of that country.
New Zealand is working to enhance and
complement existing security capabilities within the
Pacific region. We are engaged in a number of
activities, including establishing border security
systems and drafting model legislation to address
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
The international community must retain an
ongoing commitment to Afghanistan, where President
Karzai’s Government continues to face significant
challenges. Improving security outside Kabul will be a
crucial element in bringing political stability to
Afghanistan.
8

It is in the interests of us all to assist in the
restoration of Afghanistan — not only for the well-
being of the Afghan people, but also so that terrorists
cannot operate freely within its borders.
Earlier this week, New Zealand assumed
leadership of the Provincial Reconstruction Team in
Bamian Province. I am pleased that we could
demonstrate support for the Afghanistan Transitional
Government in this way.
The shared nightmare of all States is that
weapons of mass destruction or the materials from
which they can be constructed will find their way into
the terrorist arsenal. The possibility of nuclear weapons
in the hands of terrorists is a worst-case scenario with
horrific implications. We must do everything we can to
prevent this from happening.
The possible acquisition of nuclear weapons by
terrorist groups increases as the numbers and types of
these weapons, and the States that possess them,
continue to expand. For these and other reasons the
elimination of these weapons is vital.
New Zealand calls on all countries to commit and
to adhere to multilateral disarmament and arms control
treaties.
North Korea’s proclaimed nuclear weapons
programme is a major concern. We urge North Korea to
resume its cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and its commitment to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The current
multilateral dialogue process is a positive way forward.
We commend China for facilitating this.
Iran, too, must heed the strong message of the
international community and take the urgent steps
required to restore confidence that its nuclear
intentions are peaceful.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is equally
about nuclear disarmament. The commitment given by
the nuclear-weapon States to give up their nuclear
weapons, reaffirmed unequivocally at the NPT Review
Conference in 2000, must be honoured.
The nuclear Powers have a particular responsibility
in this respect. They must lead by example against
proliferation. Meaningful steps toward permanent
disarmament would add to their moral authority in
demanding that others must not develop nuclear
weapons capability.
The invasion of Iraq has had a profound impact
on this Organization. We regret that differences of view
could not be resolved in the Security Council.
The reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration of its
sovereignty and the rebuilding of political and social
structures to guarantee the Iraqi people a better life are
now the critical issues. We welcome initiatives to push
forward the political and constitutional process.
The passage of Security Council resolutions 1483
(2003) and 1500 (2003) recognizes the vital role of the
United Nations and the need for the international
community to be fully engaged in reconstruction
efforts. While responsibility for security must
inevitably rest with coalition forces, multilateralism
offers the best prospect and the greatest legitimacy for
the process of transition back to Iraqi self-rule.
New Zealand has announced substantial
contributions to reconstruction and humanitarian relief
work. These include the deployment of a New Zealand
Defence Force light engineer group to work on
humanitarian and reconstruction tasks alongside a
United Kingdom engineer regiment in southern Iraq.
We have helped with demining operations and have
made contributions through United Nations agencies,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations.
New Zealand continues to view the United
Nations as the best hope we have to collectively pursue
the principles enshrined in the Charter. The strength of
the United Nation is that it brings all countries of the
world together on an equal footing to address common
problems. Millions of people around the world have had
their lives improved by the actions of the United Nations.
East Timor is but one recent example of its effectiveness
when it is supported by a common will to act.
At the same time, we all recognize the need to
reform the Organization. In opening this session, the
Secretary-General called on us to consider whether the
rules and instruments of this multilateral institution
continue to serve us well. We have been discussing the
reform of the Security Council for more than a decade
now. It is time to make an institution designed in an
earlier age, for a smaller number of nations more
representative and responsive to the 191 current
Members of the United Nations. We welcome the
establishment of a panel to address key issues
fundamental to the Organization’s future role. Member
States will need to put aside self-interest and
9

differences to reach agreement on the panel’s findings
and to translate those into action.
Fifty-eight years ago, the United Nations was
created in the aftermath of the death and devastation
that had resulted from two world wars. The vision of
its founders was that of an organization that would
establish rules to govern international behaviour, with
procedures to enforce them through collective action. The
United Nations was bestowed with a unique legitimacy
and unique authority to resolve conflict. Whatever its
shortcomings, it remains an indispensable organization.
The challenge before us is to create the structures
and provide the political will that will enable it to
deliver the peaceful, just and prosperous world that is
the hope and expectation of humanity.





﻿Once again,
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this
representative audience. At the outset, however, I
should like to wish the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly fruitful work — work to
successfully harmonize the actions of peoples and
States; work on behalf of peace, security and progress.
Those purposes were set out in the Charter of the
United Nations by our predecessors, but, as we can see,
they are still relevant. Even now, they provide a solid,
long-term foundation for the activities of the United
Nations. And, although the structure and the functions
of the Organization took shape in an international
environment fundamentally different from ours, time
has only reaffirmed their universal importance. Today,
the instruments of the United Nations are not merely in
demand; they are, as life itself has shown, simply
irreplaceable in crucial situations.
That has been made abundantly clear by the
following important fact: despite sharp differences
concerning how to resolve the Iraq crisis, the situation
is ultimately returning to the legal sphere of the United
Nations. Russia’s position in that regard is consistent
and clear. Only direct United Nations participation in
Iraq’s reconstruction will enable Iraq’s people to decide
their future. And only with active and — I want to stress
this — practical United Nations assistance in Iraq’s
economic and civil transformation will Iraq assume a
truly new and worthy place in the world community.
It is clear that, in recent years, the United Nations
has increasingly been obliged to carry out
fundamentally new tasks and to tackle threats that are
different from, but just as serious as, those it faced
before. Three years ago, at the 2000 Millennium
Summit, I said here that the common enemy of the
United Nations was terrorism. Was Russia’s voice
heeded then? Did everyone understand the seriousness
of the threat, and were our joint actions adequate? The
events of 11 September proved that, unfortunately, they
were not.
To us in Russia, however, the style of the
murderers who committed terrorist acts in Moscow, in
Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia and in New York, as
well as against United Nations staff in Baghdad, has
long been painfully familiar. That style is identical
everywhere, and the fact that the inciters of terror are
easily recognizable — with regard to both the events of
August this year and the terrorist attacks of previous
years — only attests to the global nature of this threat.
It is true that now we are listening to one another.
And we understand that the United Nations must
become — and is indeed becoming — the basis for a
global anti-terrorist coalition. Here, I wish to take
particular note of the Security Council’s Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Terrorism is a challenge to the
planet’s security and to its economic future. Therefore,
the Committee must become a real and practical
instrument for effectively fighting the terrorist threat.
I should like to focus in particular on the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations. That area
consumes the lion’s share of the Organization’s energy,
time and resources, but it does not always appear in the
headlines, nor is it always familiar to the citizens of the
more prosperous States. But it is precisely that area of
United Nations work that is so fundamental and
irreplaceable. The United Nations is helping millions
of destitute people throughout the world — victims of
hunger, of disease and of conflict — to survive and not
to lose hope. That work is exceptionally important; it
lends indisputable political and moral authority to the
entire Organization. And it is here that the
interrelationship between the moral and political content
of international activities is particularly evident.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all
staff members of the United Nations, all non-
governmental organizations and, of course, the many
volunteers who are participating in this noble work.
Because we understand how valuable the
Organization’s humanitarian mission is, Russia views it
as a major political endeavour. We are already
contributing to this work, and we are committed to
increasing our contribution. Over the past three years,
Russia has forgiven a total of $27.2 billion in debt of
5
 
developing countries, and we are currently granting
significant tariff preferences to such countries.
For the first time in many years, as our country
has grown, it has become a donor to the United Nations
World Food Programme. The horrors of starvation are
well known to us from our own history. As a result of
the civil war of the past century and the forced
collectivization of the 1920s and 1930s, millions of
people died of starvation in the Volga region, in Northern
Caucasus and in other parts of our country. Hunger
became a national tragedy for the peoples of Ukraine as
well. We consider it our moral and ethical duty to
expand our participation in food aid programmes.
Russia intends to work actively to resolve acute
environmental problems. A milestone will be achieved
in that area by the World Conference on Climate
Change, scheduled to convene next week in Russia’s
capital, Moscow. We also believe it is essential that a
global system be established to monitor and neutralize
dangerous infectious diseases, and we consider the
work done by the Global Fund to be a real
demonstration of international solidarity in fighting the
spread of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria.
Of course, the United Nations, like any system
with a complex structure, needs to be improved. But
the Organization’s past and current problems have never
been problems of only the Organization per se; they have
always been created by — and they continue to reflect —
contradictions in the very system of international
relations, particularly the system of international law.
After all, politicians, including those represented in the
United Nations, including the Security Council, do not
always have at their disposal adequate and effectively
functioning legal instruments — instruments that would
enable them to deal effectively with the international and
regional crises that arise. International law must, of
course, be fluid and living, reflecting the realities of
the contemporary world. I believe that many of the
processes that are under way within the United Nations
also attest to the constant changes that are taking place
in the world. Such changes dictate a logic of evolution
in the United Nations.
Members of the Organization know very well
that, as a rule, all of the achievements of the United
Nations are shared successes, and that our failures are
shared miscalculations. Such knowledge, however,
brings with it great responsibility. First and foremost,
we must be extremely careful about interfering with the
fabric — the mechanisms — of the work of the United
Nations. Clearly, behind any such decision there should
be more than general political rhetoric — mere words
about so-called fair policies.
I am convinced that any attempt to modernize
United Nations instruments must be preceded by
serious analysis and careful calculation. Such an
approach should be taken, first and foremost, with
regard to the principal international legal instruments.
After all, guaranteeing that they remain effective is the
only way to avoid a legal vacuum. As long as the
norms of international law remain unchanged and
operative, we must observe them. We must ensure
continuity of security guarantees for States and for the
world as a whole.
We must analyse United Nations structures and
mechanisms and try to understand which have proved
effective and productive, as well as which have done
the job they were intended to do and which now remain
unused. We should remember that much of the
potential of the United Nations has still to be tapped.
There are many resources that we are only now
learning how to use.
I would like in particular to comment on the need
to enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council. I
am convinced that, given the deep-rooted nature of the
current differences of opinion and the importance of
ensuring that the Council remain effective, we must
work gradually and very cautiously.
We believe that at this stage we should be guided
above all by the broadest possible agreement on all
aspects of the expansion of the Council, as well as by
the need to ensure that it maintains its current high
status and the legitimacy born of agreed actions. After
all, the Security Council, as the Charter makes clear,
acts on behalf of the United Nations. The Security
Council is endowed with a specific mechanism for
harmonizing political will and for protecting the
national interests of a great variety of States, and,
through this, the interests of the entire international
community.
It is true that we often hear that the developed
countries bear special responsibility for the destiny of
the world. Such leadership, however, entails major
obligations, primarily to ensure that the interests of the
international community as a whole are reflected.
Being a world Power means working together with the
world community. Being a truly strong, influential
6
 
State means seeing and helping to resolve the problems
of small and economically weak countries.
In that connection, I believe that it would be
useful to intensify the work that is being carried out by
the United Nations in cooperation with the regional
international structures. That will lead directly towards
increased economic prosperity in various parts of the
world, and thus contribute to the containment of
potential threats and the maintenance of a common
global strategic balance.
We welcome the emergence of regional centres
for coordination and cooperation in a united Europe.
We favour the strengthening of integration processes in
the Asia-Pacific region. And of course, we support the
work of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), as well as that of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, whose authority and effectiveness are
continuing to grow.
Russia is not the only country that is interested in
regional integration. Our CIS partners have also
demonstrated their practical commitment to that same
goal. This was reaffirmed during the recent CIS
summit. We consider the development of our
interaction with the European Union, which is
multifaceted in nature, to be important. Likewise, with
regard to security issues, we attach importance to the
search new forms of cooperation with the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We should counter current threats to civilization
only by means of collective responses whose legitimacy
is not in doubt. In this respect, we need a systemic vision
that combines political with, when necessary, military
measures. Such measures should be agreed upon in
advance, and be sensible and appropriate.
The need to improve the peacekeeping
mechanisms of the United Nations remains on the
Organization’s agenda. The United Nations must be
able to deploy peacekeeping — and, where necessary,
peace-enforcement — operations more quickly and
efficiently, in strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter. I should like to note that Russia, which has
always supported the peacekeeping functions of the
Organization, is prepared to step up its participation in
such operations, both under United Nations auspices
and in coalition operations authorized by the Security
Council.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems remains a serious challenge
to the modern world. The most dangerous challenge is
the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. We know what steps must be taken in order
to eliminate such threats. These include the further
universalization of the existing non-proliferation
regimes, the strengthening of international verification
instruments and the introduction of safe technologies in
nuclear energy production. In general, this requires the
renunciation by States of excessive arsenals and
military programmes that could undermine the political
and military balance and trigger an arms race.
Russia believes that it is extremely important to
prevent the militarization of outer space. We believe
that a comprehensive agreement should be elaborated
on this issue, and invite all countries possessing
potential in this area to join our initiative. The Russian
initiative to set up, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a global system to counter these new threats has
already been supported by the General Assembly. We
propose the adoption of a new resolution during this
session setting out specific further steps in this direction.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that the solid
structure of the United Nations has enabled it to
withstand all of the many crises of the second half of
the twentieth century. It has helped to overcome threats
of global confrontation and, most importantly, helped
to promote human rights. It has also helped to assert
the principles of mutual respect and good-neighbourliness
among States. The main thrust of the United Nations
approach is that humankind has no alternative but to
jointly construct a safer, fairer and more prosperous
world. That is our duty to succeeding generations. In
that important task we can have no better help than
such time-tested instruments as the work of the United
Nations, an Organization that, for half a century, took
decisions that were crucial for the entire world.
Russia is convinced that the United Nations must
maintain its central role in international affairs. This is
particularly relevant, and particularly important, for
resolving conflict situations. This is our choice and our
strategic position of principle.





﻿Twenty-four months ago, and
yesterday in the memory of America, the centre of New
York City became a battlefield, and a graveyard, and
the symbol of an unfinished war. Since that day,
terrorists have struck in Bali, in Mombassa, in
9

Casablanca, in Riyadh, in Jakarta, in Jerusalem,
measuring the advance of their cause in the chaos and
innocent suffering they leave behind.
Last month, terrorists brought their war to the
United Nations itself. The United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad stood for order and compassion. For that
reason, the terrorists decided it must be destroyed.
Among the 22 people who were murdered was Sergio
Vieira de Mello. Over the decades, that good and brave
man from Brazil gave help to the afflicted in
Bangladesh, Cyprus, Mozambique, Lebanon,
Cambodia, Central Africa, Kosovo and East Timor, and
was aiding the people of Iraq in their time of need.
America joins you, his colleagues, in honouring the
memory of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the memory
of all those who died with him in the service of the
United Nations.
By the victims they choose and by the means they
use, the terrorists have clarified the struggle we are in.
Those who target relief workers for death have set
themselves against all humanity. Those who incite
murder and celebrate suicide reveal their contempt for
life itself. They have no place in any religious faith,
they have no claim on the world's sympathy, and they
should have no friend in this Hall.
Events during the past two years have set before
us the clearest of divides: between those who seek
order and those who spread chaos, between those who
work for peaceful change and those who adopt the
methods of gangsters, between those who honour the
rights of man and those who deliberately take the lives
of men, women and children without mercy or shame.
Between those alternatives there is no neutral
ground. All Governments that support terror are
complicit in a war against civilization. No Government
should ignore the threat of terror because to look the
other way gives terrorists the chance to regroup, recruit
and prepare. All nations that fight terror as if the lives
of their own people depended on it will earn the
favourable judgement of history.
The former regimes of Afghanistan and Iraq knew
those alternatives and made their choices. The Taliban
was a sponsor and servant of terrorism. When
confronted, that regime chose defiance, and that regime
is no more. Afghanistan's President, who is here today,
now represents a free people who are building a decent
and just society. They are building a nation fully joined
in the war against terror.
The regime of Saddam Hussain cultivated ties to
terror while it built weapons of mass destruction. It
used those weapons in acts of mass murder and refused
to account for them when confronted by the world. The
Security Council was right to be alarmed. The Security
Council was right to demand that Iraq destroy its
illegal weapons and prove that it had done so. The
Security Council was right to vow serious
consequences if Iraq refused to comply. And because
there were consequences   because a coalition of
nations acted to defend the peace and the credibility of
the United Nations   Iraq is free, and today we are
joined by the representatives of a liberated country.
Saddam Hussain's monuments have been
removed, and not only his statues. The true monuments
of his rule and his character   the torture chambers,
the rape rooms and the prison cells for innocent
children   are closed. And as we discover the killing
fields and mass graves of Iraq, the true scale of
Saddam's cruelty is being revealed.
The Iraqi people are meeting hardships and
challenges, like every nation that has set out on the
path of democracy. Yet, their future promises lives of
dignity and freedom, and that is a world away from the
squalid, vicious tyranny they have known. Across Iraq,
life is being improved by liberty. Across the Middle
East, people are safer because an unstable aggressor
has been removed from power. Across the world,
nations are more secure because an ally of terror has
fallen.
Our actions in Afghanistan and Iraq were
supported by many Governments, and America is
grateful to each one. I also recognize that some of the
sovereign nations of the Assembly disagreed with our
actions. Yet, there was and there remains unity among
us on the fundamental principles and objectives of the
United Nations. We are dedicated to the defence of our
collective security and to the advance of human rights.
Those permanent commitments call us to great work in
the world, work that we must do together. So, let us
move forward. First, we must stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq as they build free and stable
countries. The terrorists and their allies fear and fight
this progress above all because free people embrace
hope over resentment and choose peace over violence.
The United Nations has been a friend of the
Afghan people, distributing food and medicine, helping
refugees return home, advising on a new constitution
10

and helping to prepare the way for nationwide
elections. NATO has taken over the United Nations
mandated security force in Kabul. American and
coalition forces continue to track and defeat al Qaeda
terrorists and the remnants of the Taliban. Our efforts
to rebuild that country go on. I have recently proposed
to spend an additional $1.2 billion for the Afghan
reconstruction effort, and I urge other nations to
continue contributing to that important cause.
In the nation of Iraq, the United Nations is
carrying out vital and effective work every day. By the
end of 2004, more than 90 per cent of Iraqi children
under age five will have been immunized against
preventable diseases such as polio, tuberculosis and
measles, thanks to the hard work and high ideals of
UNICEF. Iraq's food distribution system is operational,
delivering nearly a half million tons of food per month,
thanks to the skill and expertise of the World Food
Programme.
Our international coalition in Iraq is meeting its
responsibilities. We are conducting precision raids
against terrorists and holdouts of the former regime.
Those killers are at war with the Iraqi people. They
have made Iraq the central front in the war on terror.
And they will be defeated. Our coalition has made sure
that Iraq's former dictator will never again use
weapons of mass destruction. We are now interviewing
Iraqi citizens and analysing records of the old regime
to reveal the full extent of its weapons programmes and
its long campaign of deception. We are training Iraqi
police, border guards and a new army so that the Iraqi
people can assume full responsibility for their own
security.
At the same time, our coalition is helping to
improve the daily lives of the Iraqi people. The old
regime built palaces while letting schools decay, so we
are rebuilding more than a thousand schools. The old
regime starved hospitals of resources, so we have
helped to supply and reopen hospitals across Iraq. The
old regime built up armies and weapons while allowing
the nation's infrastructure to crumble, so we are
rehabilitating power plants, water and sanitation
facilities, bridges and airports. I have proposed to
Congress that the United States provide additional
funding for our work in Iraq, the greatest financial
commitment of its kind since the Marshall Plan.
Having helped to liberate Iraq, we will honour
our pledges to Iraq, and by helping the Iraqi people
build a stable and peaceful country we will make our
own countries more secure.
The primary goal of our coalition in Iraq is self-
government for the people of Iraq, reached by an
orderly and democratic process. That process must
unfold according to the needs of Iraqis, neither hurried
nor delayed by the wishes of other parties. And the
United Nations can contribute greatly to the cause of
Iraqi self-government.
America is working with friends and allies on a
new Security Council resolution, which will expand the
United Nation's role in Iraq. As in the aftermath of
other conflicts, the United Nations should assist in
developing a constitution, training civil servants and
conducting free and fair elections. Iraq now has a
Governing Council, the first truly representative
institution in that country. Iraq's new leaders are
showing the openness and tolerance that democracy
requires, and they are also showing courage. Yet every
young democracy needs the help of friends. Now the
nation of Iraq needs and deserves our aid, and all
nations of good will should step forward and provide
that support.
The success of a free Iraq will be watched and
noted throughout the region. Millions will see that
freedom, equality and material progress are possible at
the heart of the Middle East. Leaders in the region will
face the clearest evidence that free institutions and
open societies are the only path to long-term national
success and dignity. And a transformed Middle East
would benefit the entire world by undermining the
ideologies that export violence to other lands.
Iraq as a dictatorship had great power to
destabilize the Middle East. Iraq as a democracy will
have great power to inspire the Middle East. The
advance of democratic institutions in Iraq is setting an
example that others, including the Palestinian people,
would be wise to follow. The Palestinian cause is
betrayed by leaders who cling to power by feeding old
hatreds and destroying the good work of others. The
Palestinian people deserve their own State. They will
gain that State by embracing new leaders committed to
reform, to fighting terror and to building peace.
All parties in the Middle East must meet their
responsibilities and carry out the commitments they
made at Aqaba. Israel must work to create the
conditions that will allow a peaceful Palestinian State
to emerge. Arab nations must cut off funding and other
11

support for terrorist organizations. America will work
with every nation in the region that acts boldly for the
sake of peace.
A second challenge we must confront together is
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Outlaw regimes that possess nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and the means to deliver them
would be able to use blackmail and create chaos in
entire regions. Those weapons could be used by
terrorists to bring sudden disaster and suffering on a
scale we can scarcely imagine. The deadly combination
of outlaw regimes, terror networks and weapons of
mass murder is a peril that cannot be ignored or wished
away. If such a danger is allowed to fully materialize,
all words, all protests, will come too late.
Nations of the world must have the wisdom and
the will to stop grave threats before they arrive. One
crucial step is to secure the most dangerous materials at
their source. For more than a decade, the United States
has worked with Russia and other States of the former
Soviet Union to dismantle, destroy or secure weapons
and dangerous materials left over from another era.
Last year in Canada, the G-8 nations agreed to
provide up to 20 billion dollars, half of it from the
United States, to fight this proliferation risk over the
next ten years. Since then, six additional countries have
joined the effort. More are needed, and I urge other
nations to help us meet this danger.
We are also improving our capability to interdict
lethal materials in transit. Through our Proliferation
Security Initiative, eleven nations are preparing to
search planes, ships, trains and trucks carrying suspect
cargo and to seize weapons or missile shipments that
raise proliferation concerns. These nations have agreed
on a set of interdiction principles consistent with
current legal authorities, and we are working to expand
the Proliferation Security Initiative to other countries.
We are determined to keep the world's most destructive
weapons away from all our shores and out of the hands
of our common enemies.
Because proliferators will use any route or
channel that is open to them, we need the broadest
possible cooperation to stop them. Today I ask the
United Nations Security Council to adopt a new
antiproliferation resolution. That resolution should call
on all Members of the United Nations to criminalize
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to
enact strict export controls consistent with international
standards and to secure any and all sensitive materials
within their own borders. The United States stands
ready to help any nation draft these new laws and to
assist in their enforcement.
A third challenge we share is a challenge to our
conscience. We must act decisively to meet the
humanitarian crises of our time. The United States has
begun to carry out the Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief, aimed at preventing AIDS on a massive scale
and treating millions who have the disease already. We
have pledged 15 billion dollars over five years to fight
AIDS around the world.
My country is acting to save lives from famine as
well. We are providing more than 1.4 billion dollars in
global emergency food aid, and I have asked our
United States Congress for 200 million dollars for a
new famine fund so that we can act quickly when the
first signs of famine appear. Every nation on every
continent should generously add their resources to the
fight against disease and desperate hunger.
There is another humanitarian crisis, spreading,
yet hidden from view. Each year, an estimated eight to
nine hundred thousand human beings are bought, sold
or forced across the world's borders. Among them are
hundreds of thousands of teenage girls and others as
young as five who fall victim to the sex trade. This
commerce in human life generates billions of dollars
each year, much of which is used to finance organized
crime. There is a special evil in the abuse and
exploitation of the most innocent and vulnerable. The
victims of the sex trade see little of life before they see
the very worst of life   an underground of brutality
and lonely fear. Those who create these victims and
profit from their suffering must be severely punished.
Those who patronize this industry debase themselves
and deepen the misery of others, and Governments that
tolerate this trade are tolerating a form of slavery.
This problem has appeared in my own country
and we are working to stop it. The Protect Act, which I
signed into law this year, makes it a crime for any
person to enter the United States or for any citizen to
travel abroad for the purpose of sex tourism involving
children. The Department of Justice is actively
investigating sex tour operators and patrons, who can
face up to 30 years in prison. Under the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, the United States is using
sanctions against Governments to discourage human
trafficking.
12

The victims of this industry also need help from
Members of the United Nations. This begins with clear
standards and the certainty of punishment under the
laws of every country. Today, some nations make it a
crime to sexually abuse children abroad. Such conduct
should be a crime in all nations. Governments should
inform travellers of the harm this industry does and the
severe punishments that will fall on its patrons. The
American Government is committing $50 million to
support the good work of organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them shelter, medical treatment and the hope of
a new life. I urge other Governments to do their part.
We must show new energy in fighting back an old
evil. Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century after
slavery was officially ended in its last strongholds, the
trade in human beings for any purpose must not be
allowed to thrive in our time.
All the challenges I have spoken of this morning
require urgent attention and moral clarity. Helping
Afghanistan and Iraq to succeed as free nations in a
transformed region; cutting off the avenues of
proliferation; abolishing modern forms of slavery  
these are the kinds of great tasks for which the United
Nations was founded. In each case, careful discussion
is needed and, also, decisive action. Our good
intentions will be credited only if we achieve good
outcomes. As an original signer of the United Nations
Charter, the United States of America is committed to
the United Nations and we show that commitment by
working to fulfil the United Nations stated purposes
and by giving meaning to its ideals.
The founding documents of the United Nations
and the founding documents of America stand in the
same tradition. Both assert that human beings should
never be reduced to objects of power or commerce,
because their dignity is inherent. Both recognize a
moral law that stands above men and nations, but
which must be defended and enforced by men and
nations. And both point the way to peace   the peace
that comes when all are free. We secure that peace with
our courage and we must show that courage together.



﻿May I congratulate you, Sir,
for assuming the mantle of the presidency for this
session of the Assembly and thank the outgoing
President, Mr. Jan Kavan. I would also like to echo
what other speakers have said about the death of the
dedicated United Nations workers who lost their lives
in the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad last month, including Sergio Vieira de Mello,
an outstanding international civil servant.
When we met here last year, we were all
concerned about what would happen in Iraq. At the
same time, we were concerned about what role the
United Nations would play in the resolution of the Iraq
affair. Dramatic events since then have provided
answers to those questions. However, those dramatic
events have raised important and disturbing questions
about the very future of the United Nations. Central
among them is the question, does the United Nations
have a future as a strong and effective multilateral
organization enjoying the confidence of the peoples of
the world and capable of addressing the matters that
are of concern to all humanity?
Quite correctly, as we meet here this time, while
still preoccupied by the issue of the future of Iraq, I am
certain that none of us wants to rehash the debate that
took place on this matter in the period following the
last general debate in the General Assembly. While for
some time after that general debate we were concerned
to provide answers to questions about the role of the
United Nations in Iraq, today we have to answer
questions about the impact of the Iraq affair on the
future of the United Nations. Matters have evolved in
such a manner that to our limited understanding it
seems extremely difficult to resolve the issue of the
role of the United Nations in Iraq, unless we answer
the question about the future of the United Nations as a
legitimate expression of the collective will of the
peoples of the world and the principal guarantor of
international peace and security, among other global
issues.
Put differently, we could say that what is decided
about the role of the United Nations in Iraq will at the
same time decide what will become of the United
Nations in the context of its Charter and of the
important global objectives that have been set since the
Charter was adopted.
This is not a case of the tail wagging the dog;
rather, history has placed at our feet an urgent and
practical test case that obliges us to answer the
question: what do we, collectively, want the United
Nations to be? What do we do to distinguish the trees
from the forest? In that regard we must make the point
directly, that as South Africans, we are partners and
activists who campaign in favour of a strong and
effective United Nations. We do so because of the
place our country and people occupy in the
contemporary world.
We believe that everything that has happened
places an obligation on the United Nations to reflect on
a number of fundamental issues that are of critical
importance to the evolution of human society. We are
convinced that this General Assembly would
disappoint the expectations of the peoples of the world
and put itself in jeopardy if, for any reason whatsoever,
it did not address these issues.
We speak as we do because we represent the
people who are more sensitive to the imperatives of
what the world decides, given our experience during a
period when apartheid South Africa was correctly a
matter of focused and sustained interest by the United
Nations and the peoples of the world, including
ordinary folk, even in the most marginalized areas of
our globe.
This Organization, and all of us singly and
collectively, has spoken and frequently speaks about
the phenomenon of globalization. Correctly, we speak
of a global village driven by recognition of the fact of
the integration of all peoples within a common and
interdependent global society.
24

Certainly, humanity is more integrated today than
it was when the United Nations was established more
than fifty years ago. However, many have drawn
attention to the fact that, whereas objective social
processes have led to the emergence of the global
village, all of our political collectives have not yet
succeeded in designing the institutions of governance
made necessary by the reality of the birth of this global
village.
Correct observations have also been made that the
use of the image and concept of the village does not
imply that the residents of this village are equal. The
reality is that the same processes that bring all of us
closer together in a global village are simultaneously
placing the residents of the global village in different
positions. Some have emerged as dominant, and the
rest as the dominated, with the dominant being the
decision makers and the dominated being the recipients
and implementers of those decisions.
To the same extent that our political collectives
have not designed the institutions responsive to the
evolution of the global village, so have they failed to
respond to the imbalance in the distribution of power
inherent in contemporary global human society. We
speak here of power in all fields of human activity. Left
to its internal and autonomous impulses, the process of
globalization will inevitably result in the further
enhancement of the domination of the dominant and
the entrenchment of the subservience of the dominated,
however much the latter might resent such domination.
This will include the perpetuation of the
dominant positions by those who are dominant to
ensure the sustenance of their capacity to set the
agenda of the global village in the interest of their own
neighbourhoods within that village. Inherent within
this is, necessarily, reliance on the use of superior
power, of which the dominant dispose, to achieve the
objective of the perpetuation of the situation of an
unequal distribution of power.
In this situation, it is inevitable that the pursuit of
power in itself will assert itself as a unique legitimate
objective, apparently detached from any need to define
the uses of such power. This also signifies the
deification of force in all its forms as the final arbiter
in the ordering of human affairs.
However, from the point of view of the
disempowered, the struggle to ensure the use of such
power to address their own interests becomes a
strategic objective they cannot avoid. Necessarily this
means that power would have to be redistributed. That
would be done to empower the disempowered and to
regulate the use of power by those who are powerful.
Thus we come back to what I said earlier.
Because we are poor, we are partisan activists for a
strong, effective and popularly accepted United
Nations. We take those positions because there is no
way in which we could advance the interests of the
people, the majority of whom are poor, outside the
context of a strong, effective and popularly accepted
United Nations. An autonomous process of
globalization, driven by its own internal regularities,
can only result in the determination of our future
within the parameters set by those who enjoy the
superiority of power. The powerful will do this in their
own interests, which might not coincide with ours.
When this Organization was established 58 years
ago, its objectives and institutions necessarily reflected
both the collective global concerns as then perceived
and the then balance of power.
Among other things, our esteemed Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, has drawn attention to the
fact that the United Nations started off as an
Organization of 51 States and is now composed of 191
States. Undoubtedly, the perceived and real collective
global concerns of our day are, to some extent at least,
different from those that prevailed more than 50 years
ago, when the Organization was about a quarter of its
present size.
For more than a decade, this Organization has
been involved in discussions about its transformation.
Once more, the Secretary-General has reflected on this
challenge. The truth is that our discussions have gone
nowhere. Earlier this morning the Secretary-General
announced steps he will take to facilitate the adoption
of decisions that will help all of us to effect the
necessary and inevitable transformation of the United
Nations. We support the decisions he announced.
The global resolve to defeat such organizations as
al Qaeda has emerged out of our understanding that
international aggression should not necessarily be
expected to come from formal and recognized State
institutions. We have all come to understand that such a
threat coming from non-State institutions would
express itself as the most inhumane and despicable
terrorism, as was most painfully demonstrated on 11
September 2001.
25

Our collective experience   stretching from New
York and elsewhere in the United States on 11
September 2001; and reaching back to Nairobi and
Dar es Salaam, in Africa, earlier still; and, more
recently, to Bali, Indonesia; to Morocco; to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine; to Algeria, India, Russia
and elsewhere; and even our own country   tells us
that the United Nations, working in defence of the
collective interests of the peoples of the world, must
ensure that we act together to defeat the threat of
terrorism, collectively defined.
At the same time, we have to take on board the
conviction among some of our Member States that they
constitute special and particular targets of global
terrorism. Understandably, the argument is advanced
that it would be unreasonable and irrational to expect
such States not to act to deter such terrorist actions
against themselves. None of us can defend
international rules that prescribe that any one of us
should wait to be attacked knowing in specific ways
that we were going to be attacked by identified
terrorists, and then act against those who had attacked
us, with such horrendous costs as were experienced by
the United States during the 11 September attacks. I do
not imagine that any one of us would seek to impose
such a costly and unsustainable burden on any of our
Member States, which would also violate the self-
defence provisions of Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We also have no choice but to deal with the brute
reality that the reform process of the United Nations
and all its bodies, and other multilateral organizations,
has got to recognize the reality of the imbalance of
power, as represented by different countries and
regions. At the same time, we must proceed from the
position that such distribution of power is not
necessarily in the interests of the peoples of the world,
or even in the interests of those who today have the
power to determine what happens to our common
world. That includes acceptance of the fact that,
depending on the place we occupy in the global
community, we have different priorities. Among other
things, the rich are concerned about ways and means to
maintain the status quo, from which they benefit. In
practical terms that means that all matters that threaten
to destabilize the status quo must necessarily be
anathema to such people. Such matters will therefore
be an issue of principal concern to them. Necessarily
and understandably, they will then seek to get the rest
of the world to accept their assertion that the
maintenance of the status quo must be a universal
human preoccupation, precisely the kind of issue on
which the United Nations must take a united position.
On the other hand, the poor are interested in
changing their conditions for the better. Accordingly,
they will not accept the maintenance of the status quo,
which perpetuates their poverty. Accordingly, among
other things, the poor billions of the world will argue
for action by the United Nations to ensure the transfer
of resources to themselves, which will enable them to
extricate themselves from their condition of poverty
and underdevelopment, consistent with the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
the objectives of the Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development and other international
agreements. Inevitably, that will run counter to the
propositions of those who are more powerful than the
poor, namely, the Governments, peoples and countries
that keep them afloat with development assistance.
That will require   whether it is stated or not   that
the recipients of that assistance understand that such
assistance can dry up.
Important shifts in the global balance of power
and global objectives have taken place since the United
Nations was established, 58 years ago. The
Organization has not substantially changed, in terms of
its structures and mode of functioning, to reflect those
changes. That has served as a recipe for an inevitable
crisis, a disaster waiting to occur. And so as we meet
today we are confronted by global challenges that the
global Organization cannot solve. Impelled by the
urgent issues of the day, some of the powerful will not
wait for all of us to respond to the problems we have
raised, and which they face. They will act to solve
those problems; their actions will make the statement
that they do not need the United Nations to find
solutions to those problems. Simultaneously, that will
make the practical statement that the United Nations is
irrelevant to the solution of the most pending problems
of our day. The disempowered will continue to look to
the Organization, understanding, correctly, that they are
too weak to advance their interests singly outside the
collective voice of the United Nations. In that regard,
they expect that the United Nations will be informed by
its founding documents and other solemn decisions it
has taken since it was established, all of which have
been approved by successive sessions of the General
Assembly.
26

Global poverty and underdevelopment are the
principal problems that face the United Nations.
Billions across the world expect that the General
Assembly will address that challenge in a meaningful
manner. The masses of people of our world expect that
the statements we will make at this session of the
General Assembly as representatives of various
Governments will indicate a serious commitment to
implement what we say. The poor of the world expect
an end to violence and war everywhere. They want an
end to the killing that is taking too many Israeli and
Palestinian lives. They want Africans to stop killing
one another, continuing to convey the message that we
are incapable of living in peace among ourselves. They
desire the realization of the democratic objective
universally: that the people shall govern. They believe
that we are seriously committed to the objective of the
eradication of poverty and the provision of a better life
for all. They think that we mean it when we say that we
will not allow the process of globalization to result in
the further enrichment of the rich and the
impoverishment of the poor within and between
countries. They believe us when we say that our
collective future is one of hope, and not despair. They
are keenly interested to know whether our gathering,
the United Nations General Assembly, will produce
those results.
To collectively meet those requirements will
require that each and every one of us   both rich and
poor, the powerful and the disempowered   commit
ourselves practically to act in all circumstances in a
manner that recognizes and respects the fact that none
of us is an island sufficient unto ourselves. That
includes the most powerful. The latter face the
interesting challenge, important to themselves in their
national interests, that the poverty and
disempowerment of the billions will no longer serve as
a condition for their success and their possibility to
prosper in conditions of peace.
What we have said today may not be heard,
because we do not have the strength to have our voice
heard. Tomorrow we may be obliged to say, No more
water; the fire next time. As the fires burn, the United
Nations will die, consumed by the flames. So will the
hopes of the poor of the world die, as they did at
Cancun, Mexico, not so long ago. We must act together
to say in our words and in our actions, as countries and
as the United Nations, that there will be water next
time, and not fire.












﻿Please allow me warmly to congratulate Mr. Hunte, on
his assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its fifty-eighth session. I would also like
to thank Mr. Jan Kavan for his valuable contribution as
President of the General Assembly at its last session.
I also take this opportunity to express my
heartfelt condolences on the recent tragic deaths in
Baghdad of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, and
other United Nations staff members.
The twenty-first century is about to complete its
third year, with hope and distress coexisting side by
28

side. Peace and development remain the overriding
themes of the times and the shared aspirations of
people of all races, colours and nationalities. The
concept of democracy and equality has planted deep
roots in the hearts of the people. The shared
confrontation of global challenges through stronger
coordination and cooperation has become the
consensus of the international community.
Countries are increasingly closer in their
economic relations. Advanced means of
communications have made it possible to share
information in real time. With their interests closely
connected and intertwined, countries are finding
themselves more and more like passengers in the same
boat. Regional cooperation has grown substantially in
both depth and scope, with cooperation mechanisms
taking shape at various levels. Regional economic
integration is forging ahead in many parts of the world.
There are, however, many worrisome aspects of
the international situation. Local wars and conflicts
continue to emerge sporadically. Although the Iraq war
is over, peace remains elusive, with no end of suffering
in sight for the Iraqi people. With the situation between
Israel and Palestine still experiencing ups and downs,
the Middle East peace process remains a long, uphill
journey. In Africa, wars are still raging in some
countries.
Non-traditional security concerns such as
terrorism, drug-trafficking, arms proliferation, the
spread of diseases and environmental degradation have
become more pronounced. Given modern conditions,
they can easily spread within regions or even across the
world, making the security situation of human
communities even more complicated.
Humankind still confronts severe challenges in its
development. In the past 30 years, the number of least
developed countries has doubled, reaching 50, which
accounts for one quarter of the United Nations
membership. The ever-widening gap between the North
and South and the aggravated disparity between the
rich and the poor have become a major factor breeding
new conflicts and wars and undermining regional
stability.
At a moment like this, people are inevitably
pondering the same question: in the interest of world
peace and common development, what kind of new
world order should we establish in the twenty-first
century?
China is of the view that the future well-being of
humankind hinges on closer international cooperation
and a multipolar world. We should promote democracy
in international relations. Multipolarization does not
mean back-pedalling into the age of spheres of
influence or a replay of the now long-gone rivalry of
major Powers. It simply means bringing about a new
regime of international relations under which all
countries — big or small, rich or poor, strong or
weak — are treated as equals, and under which no
country has the right to impose its will on others.
We should cultivate a new security concept based
on the principles of mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and cooperation. Security should be
maintained through cooperation, and disputes should
be resolved peacefully through dialogue. The frequent
use of force and the threat of its use should be avoided.
The practice of building one’s own security at the
expense of others should be rejected.
We should support diversity in the process of
development. Our world is a place of many colours and
styles. A single musical note cannot make a melody,
nor does a phonetic alphabet make a language. Human
wisdom has produced so many civilizations, allowing
us to follow different paths of development and a
variety of values. It is through the exchanges,
emulations and integrations of diverse cultures that
human reason and wisdom shine brilliantly.
We should dedicate ourselves to the
empowerment of developing countries in their large
numbers. The developing countries, which make up
three quarters of the world’s population, should
become a key pillar of a multipolar world. Without
their extensive participation on an equal footing, there
will be no democracy in international relations or a fair
and rational world order. Without their economic
revitalization, there can be no common development of
all humankind to speak of.
We should step up multilateral cooperation.
Multilateral cooperation in various forms should
become the principal vehicle in the handling of
international affairs. Countries should join hands in
taking on global challenges through globalized
cooperation.
In a multipolar world, countries should respect
and consult with one another politically, strive for
common development by helping one another
economically, prosper together by drawing on one
29

another’s cultural strengths and jointly maintain
security through mutual trust, thus working hand in
hand to realize the peace and prosperity of humankind.
More than half a century ago, our forefathers
gathered to give birth to the United Nations. The past
58 years have seen the Organization’s notable
accomplishments in preserving peace in regions and
around the world and in promoting human development
and progress. The spirit of the United Nations
Charter — characterized by such words as “to live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours”
and “to promote social progress and better standards of
life in large freedom” — has been widely accepted in
the international community.
The United Nations has become the most
universal, most representative and most authoritative
international organization in the world today. This is
what history affirms and what reality mandates.
China maintains that in the current situation the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
should be adhered to and earnestly abided by with a
view to realizing democracy, the rule of law in
international relations and the mutually advantageous
coexistence of the countries of the world.
In handling affairs affecting regional or
international peace, all Member States are obliged to
maintain the leading role and authority of the United
Nations and its Security Council. China is in favour of
an important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s post-
war arrangements and reconstruction and supports the
restoration of sovereignty to the Iraqi people at an early
date.
China also supports the United Nations carrying
out the necessary reforms to enhance its role and
effectiveness in the light of changing circumstances.
The United Nations is a microcosm of our world.
The world’s hope rests on a strong United Nations. In
order to build a better future for humankind, it is
incumbent upon us first to turn the United Nations into
a forum for cooperation instead of an arena of
recrimination. No country is entirely populated by
saints and therefore no country should have the right to
throw the stones of prejudice.
To that end, we should forsake all the old
baggage of arrogance, estrangement and narrow-
mindedness and let harmony, understanding and
tolerance ring out loudly as the undiminished themes of
this great Hall. The ocean is made great by all the
rivers it takes in. Let that be the motto of all Member
States.
Development is the foundation for world peace
and human progress. We stand for stronger
international cooperation and the achievement of
common development.
The current state of affairs — in which the gap
between the North and the South has been widening
without pause, with some countries of the South
languishing in dire poverty — must be changed without
further delay. The key lies in establishing a fair and
equitable new world economic order in response to the
requirements of economic globalization.
An open and fair multilateral trading regime
should be established and improved. The principles of
mutual understanding and mutual accommodation
should be followed to bring about due progress in
multilateral trade talks. Close attention should be given
to reforming and improving the international financial
system, setting up a financial early-warning mechanism
and enhancing the capacity of countries to prevent and
deal with financial crises.
Stronger South-South cooperation and North-
South exchanges should be promoted. The developing
countries should step up their cooperation and
coordination and gradually change their
disadvantageous position in the economic globalization
process. This coming December, the second ministerial
conference of the China-Africa Cooperation Forum
will be held in Addis Ababa, where the two sides will
work together to deepen their equality-based and
mutually beneficial cooperation and open up a new
horizon in South-South cooperation.
The developed countries should also shoulder
their duties and responsibilities by giving greater
support to the developing countries in the areas of
market access, funding, technology transfer, debt relief
and trade terms.
All human communities make an organic whole
when it comes to development. When hundreds of
millions of fellow human beings are suffering from
cold and hunger, the rich countries should not nor
cannot enjoy their riches by themselves for long. The
striking contrast in wealth is eroding the very dignity
that all human beings share. Upon the monstrous gap
30

between the North and South cannot stand the great
edifice of future prosperity.
While addressing the development issue, it is
necessary to highlight the need for a harmonious
development of the economy and society.
At present, humankind’s further development is
being increasingly hampered by excessive population
growth, environmental degradation, energy depletion,
the decline and demise of indigenous cultures, and
other constraints. Sustainable development can be truly
realized only when there is harmony, mutual
complementarity and mutual promotion between the
economy and society, and between their development
and nature.
In the first half of the year, SARS struck a
number of regions and countries, which testifies yet
again to the crucial importance of public health in the
context of development. While countries should
strengthen their public health systems, the world in
general should enhance its capacity to deal with major
diseases and disasters through an improved globalized
contingency response mechanism.
The Chinese Government supports the proposal
made by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
certain countries at the fifty-sixth World Health
Assembly for the establishment of a global fund
against SARS and is ready to contribute to it. We call
on all countries to support the United Nations in its
relevant activities, including incorporating public
health into United Nations development programmes
and other action plans and promoting regional and
international cooperation in this regard.
Last fall, the Communist Party of China convened
its 16th National Congress, which called for the
building, during the first two decades of the twenty-
first century, of a society that is well off in all respects.
This past spring, a new Chinese Central Government
was elected at the 10th National People’s Congress —
thus a smooth leadership transition was realized.
In the first half of the year, the people of China
put up a heroic fight against SARS and won a
resounding victory. Many friendly countries and
personalities in the world, together with the World
Health Organization and other United Nations
agencies, have rendered us valuable support and
assistance, for which I wish to express our heartfelt
gratitude.
China has kept its economic growth in high gear.
The first two quarters saw the nation’s gross domestic
product grow by 8.2 per cent over the corresponding
period of last year, and foreign trade grow by 39 per
cent. China’s economic efficiency has improved
markedly, and its reforms on all fronts are progressing
in an orderly way.
Needless to say, China is a developing country. It
still has a long way to go before all its citizens can live
a comfortable, even affluent life. Development,
therefore, remains China’s top priority.
China’s development requires a peaceful
international and surrounding environment. We will
continue to pursue an independent foreign policy of
peace and will seek to play a constructive role in
regional and international affairs.
China will continue to push for friendship and
good-neighbourliness in the interest of peace and
tranquillity in the region. Based on our support for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula on which peace and
stability should be maintained, we initiated and
sponsored the three-party Beijing talks and the first
round of six-party talks. China remains committed to
resolving the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
peacefully through dialogue and the building of a
lasting peace there.
To develop, China needs the world, and a
prosperous world also needs China. The market and
cooperation potential unleashed by a rapidly
developing China could bring fresh and immeasurable
opportunities to the region and to the world at large.
We desire peace, stability and development. We
aspire to equality, mutual benefit and a win-win result
for all. Conforming to the tide of history, China has
opted for the path of peaceful development, linking its
rejuvenation with that of the region, with the interests
of the majority of countries, and with the lofty cause of
peace and development for humanity. We hereby
pledge our continued and ever-greater contribution to
world prosperity and progress.





﻿I wish to
begin by congratulating the President, on his election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session and wish him every success with his work. I
also wish to thank his predecessor, President Kavan,
for the dedication with which he presided over the
fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
I also wish to endorse the statements made by the
Italian presidency on behalf of the European Union.
This year is a special one for Germany’s work
within the United Nations. History is both a reminder
and a guide for us. Thirty years ago, on 18 September
1973, the United Nations welcomed Germany back into
the fold of the family of nations. My predecessor,
Federal Chancellor Willy Brandt, paved the way for
that move. His standing as an anti-fascist inspired
confidence for Germany. His passionate commitment to
internationalism went far beyond the policy of détente
in the then East-West conflict.
In 1980 he made an urgent appeal to the
community of States with a report entitled “North-
South, A Programme for Survival”. He wrote:
“The globalization of the dangers resulting from
wars, chaos and self-destruction calls for a
domestic policy that goes far beyond national
borders.”
We are strongly committed to this task, and I
think that we Germans are not the only ones who are
committed to it, because, as I said, history is our guide.
It guides us towards intensive international
cooperation, of course under the auspices of the United
Nations, that we must strengthen through courageous
reforms. It guides us towards a universal order based
on the rule of law and human dignity, on good,
responsible governance and prosperity that is truly
shared by all people. It also guides us towards security
and peace through comprehensive prevention. We must
act resolutely by pursuing an effective multilateral
strategy wherever peace is threatened and human rights
are violated. But we must act just as resolutely to
prevent conflict and create stable structures so that
people can lead their lives in freedom and tolerance
with one another.
Thirty years ago, Germany was a country with
limited sovereignty, divided by the Iron Curtain. Today,
Germany is a sovereign nation, a civil Power in the
heart of a united Europe. We live in a common area of
freedom, the rule of law, prosperity and social
responsibility. This goes to show that development
towards justice and peace is indeed possible and we
shall not cease to support endeavours to that end
anywhere in the world, be it in the Middle East, in
Africa or in any other crisis area. Bearing in mind our
own history, we are indeed assuming responsibility for
a cooperative policy of peace. This we do by
employing economic, political and humanitarian
means.
But we are also assuming military responsibility,
shoulder to shoulder with our partners in NATO and
the European Union, where there is absolutely no other
way to secure peace and protect human beings. Today,
more than 9,000 members of the German armed forces
and police are deployed on international peace
missions. Our top priority is our commitment to peace
in Afghanistan. Germany is willing to maintain its
commitment there in the long term and we are ready to
increase it beyond its present scope. The basis for such
commitment is the Charter of the United Nations.
In the Unification Treaty, Germany vowed that it
would only deploy its armed forces within the
framework of this Charter. The Charter provides us
with “the necessary building blocks to ensure that our
common humanity is an inclusive one, built on values
such as tolerance and dignity”. These were the words
of Sergio Vieira de Mello, who on 19 August 2003 fell
victim to an underhanded criminal attack in Baghdad.
He was killed along with 22 others, including many
members of the United Nations staff working for the
people of Iraq and their hopes of a better future.
We are deeply affected by their deaths and must
honour them by taking on their legacy. Our response
must be to strengthen the role and commitment of the
United Nations in Iraq. Only the United Nations can
guarantee the legitimacy required to enable the people
of Iraq to speedily rebuild their country under an
independent, representative Government. Germany
stands ready to support such a process. We are ready to
24

provide humanitarian, technical and economic
assistance and could also train Iraqi security personnel.
International terrorism, failing States and the
dangers posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction all threaten our joint security. The obvious
question is: What must be done to truly enhance
security? We must capture the terrorists and their
masters and destroy their infrastructure. There can be
no doubt that we must prevent any further proliferation
of nuclear weapons. We must strengthen the
inspections regimes and pursue a policy of controlled
disarmament.
But as we know from history, as well as our own
experience, to follow any strategy focused narrowly on
the military and the police would be a recipe for
failure. Rather, what is needed is to address the root
causes of terrorism and insecurity. To combat
fanaticism, we must ensure social and material as well
as cultural security. That can only be achieved on the
basis of a broad concept of security. If we want to
outlaw infamy we must put an end to lawlessness. That
is the core task, indeed, of the international courts of
justice and especially the International Criminal Court.
In order to win hearts and minds for freedom,
peace and an open society, we must help people to
acquire a greater stake in society, build better lives for
them and provide them with a secure environment.
Afghanistan is a good example of this. There, the
international community succeeded in liberating the
Afghan people from the scourge of the Taliban and
al Qaeda.
At the same time, the Petersberg Conference on
Afghanistan, held in Bonn under the auspices of the
United Nations, created a political framework for
rebuilding the country. This process needs our
continued support. There must also be sustained
international commitment to the task of strengthening
security. In the long run, the fight against terrorism can
be won only if people see that it produces tangible
benefits in their everyday lives. They need to
experience at first hand that being once again part of
the international community means not only greater
freedom and more security, but also entails better
development opportunities and a greater stake in
society.
There is no doubt that we have already made
major strides towards realizing our common goals
enshrined in the United Nations Charter. More
countries than ever before now have democratic
Governments. Our concerted efforts have enabled more
people than ever before to put poverty behind them.
But we must note that the gap between the world’s rich
and poor has still not been closed and the fight against
hunger, injustice and oppression is still far from won.
For this reason, eradicating poverty remains an
imperative of our policy for peace and stability.
There has been a drastic reduction in the number
of wars fought between States. In the Balkans, for
example, resolute action by NATO and the United
Nations enabled us to put an end to certain wars and
prevent others from breaking out in the first place.
Nevertheless, our world has become — and not just
since the barbaric terrorist attacks in New York and
Washington or indeed Bali, Casablanca, Moscow or
Djerba — a dramatically more insecure place. New
threats that no country in the world can tackle
effectively on its own, make international cooperation
more vital than ever before. Such threats also require
new strategies and that is why we are all called upon to
review whether the instruments available to the United
Nations are still appropriate for tackling these new
challenges. We all have a responsibility to ensure that
people and their rights are also protected in situations
other than inter-State wars. They must be protected
from genocide and the consequences of random
violence as well. A political commitment to
comprehensive prevention must further strengthen the
United Nations monopoly on the use of force as well as
the institutions of international law.
Within the United Nations we need to muster the
strength to launch overdue institutional reforms. My
Government fully and wholeheartedly supports the
proposals made by the Secretary-General. We must
agree how to ensure in the future an even better
allocation of abilities, skills and scarce resources. I
also share the view of the Secretary-General that the
legitimacy of the Security Council depends on how
well it represents all nations and all regions. It is true
that the Council must be reformed and enlarged. First
and foremost, it must also include more representatives
of the developing countries. Let me reiterate that in the
context of such reform Germany is ready to assume
greater responsibility.
The world of the twenty-first century offers us, its
inhabitants, ample scope for change, for better or
worse. Given the wealth of opportunities and the
immense dangers ahead, we have no choice but to
25

strive for greater international partnership and expand
and strengthen multilateralism. We will only be able to
make our world a more secure place if we can also
make it more fair and equitable. It was for that very
purpose, after all, that the international community
created the United Nations. That is its mandate. Let us
join together to make the United Nations even stronger.
Let us make sure that it can fulfil its mandate to
maintain international peace and security and that it
can achieve greater justice for all.





﻿Sergio
Vieira de Mello was the pride of the United Nations.
Murdered on 19 August along with his colleagues, he
will remain in our memories. Let us dedicate this
session to that great servant of the world and of peace.
The United Nations has just emerged from one of
the most serious challenges in its history. Respect for
the Charter and the use of force were at the heart of the
debate. The war, which was launched without the
Security Council's authorization, has undermined the
multilateral system.
Having come to terms with that crisis, our
Organization can now continue to move forward; for it
is above all in this forum   the melting pot of the
international order   that we must exercise our
responsibilities to the world of today as well as to
future generations.
In an open world no one can live in isolation, no
one can act alone in the name of all and no one can
accept the anarchy of a society without rules. There is
no alternative to the United Nations. But in order to
meet today's challenges, this fundamental choice,
expressed by the Charter, requires a far-reaching
reform of our Organization.
Multilateralism is crucial, because it ensures the
participation of all in the management of world affairs.
It is a guarantee of legitimacy and democracy,
especially when decisions must be made with respect to
the use of force or to the laying down of universal
norms.
15

Multilateralism is effective. In Monterrey and
Johannesburg, it allowed us to transcend North-South
confrontation and to open the way to promising
partnerships, in particular with the African continent.
Multilateralism is modern, because it alone makes
it possible to comprehend contemporary problems
globally and in all of their complexity.
First, let me touch on the settlement of conflicts
that threaten international peace and security.
In Iraq, the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqis,
who must have sole responsibility for their destiny, is
essential for stability and reconstruction. It is up to the
United Nations to lend its legitimacy to that process. It
is also up to the United Nations to assist with the
gradual transfer of administrative and economic
responsibilities to the Iraqi institutions, according to a
realistic timetable, and to help the Iraqis draft a
constitution and hold general elections.
Finally, it is up to the United Nations to entrust a
mandate to a multinational force, commanded,
naturally, by the main troop contributor   that is, the
United States   in order to ensure the security of Iraq
and of all those helping to rebuild the country.
Thus the international community and the Iraqi
people, united around a common project, will together
put an end to the tragic decades of that great country's
history.
In the Middle East, ravaged by despair and
hatred, only strong political will on both sides to
implement the law as stipulated by the United Nations
can pave the way for a just and lasting solution.
The international community must restore a
dynamic for peace. It must involve itself in the
implementation of the road map. That should be the
objective of the upcoming meeting of the Quartet, to be
held at the ministerial level. France believes that the
idea of a monitoring mechanism is as relevant as ever,
and that the convening of an international conference is
a goal to be attained as quickly as possible.
Given the present tense situation, France calls on
the parties not to succumb to the temptation of a test of
strength and of a futile radicalization.
Another major challenge is the fight against
international terrorism. This fight is well under way,
under the auspices of the Security Council and within
the context of our treaties. The horror of 11 September
cemented our common resolve. This threat strikes at
the very heart of our democracies and our societies. We
are using force to combat terrorism, but that is not
enough. It will re-emerge again and again if we allow
extremism and fanaticism to flourish   if we fail to
realize that it seeks justification in the world's
unresolved conflicts and economic and social
imbalances.
Given the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, we reject the policy of fait accompli. We
must stand united to guarantee the universality of
treaties and the effectiveness of non-proliferation
regimes. In order to ensure compliance, we must also
develop our means of action. France has proposed the
creation of a permanent corps of inspectors under the
authority of the Security Council. Let us give fresh
impetus to this policy. Let us convene a summit
meeting of the Security Council to outline a true plan
of action of the United Nations against proliferation.
At this time, let us demand that North Korea
completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle its
military programme. Let us demand that Iran sign and
implement, unconditionally and without delay, a
strengthened nuclear safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Sustainable development poses yet another
challenge, because half of humankind is living in
conditions of insecurity or extreme poverty. Will we be
able to globalize solidarity, as our peoples demand, in
response to the inevitable globalization of the
economy?
We agree on the objectives. We are bound by the
Millennium Goals. But, in order to attain those goals,
strong political impetus remains necessary. I propose
that heads of State and Government meet in New York
in 2005 for a preliminary progress review. I hope that
this session of the General Assembly will confirm the
determination of States to overcome the failure of
Cancun and to ensure the success of the Doha
Development Round.
In order to carry out the missions entrusted to it
and to remedy its blatant shortcomings, the United
Nations must evolve. Three watchwords, I believe,
must guide us: democracy, authority, effectiveness.
Thanks to the Secretary-General, progress has been
made, and new avenues are opening up. It is now up to
States to move forward without further ado and to put
16

an end to the adverse consequences of the stalemate
over reforms.
The United Nations is suffering from the current
weakness of the General Assembly. And yet, it is here
that a debate should be organized and a consensus
crafted regarding solutions to major problems. A
culture of confrontation must give way to a culture of
action aimed at achieving our common goals, which we
should determine together.
The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security rests with the Security Council. It is
therefore essential to its legitimacy that its composition
reflect the state of the world. It must be expanded to
include new permanent members, because the presence
of major countries is necessary. France, naturally, is
thinking of Germany and of Japan, but also of some
leading countries of Asia, Africa and America. We also
need new elected members, to make the Council even
more representative. With the decisive impetus of the
five permanent members, we all need to resume
discussions, mindful of the general interest.
Such reform should be accompanied by a
strengthening of the Council's authority. It is the
Council that should set the bounds with respect to the
use of force. No one can claim the right to use force
unilaterally and preventively. Conversely, in the face of
mounting threats, States must be assured that the
Council has at its disposal the appropriate means of
evaluation and of collective action, and that it has the
will to act.
We all are very committed to the sovereignty of
States. But its scope can and should be limited in the
case of serious violations of human rights and of
humanitarian law. The Security Council is taking steps
in that direction, and France supports this development.
Meanwhile, crimes against humanity are being
suppressed more effectively with the establishment of
the International Criminal Court, whose jurisdiction is
universal. This historic step forward must be
accompanied by a strengthening of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, under a
commission equipped to discharge its duties and its
mission.
We now realize that globalization demands
stronger economic, social and environmental
governance. To that end, France proposes the creation
of a new political forum representative of the present
economic state of today's world in all its diversity.
That council would be responsible for providing the
necessary impetus to international institutions, for
improving their coordination and for anticipating and
tackling global problems more effectively.
Effectiveness also depends on increased financial
resources. France calls for two changes.
First, the trend towards increasing voluntary
contributions at the expense of mandatory
contributions must be reversed. Failing that, we will
end up with a pick-and-choose United Nations, which
is an outdated vision and a harmful one.
Secondly, we need to make progress in
mobilizing funds for development and development
assistance. France wants to meet the official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent by the
year 2012. But this effort, together with that of the
European Union, will obviously not suffice to release
the necessary funds needed to finance the Millennium
Goals each year. France therefore supports the
innovative concept of an international financial facility.
I would also like us to give pragmatic, speedy
consideration to international solidarity levies, a kind
of tax on the wealth generated by globalization and
given over to development.
To advance on these issues, I completely approve
of the Secretary-General's intention to gather around
him a committee of independent wise men and women
responsible for submitting proposals.
Against the risk of a world without order
delivered up to violence, let us work to establish the
rule of international law. Against the injustice and
suffering of a world of widening inequalities   even
though it has never been so rich   let us choose
solidarity. Against the chaos of a world shaken by
ecological disasters, let us call for a sharing of
responsibility around a United Nations environmental
organization. Against the barbarity of a world in which
fundamental rights are all too often held up to ridicule,
where the integrity of mankind is under threat, where
indigenous peoples   the heirs to an irreplaceable
heritage   vanish amid silence and indifference, let us
uphold the demands of ethics. Against the peril of a
clash of civilizations, finally, let us insist on the equal
dignity of cultures, respect for diversity and the value
of dialogue.
17

With the Charter adopted in the name of the
Peoples of the United Nations, the founders proclaimed
their faith in these ideals. Let us seek to be worthy of
them. Let us establish the United Nations at the heart
of this planetary democracy that is so vital in our day
and age.


﻿I begin by paying a tribute to Dr.
Akila Al-Hashimi, a senior member of the Iraqi
Governing Council, who died earlier today.
I had the privilege of meeting Dr. Al-Hashimi
earlier this year in London and later in Baghdad, and I
was struck by her courage and her dedication to the
Iraqi people. Dr. Al-Hashimi was murdered by those
who would deny the Iraqi people the democratic,
prosperous future they so richly deserve. The best
service that we can render her memory is to defeat the
terrorists and to ensure that her vision of a peaceful,
free Iraq prevails.
Of course, we owe this service to all those who
have fallen in the cause of peace in Iraq. Sergio Vieira
de Mello and the United Nations personnel who were
killed or injured in the blast in Baghdad on 19 August
were committed to bringing the ideals of the United
Nations to the people of Iraq. They paid the ultimate
sacrifice for their dedication. We mourn their loss, but
we will not weaken in our resolve to help the Iraqi
people rebuild their country on the principles of justice
and security.
What, I think, makes Iraq so important was the
way in which it tested the role and purpose of this
institution over more than a dozen years. Throughout
that period, the international community remained in
agreement that the regime of Saddam Hussein posed a
Chapter VII threat to international peace and security
by its proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its unparalleled defiance of the will of
the United Nations. Yet, earlier this year, sadly, we
divided on when and what action was necessary to deal
with the Iraqi threat.
Of course, I acknowledge the controversy over
the military action which the United Kingdom, the
United States and others took and the heavy
responsibilities we now bear, but I firmly believe that
the decisions we took were the right ones. The
authority of the United Nations was at stake. Having
given Saddam Hussein’s regime a final opportunity to
comply with the United Nations, what would have
happened if we had simply turned away? Would the
world be a safer place today? Would Iraq be a better
place today? Would the United Nations be a stronger
institution today? The answer to each of those
questions is no. Saddam Hussein would have been
emboldened by our failure to act; every dictator would
have been encouraged to follow his example; and the
authority of this United Nations would have been
gravely weakened.
Yet, whatever the arguments of the spring, we
have now to come together again for a common
purpose. As the Security Council has recognized in its
three resolutions 1472 (2003), 1483 (2003) and 1500
(2003), we have a shared interest in helping Iraqi
citizens to embrace the rights and freedoms which they
have been denied so long and for which this institution
was founded. Yes, the security situation does present
formidable challenges. Terrorists who despise freedom
are seeking to plunge Iraq into chaos. They have
inflicted terrible blows on the Iraqi people, coalition
soldiers and international aid workers, but ultimately
they will fail.
And let us also not lose sight of what has been
achieved and what is taking shape. Saddam Hussein’s
reign of terror is over. The apparatus of torture and
oppression which claimed hundreds of thousands of
31
 
lives is at an end. Instead, we have the beginnings of a
representative Government run by Iraqis for Iraqis;
new ministries providing daily services to the people; a
free press; the freedom for members of all religious
communities to worship as they wish; hospitals and
schools in operation; bustling traffic on the streets and
highways; and a start to real economic regeneration.
We shall stay in Iraq as long, but only as long, as
it is necessary to meet our clear responsibilities and to
restore sovereignty to the Iraqi people as quickly as we
can in an orderly manner. I hope very much that we can
agree a new Security Council resolution to strengthen
the United Nations role in Iraq. In managing this
transition, we should be guided by three central
principles: first, the transfer of powers must reflect
realities on the ground in Iraq, particularly the need to
ensure security; secondly, the Iraqi institutions must be
sufficiently robust to take on increasing responsibilities;
and thirdly, the exercise of executive powers and
responsibilities must be based on good governance,
involving representative Iraqi authorities and coherent
constitutional arrangements. In other words, the timetable
should be driven by the needs of the Iraqi people and their
capacity progressively to assume democratic control,
rather than by fixing arbitrary deadlines.
Iraq is, sadly, not the only territory in the Middle
East where the international community faces great
challenges. Three months ago, we all had high hopes
about the work of the Quartet of the United Nations,
the European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United States in Israel and the occupied territories. It is
tragic that these hopes were blown apart on 19 August
by the terrorist atrocity in Jerusalem, which came only
a few hours after the terrorist atrocity against the
United Nations in Baghdad, but the international
community has to stay united on both the means and
the ends in the Middle East. There are no alternatives
to the road map and there can be no alternatives to the
outcome the entire world wishes to see — two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security. This can be the only fitting memorial to the
thousands who have died on both sides since the
beginning of this appalling conflict.
The breadth of the issues being tackled by the
United Nations and its agencies demonstrates the
continued relevance of this institution. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee has given the United Nations a
focus for its work following  September two years
ago, but we must now build upon that work, giving the
Committee the expertise and the remit to reinforce the
capacity of Member States to tackle and to overcome
terrorism.
We also know that proliferation is one of the
greatest threats we face alongside terrorism. Much
good work on proliferation is being done by United
Nations agencies, particularly the International Atomic
Energy Agency, but it is extraordinary that the Security
Council itself has not addressed the issue of
proliferation for over 10 years. In our judgement, it is
time that it did.
Problems of internal conflict, on the other hand,
are regularly on the Security Council’s agenda. The
United Nations has unrivalled expertise and experience
in this area and has achieved great things in countries
as far apart as East Timor and Sierra Leone, but nation-
building is a collaborative effort, requiring the
resources and commitment of Member States if the
United Nations peace-building is to be effective. We
therefore need new mechanisms to help prevent
conflicts and then to help States before they collapse.
We must also make a real success of the
Millennium Declaration. We have to overcome the
setback of Cancún and secure a positive outcome to the
Doha Round.
These and other shared problems require
collective responses, as our Secretary-General so
eloquently said here in his speech on Tuesday. A key to
this is to ensure that the United Nations itself remains
an effective global forum capable of delivering results.
The Secretary-General posed some difficult questions
two days ago. I welcome his initiative to seek the
advice of a distinguished group to make proposals on
reform. I welcome, too, his parallel commitment to
modernizing the United Nations and its agencies.
For our part, the United Kingdom is committed to
making the Security Council more representative. The
issue is not whether but how to do this. A bigger and
more representative Council, however, will not of itself
make it easier to make the tough choices which it has
to face so often. The most important ingredient is the
political will and determination of the members of the
Council to take effective action.
The most important part of the Secretary-
General’s speech on Tuesday was about the choices
now confronting the United Nations. He was right
about those. We have indeed come to a fork in the road.
32
 
Down one route lies a world in which the United
Nations strengthens its role as the collective instrument
for protecting our peace and security; down the other
route lies a world in which collective action becomes a
synonym for “inaction”. We must not take this second
route. The Secretary-General’s speech was a challenge
to all of us. We all share a world in which international
terrorists strike down the innocent, regardless of faith
or nationality, and we are all less secure when weapons
of mass destruction are in reckless hands. We do not
have the luxury simply of rejecting unilateralism, while
proposing no multilateral means of confronting and
dealing with these threats.
The British Government is profoundly
committed, as it always has been, to the ideals of the
United Nations. To us, the importance of this
Organization has always been its ability to put those
high ideals into effect. We will work wholeheartedly
with the Secretary-General and the international
community to ensure that the United Nations retains
and strengthens both its idealism and its effectiveness.












﻿Mr. President, we
congratulate you on your election to the presidency of
the fifty-eighth session of the United Nations General
Assembly. We wish you every success in our shared
endeavours. You will have our fullest cooperation in
your efforts.
As we gather here, in the wake of the many
momentous events over the past year, it is inevitable
that we should ponder some fundamental questions
about the role and relevance of the United Nations.
The United Nations was charged by its Charter
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war.” The Charter also speaks of our collective
determination “to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security.” There was an implicit
conviction that the United Nations would be stronger
than the sum of its constituent Member States. Its
unique legitimacy flows from a universal perception
that it pursues a larger purpose than the interests of one
country or a small group of countries.
This vision of an enlightened multilateralism has
not materialized. There have been difficulties and
deficiencies in ensuring a world free from strife, a world
without war. The United Nations has not always been
successful in preventing conflicts or in resolving them.
During the past year, the United Nations
encountered new challenges. We saw the extraordinary
inability of the five permanent members of the Security
Council to agree on action in respect of Iraq, in spite of
complete agreement on basic objectives. Most recently,
the brutal terrorist attack on the United Nations Office
in Baghdad struck a body blow at the United Nations’
humanitarian efforts there.
Looking back at events over recent years, we can
analyse the successes and failures of the United
Nations in this or that crisis. But it would be more
purposeful to reflect on our own commitment to
multilateralism, the extent of its applicability in the
real world of today, and the manner in which it can be
exercised through the United Nations. The reality is
that an international institution like the United Nations
can only be as effective as its Members allow it to be.
Our reflections on the United Nations should
focus on three key aspects:
First, we need to introspect on some of the
assumptions that have been made over the years
concerning the will and reach of the United Nations. In
the euphoria after the Cold War, there was a misplaced
notion that the United Nations could solve every
problem anywhere. Its enthusiasm and proactive stance
on many issues reflected laudable intentions. But we
soon realized that the United Nations does not possess
magical powers to solve every crisis in all parts of the
globe or to change overnight the motivation of leaders
and communities around the world. //We need to
clearly recognize, with a sense of realism, the limits to
what the United Nations can achieve, and the changes
of form and function required for it to play an optimal
role in today’s world. We need to clearly recognize,
with a sense of realism, the limits to what the United
Nations can achieve, and the changes that it needs to
make to its form and function to play an optimal role in
today’s world.
Secondly, the Iraq issue has inevitably generated
a debate on the functioning and the efficacy of the
Security Council and of the United Nations itself. Over
the decades, the United Nations membership has grown
enormously. The scope of its activities has expanded
greatly, with new specialized agencies and new
programmes. But in the political and security
dimensions of its activities, the United Nations has not
kept pace with the changes in the world. For the
Security Council to represent genuine multilateralism
in its decisions and actions, its membership must
reflect current world realities. Most United Nations
Members today recognize the need for an enlarged and
restructured Security Council, with more developing
countries as permanent and non-permanent members.
The permanent members guard their exclusivity. Some
States with weak claims want to ensure that others do
not enter the Council as permanent members. This
combination of complacency and negativism has to be
countered with a strong political will. The recent crises
should serve as a warning to us that until the Security
Council is reformed and restructured, its decisions
cannot truly reflect the collective will of the
community of nations.
Thirdly, even after such reform, the Security
Council would have to develop suitable decision-
making mechanisms that ensure better representation of
the collective will of the international community. How
can multilateralism be genuinely implemented? A
single veto is an anachronism in today’s world. On the
other hand, the requirement of unanimity can sabotage
imperative actions. A simple-majority vote may not be
15
 
sufficiently representative for major and serious issues.
Should we aim for the highest common factor, or
should we settle for the lowest common denominator?
Democratic countries could use their national
experience to provide feasible models for mechanisms
and determine the extent of support required based on
the impact of action to be taken.
The Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the
urgent need for reform of the institutions and processes
of the United Nations. We encourage his efforts in this
direction. We should seek to implement these reforms
within a specified time frame.
The Iraq issue continues to present a major
challenge to the United Nations. At this point in time,
it is not very productive to linger on the past. Our
thoughts and concerns should be about the suffering of
the people of Iraq. It is imperative that the people of
Iraq should be empowered to determine their own
future and to rebuild their nation.
The immediate priorities are ensuring security
and stability, restoration of basic facilities and
infrastructure and a road map of political processes for
a representative Iraqi Government. It is clear that the
United Nations has a crucial role to play in the process
of political and economic reconstruction of that
country. This has been acknowledged both by those
who had opposed military action and by those who did
not seek specific United Nations endorsement for it.
One issue on which the United Nations showed
remarkable unanimity after 11 September was global
terrorism. Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003) were unequivocal in condemning all
forms of terrorism and in calling for united action
against support, shelter, sponsorship, arming, training
and financing of terrorism or terrorists.
Unfortunately, the solidarity that was voiced has
not translated into coherent and effective action.
Terrorist acts continue to shatter our peace, from
Mombasa to Moscow and from Baghdad to Bali. India
has had more than its share of terrorism in various
parts of the country. The global coalition against
terrorism has registered successes in Afghanistan, but
has not been able to extend this elsewhere. Some of its
members are themselves part of the problem. We are
sometimes led to enter into semantic arguments over
the definition of terrorism. The search for root causes
or imaginary freedom struggles provides alibis for
killing innocent men, women and children.
There is much that the United Nations can do to
carry forward the war against international terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee should develop
measures to ensure compliance by Member States of
their obligations under Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1456 (2003). We should have credible
multilateral instruments to identify States that
contravene these resolutions. Multilateral mechanisms
must be created to detect and choke off international
financial flows to terrorists and terrorist organizations.
A much better international system of
information exchange and intelligence sharing needs to
be devised to prevent terrorists from evading capture
simply by crossing national borders. No State should
be allowed to profess partnership with the global
coalition against terror, while continuing to aid, abet
and sponsor terrorism. To condone such double
standards is to contribute to multiplying terrorism.
Yesterday, the President of Pakistan chose this
august Assembly to make a public admission for the
first time that Pakistan is sponsoring terrorism in
Jammu and Kashmir. After claiming that there is an
indigenous struggle in Kashmir, he has offered to
encourage a general cessation of violence within Kashmir,
in return for reciprocal obligations and restraints.
We totally refuse to let terrorism become a tool of
blackmail. Just as the world did not negotiate with al
Qaeda or the Taliban, we shall not negotiate with
terrorism. Were we to do so, we would be betraying the
people of Jammu and Kashmir, who defied a most
ferocious campaign of violence and intimidation
sponsored from across our borders and participated in
an election, which has been universally hailed as free
and fair. This was an unequivocal expression of both
determination and self-determination.
When the cross-border terrorism stops, or when
we eradicate it, we can have a dialogue with Pakistan
on the other issues between us.
While on this subject, I would also like to point
out to the President of Pakistan that he should not
confuse the legitimate aspiration for equality of nations
with outmoded concepts of military parity.
We should be particularly concerned at the
various recent revelations about clandestine transfers of
weapons of mass destruction and their technologies.
We face the frightening prospect of these weapons and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists. Surely
16
 
something needs to be done about the helplessness of
international regimes in preventing such transactions,
which clearly threaten international security. The same
regimes expend considerable energy in imposing a
variety of discriminatory technology-denial restrictions
on responsible States.
Our preoccupation with terrorism should not
dilute our commitment to tackle the non-military
threats to human and international security. We have to
sustain the fight against trafficking in narcotic drugs,
human beings and small arms, the pandemic of
HIV/AIDS, diseases like malaria and tuberculosis that
beset developing countries and the degradation of our
common environment. Food security, energy security
and health security are important goals.
The countries of the North and of the South —
the developed, developing and transition economies —
must resume their dialogue to build a better world for
the present and future generations. For the agenda of
globalization, Cancún was a disappointment.
Significant progress was made at Johannesburg
towards the realization of sustainable development, but
the entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol on climate
change remains stalled and the Convention on
Biological Diversity has not yielded any tangible
benefits to the world’s poor.
International economic relations continue to be
characterized by inequities and inequalities.
Globalization has helped sections of the international
economy, including some developing countries; however,
large communities have been left outside its pale. It has
engendered economic crises and instability in several
developing countries and sharply increased poverty.
Poverty is multidimensional. It extends beyond
money and income to education, health care, skills
enhancement, political participation at all levels from
the local to the global, access to natural resources,
clean water and air, and advancement of one’s own
culture and social organization.
Poverty alleviation requires resources on a far
greater scale than now available. Globalization itself
places constraints on Governments of developing
countries in raising public resources for poverty
alleviation. The promise of the climate change and
biodiversity treaties to raise significant resources for
investment and technology transfer is as yet unrealized.
The resources of multilateral and bilateral development
agencies are limited by the failure of industrialized
countries to enhance development budgets.
Therefore, if the current regimes of globalization
and sustainable development are to be expanded — or
even to survive — they must be directly harnessed to
provide the necessary resources for poverty alleviation.
In fact, all international agreements and initiatives
affecting developing countries have to be evaluated by
their impact on poverty.
Developing countries need to coordinate their
positions in international negotiations to promote the
adoption of regimes which would help alleviate
poverty. The India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue
Forum, which was established earlier this year, is an
effort in this direction.
We in the developing countries do not have the
luxury of time. Political compulsions force us to meet
the aspirations of our people quickly, even as we
subject ourselves to newer and more rigid international
standards and norms. We owe it to our future generations
to make strong efforts to meet the Millennium
Development Goals. There is a mutuality of interest in
this between the developed and the developing
countries. Global interdependence today means that
economic disasters in developing countries could
create a backlash in developed countries. We hope the
world will act in this spirit of enlightened self-interest.





﻿I would like to congratulate
His Excellency, the Foreign Minister of Saint Lucia,
upon his assumption of the Presidency of the General
Assembly, and wish him much success.
Until just one month ago, every person in this hall
and every Member of this Organization joined us in the
hope that the Middle East peace process might finally
be back on track, and that a resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict might be on the horizon. The
establishment of a new Palestinian Government
promised an end to terror and a new beginning.
This glimmer of hope was darkened on 19 August
by the extremists who blew up a bus full of Jewish
families on their way home from prayers at the Western
Wall, the holiest site in the Jewish religion. Twenty-
three people, young and old, mothers and babies in
their cradles, were slaughtered in that attack. That
attack was carried out by Hamas, a terrorist
organization, which, under the road map, should have
been dismantled by the Palestinian Authority. Failure
to dismantle Hamas and other extremist organizations
has brought our diplomatic efforts to a standstill.
Rather than acting to fulfil its obligation, the
Palestinian Authority has chosen the route of inaction,
and complicity in terror.
We cannot allow this to continue. We must restore
hope that we can build a better future for our children.
The infrastructure of terror must be dismantled so that
we can put our peace efforts back on track. There is no
time other than now. There is no other way.
For many years it was thought that terrorism in
the Middle East was Israel’s problem, not the world’s.
Today, the world knows otherwise. Today, it is not only
Israel that mourns the loss of its loved ones, including
women and children and babies, at the hands of the
terrorists. Sadly, we have been joined by peoples from
across the globe — from Mombassa to Casablanca and
from Moscow to Bali. Even the United Nations, which
for so many has been a symbol of peace and goodwill,
is not immune.
28
 
Gathered here today in New York, just two short
years after 11 September, the community of nations
knows that those who seek to advance their political
agendas through killing innocents are ready to strike at
anyone or anything that represents the values of
freedom and human life.
Terrorism has declared war on us all. Israel has
often stood alone in this battle. A country that has
suffered more than any other from terrorism, we have
always understood the danger it poses to democracy
and freedom everywhere, even when others refused to
see this, and condemned us for our actions. We have
always understood that terrorism, no matter what cause it
claims to serve, seeks only to destroy, rather than to build.
There can be no neutrality in the war against
terrorism and there can be no immunity for those who
engage in it. Abstaining is not an option. This is not a
war of choice. Terrorism will not be eliminated until
the world unites against it. Our only choice is to win.
Every member of the international community must
take concrete and proactive measures to cut off all
channels of financial, moral and political support to
this common enemy.
States Members of this institution that sponsor
terrorists and give them shelter are accomplices in the
acts of terror themselves. They must be held
accountable for their crimes. It is no coincidence that
States that sponsor terrorism, like Iran and Syria, are
also striving to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
Their hostility to freedom and the rule of law puts the
very future of humanity in jeopardy.
I know that many in this place see Yasser Arafat
as the symbol of the Palestinian struggle. Tragically,
for his people and for ours, he is one of the world’s
icons of terror. In the 10 years since Arafat made a
commitment to Israel and the world that he would no
longer use terror, 1,126 Israelis have been killed and
thousands wounded in 19,000 separate Palestinian
terrorist attacks. In relative numbers, this would be the
same as 11,000 French or 56,000 Americans dying
from terrorism in the same period of time.
This carnage must stop. Its impact on both
societies is devastating. Yasser Arafat bears direct
responsibility for this terrible suffering. He has led his
people along the path of terror — from hijackings to
suicide bombings — for more than 30 years, always
preferring Israeli pain over Palestinian gain. He has
been — and he remains — the greatest obstacle to
peace between our peoples. For as long as he controls
the levers of power, no moderate leadership can
emerge. To vote for Arafat, like we saw in this
Assembly just last week, is to vote against the
Palestinian people. When Arafat wins, terrorism wins,
and we all lose. Instead of rallying around Arafat, the
international community must rally around the genuine
interests of the Palestinian people. They must do so
now, before he leads them even further down the path
of terror and destruction.
When a responsible and empowered Palestinian
leadership finally emerges — a leadership ready to join
the war on terror — it will find us a willing partner for
peace. Israel is committed to the vision for Middle East
peace laid out by United States President George Bush
on 24 June 2002. Israel will not compromise on the
safety of its citizens, but we will go the extra mile, as
we have proven before, to bring peace and security to
both our peoples.
We are ready to work with the Palestinians and
with the international community to make this vision a
reality. For this to happen, the Palestinian leadership
must take the moral and strategic decision to abandon
terrorism once and for all, and make peacemaking
possible. They must guide their people to build their
own society, rather than seek to destroy ours. They,
too, must understand that it is not poverty that breeds
terror but terror that breeds poverty.
We cannot stop only at dismantling the
infrastructure of terror. We must also build an
infrastructure of peace. It is up to political and moral
leaders everywhere to foster an environment which
rejects extremism and empowers the peacemakers. This
is particularly so in the Arab and Muslim world, where
incitement against Israel closes hearts and minds to the
possibility of peace.
Leaders must guide their people away from the
culture of hate, and replace it with a culture of
tolerance. Concrete expressions of cooperation and
exchange must be built in media and government,
education, science and business, to reinforce the
message of tolerance and acceptance.
For the sake of our collective future, voices of
moderation must be heard. For the sake of our
collective future, Israel and the Arab nations must learn
to live together side by side, to overcome our conflicts
just as the nations of Europe have learned to overcome
theirs. Israel is living among its Arab neighbours. We
29
 
believe in a common future of peace and prosperity
with them. My many meetings with Arab leaders over
the last few days have encouraged me to believe that
together we can make our region a better place.
This culture of peace must permeate not only the
borders of the Middle East, it must permeate the walls
of the United Nations as well. In the past, the United
Nations has shown us that it can play a positive role.
This Assembly was key to the founding of the State of
Israel, 55 years ago. Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) are our guideposts to
negotiations and peace.
To play such a constructive role in the future, the
United Nations must reform. It must move away from
the partisan hostility that has taken over its Middle East
agenda. For more than three decades, this Assembly
has passed every year a litany of resolutions designed
to discredit Israel, challenge its interests, and promote
the will of its greatest enemies.
In my hand I am holding a collection of the
decisions of the fifty-seventh General Assembly on the
Middle East — 175 pages filled not with hope, but with
the negative agendas of the past. No other country has
suffered such unjustified attack and consistent
discrimination within the United Nations system. The
time has come to end this campaign of diplomatic
incitement. For the sake of Israelis and Palestinians —
for the sake of the United Nations and peace itself — I
call on this body to rise above the tired politics of
yesterday, and adopt a new, courageous agenda for
tomorrow.
I call on the General Assembly to abandon the
automatic adoption of anti-Israel resolutions and to
find ways of making itself relevant once again to the
interests of the people it claims to serve. I call on this
Assembly to fulfil its historic mission and help
promote what unites us, not what divides us.
On the morning of 1 February of this year, Israel
lost its first astronaut in the Space Shuttle Columbia
disaster — a skilled and courageous pilot whom I knew
personally, a child of Holocaust survivors, a national
hero. Colonel Ilan Ramon embodied the spirit of our
nation. He was a man of courage and action, dedicated
to the well-being of his people. Just as he sought to
contribute to the advancement of his fellow man, he
met his death, together with colleagues from the United
States and India, on a scientific mission in the name of
humanity as a whole.
Israel’s place in such endeavours of international
cooperation and accomplishment is no coincidence. In
the 55 years since the State of Israel was established,
recognized and welcomed into the family of nations,
our achievements in the fields of science and
technology, the arts and literature and agriculture and
medicine have come to rank with the best in the world.
Our international cooperation programme is celebrated
in over a hundred countries around the globe, sharing
skills, experience and knowledge for the benefit of
millions of people. We extend this hand of friendship
to all the nations of the world. We welcome our
improving relations with Europe, just as we remain
committed to promoting closer ties with the nations of
Africa, Asia and the Americas.
The Zionist vision of Israel’s founders was to
bring into the world a State in our ancient homeland to
serve as a haven from persecution for our people, a
place where the Jewish people could fulfil its right to
self-determination in the modern era and a bastion of
democracy and opportunity for all its citizens. Our
founders also made a promise not just to the people of
Israel, but also to the people of the Middle East as a
whole — to pursue peace and to work for the common
advancement of our region.
I know personally the profound meaning of this
historic undertaking. I came to Israel as a young
refugee from Tunisia. I serve as one of hundreds of
thousands of immigrants to whom Israel has granted
promise and protection, freedom and opportunity,
through the values and institutions of democracy.
I stand here today to reaffirm, before the nations
of the world, the commitment of my country to peace.
Peace for the people of Israel is both a moral and
historic imperative. “Shalom” — the word for peace in
Hebrew — is central to our language and our heritage.
It is how we say “hello” and it is how we say
“goodbye”. It is a name we give to our children. It is
my own family name.
It was our prophet Isaiah, who brought this
message of peace to the world centuries ago, when he
said: “And they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares and their spears into pruning hooks.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn war any more”.
Israel’s historic record is clear. Whenever a true
partner for peace has emerged, he has been met with
Israel’s extended hand. This was true when President
30
 
Anwar Sadat of Egypt came to Jerusalem in 1977 and it
was true when King Hussein of Jordan signed the
Peace Treaty with us in 1994. The same is true today.
Israel stands ready to complete the circle of peace with
all its neighbours — real peace, not just peace for the
headlines, but peace which brings an end to violence
and hostility and positive change for the citizens of our
region.
From this great rostrum — a rostrum shared by
all humanity — I call on the leaders of Syria and
Lebanon, of Iran and of the Palestinian people to
abandon once and for all their hostility towards us and
to join us in building a better future for our children.
This evening, I shall return to Jerusalem, the
eternal capital of the Jewish people, to join with them
in celebrating Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year.
According to our tradition, this is a time when God
determines the fate of each and every individual for the
coming year. These are days of reflection and prayer.
May all our prayers for peace and for life be answered,
and may the actions and deeds of all the States and
peoples represented here in this Hall bring to mankind
peace and all the blessings that life can offer.




﻿The General Assembly
is meeting in the shadow of the tragedy last month in
which United Nations staff were killed or injured in
Baghdad. New Zealand unreservedly condemns such
brutal and calculated acts of terror. The United Nations,
after all, was in Iraq to improve the conditions of Iraqi
people and to assist the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty.
We mourn the loss of all those who perished. In
particular, I pay tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello, who
worked so effectively in the world’s trouble spots,
including Timor-Leste, where New Zealand worked
alongside him and developed huge admiration for his
ability and determination.
This was not the first occasion on which the
employees of the international community have been
targeted, although it was the worst. History suggests
that it will not be the last.
To do its work effectively, the United Nations
must interact with local communities, not operate from
behind barbed wire and concrete barriers. Its
employees are mainly unarmed civilians. We, the States
Members of the United Nations, must do more to
protect those whom we employ to work on our behalf.
Nine years ago New Zealand was at the forefront
in creating the Convention for the Safety of United
7

Nations and Associated Personnel. It was opened for
signature in 1995. Regrettably, only one third of the
membership has since become a party to it. We urge all
countries to do so now.
New Zealand believes that the Convention should
be widened to cover all situations where United
Nations and other associated personnel are engaged in
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other assistance-
related activities.
Over the last year we have witnessed terrorist
attacks, including in Casablanca, Riyadh and Jakarta,
as well as in Baghdad.
Next month is the first anniversary of the terrorist
attack in Bali, in which more than 200 people lost their
lives. And two years ago this city itself was the victim
of the 9/11 attacks, which took 3,000 lives.
International terrorism remains the primary threat to
the security and well-being of people across the world.
If we are to defeat terrorism, regional cooperation
is imperative. In the Asia Pacific region, a concerted
response to terrorism is now at the centre of the
Association of South-east Asian Nations Regional
Forum agenda and is becoming increasingly important
in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.
The Pacific Islands Forum is responding
collectively to security challenges, including terrorism,
transnational crimes and challenges to national
integrity and independence.
An effective campaign against terrorism requires
international collaboration on intelligence, military,
social and economic measures.
New Zealand is aware that while we focus on the
symptoms of terrorism, the international community
must work together to tackle the conditions that foster
it. We welcome the Norwegian initiative to strengthen
analysis of the causes of terrorism. There are simply no
ends that can justify the death and the maiming of
vulnerable and innocent people.
New Zealand has, since 1972, supported the
development of a comprehensive international regime to
outlaw terrorism. I hope that the General Assembly will
be able to move forward on this issue and conclude the
comprehensive and nuclear terrorism conventions.
In combating terrorism, however, we should
avoid undermining the very values we are seeking to
uphold. The fight against terrorism should not become
an excuse to justify actions that do not conform to
international standards of humanity.
New Zealand is the current Chair of the Pacific
Islands Forum, which it hosted last month. Leaders
strongly endorsed the Regional Assistance Mission to
the Solomon Islands — a concrete example of the
region working together to assist one of its members to
restore security, stability and progress to its people.
New Zealand joined with the other members of
the Pacific Islands Forum in responding to a request
from the Solomon Islands Government for police and
military assistance to end the actions of armed
criminals responsible for the deterioration in the social
and economic conditions in the Solomon Islands. A
police-led operation has been working successfully to
restore the rule of law and economic stability.
In failed or weak States, Governments often lack the
capacity or will to exercise territorial control. That can
create a power vacuum for terrorist organizations and
criminals to exploit and maintain safe havens, training
facilities and bases for launching terrorist operations.
The Regional Assistance Mission has gone
exceptionally well to date and has received strong
support from the people of the Solomon Islands. It is a
Pacific solution to a Pacific problem. Cooperation and
commitment by Pacific States to respond to regional
security needs, under the umbrella of the Pacific Islands
Forum, is a model that other regions could adopt.
The statements of support from the Secretary-
General and the Security Council for this regional
action, taken in accordance with the Charter, are
welcome. We would urge the United Nations to assist
where it can the process of rebuilding the social
structure and the economy of that country.
New Zealand is working to enhance and
complement existing security capabilities within the
Pacific region. We are engaged in a number of
activities, including establishing border security
systems and drafting model legislation to address
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
The international community must retain an
ongoing commitment to Afghanistan, where President
Karzai’s Government continues to face significant
challenges. Improving security outside Kabul will be a
crucial element in bringing political stability to
Afghanistan.
8

It is in the interests of us all to assist in the
restoration of Afghanistan — not only for the well-
being of the Afghan people, but also so that terrorists
cannot operate freely within its borders.
Earlier this week, New Zealand assumed
leadership of the Provincial Reconstruction Team in
Bamian Province. I am pleased that we could
demonstrate support for the Afghanistan Transitional
Government in this way.
The shared nightmare of all States is that
weapons of mass destruction or the materials from
which they can be constructed will find their way into
the terrorist arsenal. The possibility of nuclear weapons
in the hands of terrorists is a worst-case scenario with
horrific implications. We must do everything we can to
prevent this from happening.
The possible acquisition of nuclear weapons by
terrorist groups increases as the numbers and types of
these weapons, and the States that possess them,
continue to expand. For these and other reasons the
elimination of these weapons is vital.
New Zealand calls on all countries to commit and
to adhere to multilateral disarmament and arms control
treaties.
North Korea’s proclaimed nuclear weapons
programme is a major concern. We urge North Korea to
resume its cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and its commitment to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The current
multilateral dialogue process is a positive way forward.
We commend China for facilitating this.
Iran, too, must heed the strong message of the
international community and take the urgent steps
required to restore confidence that its nuclear
intentions are peaceful.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is equally
about nuclear disarmament. The commitment given by
the nuclear-weapon States to give up their nuclear
weapons, reaffirmed unequivocally at the NPT Review
Conference in 2000, must be honoured.
The nuclear Powers have a particular responsibility
in this respect. They must lead by example against
proliferation. Meaningful steps toward permanent
disarmament would add to their moral authority in
demanding that others must not develop nuclear
weapons capability.
The invasion of Iraq has had a profound impact
on this Organization. We regret that differences of view
could not be resolved in the Security Council.
The reconstruction of Iraq, the restoration of its
sovereignty and the rebuilding of political and social
structures to guarantee the Iraqi people a better life are
now the critical issues. We welcome initiatives to push
forward the political and constitutional process.
The passage of Security Council resolutions 1483
(2003) and 1500 (2003) recognizes the vital role of the
United Nations and the need for the international
community to be fully engaged in reconstruction
efforts. While responsibility for security must
inevitably rest with coalition forces, multilateralism
offers the best prospect and the greatest legitimacy for
the process of transition back to Iraqi self-rule.
New Zealand has announced substantial
contributions to reconstruction and humanitarian relief
work. These include the deployment of a New Zealand
Defence Force light engineer group to work on
humanitarian and reconstruction tasks alongside a
United Kingdom engineer regiment in southern Iraq.
We have helped with demining operations and have
made contributions through United Nations agencies,
the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-
governmental organizations.
New Zealand continues to view the United
Nations as the best hope we have to collectively pursue
the principles enshrined in the Charter. The strength of
the United Nation is that it brings all countries of the
world together on an equal footing to address common
problems. Millions of people around the world have had
their lives improved by the actions of the United Nations.
East Timor is but one recent example of its effectiveness
when it is supported by a common will to act.
At the same time, we all recognize the need to
reform the Organization. In opening this session, the
Secretary-General called on us to consider whether the
rules and instruments of this multilateral institution
continue to serve us well. We have been discussing the
reform of the Security Council for more than a decade
now. It is time to make an institution designed in an
earlier age, for a smaller number of nations more
representative and responsive to the 191 current
Members of the United Nations. We welcome the
establishment of a panel to address key issues
fundamental to the Organization’s future role. Member
States will need to put aside self-interest and
9

differences to reach agreement on the panel’s findings
and to translate those into action.
Fifty-eight years ago, the United Nations was
created in the aftermath of the death and devastation
that had resulted from two world wars. The vision of
its founders was that of an organization that would
establish rules to govern international behaviour, with
procedures to enforce them through collective action. The
United Nations was bestowed with a unique legitimacy
and unique authority to resolve conflict. Whatever its
shortcomings, it remains an indispensable organization.
The challenge before us is to create the structures
and provide the political will that will enable it to
deliver the peaceful, just and prosperous world that is
the hope and expectation of humanity.





﻿Once again,
I am delighted to have this opportunity to address this
representative audience. At the outset, however, I
should like to wish the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly fruitful work — work to
successfully harmonize the actions of peoples and
States; work on behalf of peace, security and progress.
Those purposes were set out in the Charter of the
United Nations by our predecessors, but, as we can see,
they are still relevant. Even now, they provide a solid,
long-term foundation for the activities of the United
Nations. And, although the structure and the functions
of the Organization took shape in an international
environment fundamentally different from ours, time
has only reaffirmed their universal importance. Today,
the instruments of the United Nations are not merely in
demand; they are, as life itself has shown, simply
irreplaceable in crucial situations.
That has been made abundantly clear by the
following important fact: despite sharp differences
concerning how to resolve the Iraq crisis, the situation
is ultimately returning to the legal sphere of the United
Nations. Russia’s position in that regard is consistent
and clear. Only direct United Nations participation in
Iraq’s reconstruction will enable Iraq’s people to decide
their future. And only with active and — I want to stress
this — practical United Nations assistance in Iraq’s
economic and civil transformation will Iraq assume a
truly new and worthy place in the world community.
It is clear that, in recent years, the United Nations
has increasingly been obliged to carry out
fundamentally new tasks and to tackle threats that are
different from, but just as serious as, those it faced
before. Three years ago, at the 2000 Millennium
Summit, I said here that the common enemy of the
United Nations was terrorism. Was Russia’s voice
heeded then? Did everyone understand the seriousness
of the threat, and were our joint actions adequate? The
events of 11 September proved that, unfortunately, they
were not.
To us in Russia, however, the style of the
murderers who committed terrorist acts in Moscow, in
Chechnya and elsewhere in Russia and in New York, as
well as against United Nations staff in Baghdad, has
long been painfully familiar. That style is identical
everywhere, and the fact that the inciters of terror are
easily recognizable — with regard to both the events of
August this year and the terrorist attacks of previous
years — only attests to the global nature of this threat.
It is true that now we are listening to one another.
And we understand that the United Nations must
become — and is indeed becoming — the basis for a
global anti-terrorist coalition. Here, I wish to take
particular note of the Security Council’s Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Terrorism is a challenge to the
planet’s security and to its economic future. Therefore,
the Committee must become a real and practical
instrument for effectively fighting the terrorist threat.
I should like to focus in particular on the
humanitarian activities of the United Nations. That area
consumes the lion’s share of the Organization’s energy,
time and resources, but it does not always appear in the
headlines, nor is it always familiar to the citizens of the
more prosperous States. But it is precisely that area of
United Nations work that is so fundamental and
irreplaceable. The United Nations is helping millions
of destitute people throughout the world — victims of
hunger, of disease and of conflict — to survive and not
to lose hope. That work is exceptionally important; it
lends indisputable political and moral authority to the
entire Organization. And it is here that the
interrelationship between the moral and political content
of international activities is particularly evident.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all
staff members of the United Nations, all non-
governmental organizations and, of course, the many
volunteers who are participating in this noble work.
Because we understand how valuable the
Organization’s humanitarian mission is, Russia views it
as a major political endeavour. We are already
contributing to this work, and we are committed to
increasing our contribution. Over the past three years,
Russia has forgiven a total of $27.2 billion in debt of
5
 
developing countries, and we are currently granting
significant tariff preferences to such countries.
For the first time in many years, as our country
has grown, it has become a donor to the United Nations
World Food Programme. The horrors of starvation are
well known to us from our own history. As a result of
the civil war of the past century and the forced
collectivization of the 1920s and 1930s, millions of
people died of starvation in the Volga region, in Northern
Caucasus and in other parts of our country. Hunger
became a national tragedy for the peoples of Ukraine as
well. We consider it our moral and ethical duty to
expand our participation in food aid programmes.
Russia intends to work actively to resolve acute
environmental problems. A milestone will be achieved
in that area by the World Conference on Climate
Change, scheduled to convene next week in Russia’s
capital, Moscow. We also believe it is essential that a
global system be established to monitor and neutralize
dangerous infectious diseases, and we consider the
work done by the Global Fund to be a real
demonstration of international solidarity in fighting the
spread of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria.
Of course, the United Nations, like any system
with a complex structure, needs to be improved. But
the Organization’s past and current problems have never
been problems of only the Organization per se; they have
always been created by — and they continue to reflect —
contradictions in the very system of international
relations, particularly the system of international law.
After all, politicians, including those represented in the
United Nations, including the Security Council, do not
always have at their disposal adequate and effectively
functioning legal instruments — instruments that would
enable them to deal effectively with the international and
regional crises that arise. International law must, of
course, be fluid and living, reflecting the realities of
the contemporary world. I believe that many of the
processes that are under way within the United Nations
also attest to the constant changes that are taking place
in the world. Such changes dictate a logic of evolution
in the United Nations.
Members of the Organization know very well
that, as a rule, all of the achievements of the United
Nations are shared successes, and that our failures are
shared miscalculations. Such knowledge, however,
brings with it great responsibility. First and foremost,
we must be extremely careful about interfering with the
fabric — the mechanisms — of the work of the United
Nations. Clearly, behind any such decision there should
be more than general political rhetoric — mere words
about so-called fair policies.
I am convinced that any attempt to modernize
United Nations instruments must be preceded by
serious analysis and careful calculation. Such an
approach should be taken, first and foremost, with
regard to the principal international legal instruments.
After all, guaranteeing that they remain effective is the
only way to avoid a legal vacuum. As long as the
norms of international law remain unchanged and
operative, we must observe them. We must ensure
continuity of security guarantees for States and for the
world as a whole.
We must analyse United Nations structures and
mechanisms and try to understand which have proved
effective and productive, as well as which have done
the job they were intended to do and which now remain
unused. We should remember that much of the
potential of the United Nations has still to be tapped.
There are many resources that we are only now
learning how to use.
I would like in particular to comment on the need
to enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council. I
am convinced that, given the deep-rooted nature of the
current differences of opinion and the importance of
ensuring that the Council remain effective, we must
work gradually and very cautiously.
We believe that at this stage we should be guided
above all by the broadest possible agreement on all
aspects of the expansion of the Council, as well as by
the need to ensure that it maintains its current high
status and the legitimacy born of agreed actions. After
all, the Security Council, as the Charter makes clear,
acts on behalf of the United Nations. The Security
Council is endowed with a specific mechanism for
harmonizing political will and for protecting the
national interests of a great variety of States, and,
through this, the interests of the entire international
community.
It is true that we often hear that the developed
countries bear special responsibility for the destiny of
the world. Such leadership, however, entails major
obligations, primarily to ensure that the interests of the
international community as a whole are reflected.
Being a world Power means working together with the
world community. Being a truly strong, influential
6
 
State means seeing and helping to resolve the problems
of small and economically weak countries.
In that connection, I believe that it would be
useful to intensify the work that is being carried out by
the United Nations in cooperation with the regional
international structures. That will lead directly towards
increased economic prosperity in various parts of the
world, and thus contribute to the containment of
potential threats and the maintenance of a common
global strategic balance.
We welcome the emergence of regional centres
for coordination and cooperation in a united Europe.
We favour the strengthening of integration processes in
the Asia-Pacific region. And of course, we support the
work of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), as well as that of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, whose authority and effectiveness are
continuing to grow.
Russia is not the only country that is interested in
regional integration. Our CIS partners have also
demonstrated their practical commitment to that same
goal. This was reaffirmed during the recent CIS
summit. We consider the development of our
interaction with the European Union, which is
multifaceted in nature, to be important. Likewise, with
regard to security issues, we attach importance to the
search new forms of cooperation with the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We should counter current threats to civilization
only by means of collective responses whose legitimacy
is not in doubt. In this respect, we need a systemic vision
that combines political with, when necessary, military
measures. Such measures should be agreed upon in
advance, and be sensible and appropriate.
The need to improve the peacekeeping
mechanisms of the United Nations remains on the
Organization’s agenda. The United Nations must be
able to deploy peacekeeping — and, where necessary,
peace-enforcement — operations more quickly and
efficiently, in strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter. I should like to note that Russia, which has
always supported the peacekeeping functions of the
Organization, is prepared to step up its participation in
such operations, both under United Nations auspices
and in coalition operations authorized by the Security
Council.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems remains a serious challenge
to the modern world. The most dangerous challenge is
the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. We know what steps must be taken in order
to eliminate such threats. These include the further
universalization of the existing non-proliferation
regimes, the strengthening of international verification
instruments and the introduction of safe technologies in
nuclear energy production. In general, this requires the
renunciation by States of excessive arsenals and
military programmes that could undermine the political
and military balance and trigger an arms race.
Russia believes that it is extremely important to
prevent the militarization of outer space. We believe
that a comprehensive agreement should be elaborated
on this issue, and invite all countries possessing
potential in this area to join our initiative. The Russian
initiative to set up, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a global system to counter these new threats has
already been supported by the General Assembly. We
propose the adoption of a new resolution during this
session setting out specific further steps in this direction.
In conclusion, I should like to recall that the solid
structure of the United Nations has enabled it to
withstand all of the many crises of the second half of
the twentieth century. It has helped to overcome threats
of global confrontation and, most importantly, helped
to promote human rights. It has also helped to assert
the principles of mutual respect and good-neighbourliness
among States. The main thrust of the United Nations
approach is that humankind has no alternative but to
jointly construct a safer, fairer and more prosperous
world. That is our duty to succeeding generations. In
that important task we can have no better help than
such time-tested instruments as the work of the United
Nations, an Organization that, for half a century, took
decisions that were crucial for the entire world.
Russia is convinced that the United Nations must
maintain its central role in international affairs. This is
particularly relevant, and particularly important, for
resolving conflict situations. This is our choice and our
strategic position of principle.





﻿Twenty-four months ago, and
yesterday in the memory of America, the centre of New
York City became a battlefield, and a graveyard, and
the symbol of an unfinished war. Since that day,
terrorists have struck in Bali, in Mombassa, in
9

Casablanca, in Riyadh, in Jakarta, in Jerusalem,
measuring the advance of their cause in the chaos and
innocent suffering they leave behind.
Last month, terrorists brought their war to the
United Nations itself. The United Nations headquarters
in Baghdad stood for order and compassion. For that
reason, the terrorists decided it must be destroyed.
Among the 22 people who were murdered was Sergio
Vieira de Mello. Over the decades, that good and brave
man from Brazil gave help to the afflicted in
Bangladesh, Cyprus, Mozambique, Lebanon,
Cambodia, Central Africa, Kosovo and East Timor, and
was aiding the people of Iraq in their time of need.
America joins you, his colleagues, in honouring the
memory of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and the memory
of all those who died with him in the service of the
United Nations.
By the victims they choose and by the means they
use, the terrorists have clarified the struggle we are in.
Those who target relief workers for death have set
themselves against all humanity. Those who incite
murder and celebrate suicide reveal their contempt for
life itself. They have no place in any religious faith,
they have no claim on the world's sympathy, and they
should have no friend in this Hall.
Events during the past two years have set before
us the clearest of divides: between those who seek
order and those who spread chaos, between those who
work for peaceful change and those who adopt the
methods of gangsters, between those who honour the
rights of man and those who deliberately take the lives
of men, women and children without mercy or shame.
Between those alternatives there is no neutral
ground. All Governments that support terror are
complicit in a war against civilization. No Government
should ignore the threat of terror because to look the
other way gives terrorists the chance to regroup, recruit
and prepare. All nations that fight terror as if the lives
of their own people depended on it will earn the
favourable judgement of history.
The former regimes of Afghanistan and Iraq knew
those alternatives and made their choices. The Taliban
was a sponsor and servant of terrorism. When
confronted, that regime chose defiance, and that regime
is no more. Afghanistan's President, who is here today,
now represents a free people who are building a decent
and just society. They are building a nation fully joined
in the war against terror.
The regime of Saddam Hussain cultivated ties to
terror while it built weapons of mass destruction. It
used those weapons in acts of mass murder and refused
to account for them when confronted by the world. The
Security Council was right to be alarmed. The Security
Council was right to demand that Iraq destroy its
illegal weapons and prove that it had done so. The
Security Council was right to vow serious
consequences if Iraq refused to comply. And because
there were consequences   because a coalition of
nations acted to defend the peace and the credibility of
the United Nations   Iraq is free, and today we are
joined by the representatives of a liberated country.
Saddam Hussain's monuments have been
removed, and not only his statues. The true monuments
of his rule and his character   the torture chambers,
the rape rooms and the prison cells for innocent
children   are closed. And as we discover the killing
fields and mass graves of Iraq, the true scale of
Saddam's cruelty is being revealed.
The Iraqi people are meeting hardships and
challenges, like every nation that has set out on the
path of democracy. Yet, their future promises lives of
dignity and freedom, and that is a world away from the
squalid, vicious tyranny they have known. Across Iraq,
life is being improved by liberty. Across the Middle
East, people are safer because an unstable aggressor
has been removed from power. Across the world,
nations are more secure because an ally of terror has
fallen.
Our actions in Afghanistan and Iraq were
supported by many Governments, and America is
grateful to each one. I also recognize that some of the
sovereign nations of the Assembly disagreed with our
actions. Yet, there was and there remains unity among
us on the fundamental principles and objectives of the
United Nations. We are dedicated to the defence of our
collective security and to the advance of human rights.
Those permanent commitments call us to great work in
the world, work that we must do together. So, let us
move forward. First, we must stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq as they build free and stable
countries. The terrorists and their allies fear and fight
this progress above all because free people embrace
hope over resentment and choose peace over violence.
The United Nations has been a friend of the
Afghan people, distributing food and medicine, helping
refugees return home, advising on a new constitution
10

and helping to prepare the way for nationwide
elections. NATO has taken over the United Nations
mandated security force in Kabul. American and
coalition forces continue to track and defeat al Qaeda
terrorists and the remnants of the Taliban. Our efforts
to rebuild that country go on. I have recently proposed
to spend an additional $1.2 billion for the Afghan
reconstruction effort, and I urge other nations to
continue contributing to that important cause.
In the nation of Iraq, the United Nations is
carrying out vital and effective work every day. By the
end of 2004, more than 90 per cent of Iraqi children
under age five will have been immunized against
preventable diseases such as polio, tuberculosis and
measles, thanks to the hard work and high ideals of
UNICEF. Iraq's food distribution system is operational,
delivering nearly a half million tons of food per month,
thanks to the skill and expertise of the World Food
Programme.
Our international coalition in Iraq is meeting its
responsibilities. We are conducting precision raids
against terrorists and holdouts of the former regime.
Those killers are at war with the Iraqi people. They
have made Iraq the central front in the war on terror.
And they will be defeated. Our coalition has made sure
that Iraq's former dictator will never again use
weapons of mass destruction. We are now interviewing
Iraqi citizens and analysing records of the old regime
to reveal the full extent of its weapons programmes and
its long campaign of deception. We are training Iraqi
police, border guards and a new army so that the Iraqi
people can assume full responsibility for their own
security.
At the same time, our coalition is helping to
improve the daily lives of the Iraqi people. The old
regime built palaces while letting schools decay, so we
are rebuilding more than a thousand schools. The old
regime starved hospitals of resources, so we have
helped to supply and reopen hospitals across Iraq. The
old regime built up armies and weapons while allowing
the nation's infrastructure to crumble, so we are
rehabilitating power plants, water and sanitation
facilities, bridges and airports. I have proposed to
Congress that the United States provide additional
funding for our work in Iraq, the greatest financial
commitment of its kind since the Marshall Plan.
Having helped to liberate Iraq, we will honour
our pledges to Iraq, and by helping the Iraqi people
build a stable and peaceful country we will make our
own countries more secure.
The primary goal of our coalition in Iraq is self-
government for the people of Iraq, reached by an
orderly and democratic process. That process must
unfold according to the needs of Iraqis, neither hurried
nor delayed by the wishes of other parties. And the
United Nations can contribute greatly to the cause of
Iraqi self-government.
America is working with friends and allies on a
new Security Council resolution, which will expand the
United Nation's role in Iraq. As in the aftermath of
other conflicts, the United Nations should assist in
developing a constitution, training civil servants and
conducting free and fair elections. Iraq now has a
Governing Council, the first truly representative
institution in that country. Iraq's new leaders are
showing the openness and tolerance that democracy
requires, and they are also showing courage. Yet every
young democracy needs the help of friends. Now the
nation of Iraq needs and deserves our aid, and all
nations of good will should step forward and provide
that support.
The success of a free Iraq will be watched and
noted throughout the region. Millions will see that
freedom, equality and material progress are possible at
the heart of the Middle East. Leaders in the region will
face the clearest evidence that free institutions and
open societies are the only path to long-term national
success and dignity. And a transformed Middle East
would benefit the entire world by undermining the
ideologies that export violence to other lands.
Iraq as a dictatorship had great power to
destabilize the Middle East. Iraq as a democracy will
have great power to inspire the Middle East. The
advance of democratic institutions in Iraq is setting an
example that others, including the Palestinian people,
would be wise to follow. The Palestinian cause is
betrayed by leaders who cling to power by feeding old
hatreds and destroying the good work of others. The
Palestinian people deserve their own State. They will
gain that State by embracing new leaders committed to
reform, to fighting terror and to building peace.
All parties in the Middle East must meet their
responsibilities and carry out the commitments they
made at Aqaba. Israel must work to create the
conditions that will allow a peaceful Palestinian State
to emerge. Arab nations must cut off funding and other
11

support for terrorist organizations. America will work
with every nation in the region that acts boldly for the
sake of peace.
A second challenge we must confront together is
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Outlaw regimes that possess nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and the means to deliver them
would be able to use blackmail and create chaos in
entire regions. Those weapons could be used by
terrorists to bring sudden disaster and suffering on a
scale we can scarcely imagine. The deadly combination
of outlaw regimes, terror networks and weapons of
mass murder is a peril that cannot be ignored or wished
away. If such a danger is allowed to fully materialize,
all words, all protests, will come too late.
Nations of the world must have the wisdom and
the will to stop grave threats before they arrive. One
crucial step is to secure the most dangerous materials at
their source. For more than a decade, the United States
has worked with Russia and other States of the former
Soviet Union to dismantle, destroy or secure weapons
and dangerous materials left over from another era.
Last year in Canada, the G-8 nations agreed to
provide up to 20 billion dollars, half of it from the
United States, to fight this proliferation risk over the
next ten years. Since then, six additional countries have
joined the effort. More are needed, and I urge other
nations to help us meet this danger.
We are also improving our capability to interdict
lethal materials in transit. Through our Proliferation
Security Initiative, eleven nations are preparing to
search planes, ships, trains and trucks carrying suspect
cargo and to seize weapons or missile shipments that
raise proliferation concerns. These nations have agreed
on a set of interdiction principles consistent with
current legal authorities, and we are working to expand
the Proliferation Security Initiative to other countries.
We are determined to keep the world's most destructive
weapons away from all our shores and out of the hands
of our common enemies.
Because proliferators will use any route or
channel that is open to them, we need the broadest
possible cooperation to stop them. Today I ask the
United Nations Security Council to adopt a new
antiproliferation resolution. That resolution should call
on all Members of the United Nations to criminalize
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to
enact strict export controls consistent with international
standards and to secure any and all sensitive materials
within their own borders. The United States stands
ready to help any nation draft these new laws and to
assist in their enforcement.
A third challenge we share is a challenge to our
conscience. We must act decisively to meet the
humanitarian crises of our time. The United States has
begun to carry out the Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief, aimed at preventing AIDS on a massive scale
and treating millions who have the disease already. We
have pledged 15 billion dollars over five years to fight
AIDS around the world.
My country is acting to save lives from famine as
well. We are providing more than 1.4 billion dollars in
global emergency food aid, and I have asked our
United States Congress for 200 million dollars for a
new famine fund so that we can act quickly when the
first signs of famine appear. Every nation on every
continent should generously add their resources to the
fight against disease and desperate hunger.
There is another humanitarian crisis, spreading,
yet hidden from view. Each year, an estimated eight to
nine hundred thousand human beings are bought, sold
or forced across the world's borders. Among them are
hundreds of thousands of teenage girls and others as
young as five who fall victim to the sex trade. This
commerce in human life generates billions of dollars
each year, much of which is used to finance organized
crime. There is a special evil in the abuse and
exploitation of the most innocent and vulnerable. The
victims of the sex trade see little of life before they see
the very worst of life   an underground of brutality
and lonely fear. Those who create these victims and
profit from their suffering must be severely punished.
Those who patronize this industry debase themselves
and deepen the misery of others, and Governments that
tolerate this trade are tolerating a form of slavery.
This problem has appeared in my own country
and we are working to stop it. The Protect Act, which I
signed into law this year, makes it a crime for any
person to enter the United States or for any citizen to
travel abroad for the purpose of sex tourism involving
children. The Department of Justice is actively
investigating sex tour operators and patrons, who can
face up to 30 years in prison. Under the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act, the United States is using
sanctions against Governments to discourage human
trafficking.
12

The victims of this industry also need help from
Members of the United Nations. This begins with clear
standards and the certainty of punishment under the
laws of every country. Today, some nations make it a
crime to sexually abuse children abroad. Such conduct
should be a crime in all nations. Governments should
inform travellers of the harm this industry does and the
severe punishments that will fall on its patrons. The
American Government is committing $50 million to
support the good work of organizations that are
rescuing women and children from exploitation and
giving them shelter, medical treatment and the hope of
a new life. I urge other Governments to do their part.
We must show new energy in fighting back an old
evil. Nearly two centuries after the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and more than a century after
slavery was officially ended in its last strongholds, the
trade in human beings for any purpose must not be
allowed to thrive in our time.
All the challenges I have spoken of this morning
require urgent attention and moral clarity. Helping
Afghanistan and Iraq to succeed as free nations in a
transformed region; cutting off the avenues of
proliferation; abolishing modern forms of slavery  
these are the kinds of great tasks for which the United
Nations was founded. In each case, careful discussion
is needed and, also, decisive action. Our good
intentions will be credited only if we achieve good
outcomes. As an original signer of the United Nations
Charter, the United States of America is committed to
the United Nations and we show that commitment by
working to fulfil the United Nations stated purposes
and by giving meaning to its ideals.
The founding documents of the United Nations
and the founding documents of America stand in the
same tradition. Both assert that human beings should
never be reduced to objects of power or commerce,
because their dignity is inherent. Both recognize a
moral law that stands above men and nations, but
which must be defended and enforced by men and
nations. And both point the way to peace   the peace
that comes when all are free. We secure that peace with
our courage and we must show that courage together.



﻿May I congratulate you, Sir,
for assuming the mantle of the presidency for this
session of the Assembly and thank the outgoing
President, Mr. Jan Kavan. I would also like to echo
what other speakers have said about the death of the
dedicated United Nations workers who lost their lives
in the bombing of the United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad last month, including Sergio Vieira de Mello,
an outstanding international civil servant.
When we met here last year, we were all
concerned about what would happen in Iraq. At the
same time, we were concerned about what role the
United Nations would play in the resolution of the Iraq
affair. Dramatic events since then have provided
answers to those questions. However, those dramatic
events have raised important and disturbing questions
about the very future of the United Nations. Central
among them is the question, does the United Nations
have a future as a strong and effective multilateral
organization enjoying the confidence of the peoples of
the world and capable of addressing the matters that
are of concern to all humanity?
Quite correctly, as we meet here this time, while
still preoccupied by the issue of the future of Iraq, I am
certain that none of us wants to rehash the debate that
took place on this matter in the period following the
last general debate in the General Assembly. While for
some time after that general debate we were concerned
to provide answers to questions about the role of the
United Nations in Iraq, today we have to answer
questions about the impact of the Iraq affair on the
future of the United Nations. Matters have evolved in
such a manner that to our limited understanding it
seems extremely difficult to resolve the issue of the
role of the United Nations in Iraq, unless we answer
the question about the future of the United Nations as a
legitimate expression of the collective will of the
peoples of the world and the principal guarantor of
international peace and security, among other global
issues.
Put differently, we could say that what is decided
about the role of the United Nations in Iraq will at the
same time decide what will become of the United
Nations in the context of its Charter and of the
important global objectives that have been set since the
Charter was adopted.
This is not a case of the tail wagging the dog;
rather, history has placed at our feet an urgent and
practical test case that obliges us to answer the
question: what do we, collectively, want the United
Nations to be? What do we do to distinguish the trees
from the forest? In that regard we must make the point
directly, that as South Africans, we are partners and
activists who campaign in favour of a strong and
effective United Nations. We do so because of the
place our country and people occupy in the
contemporary world.
We believe that everything that has happened
places an obligation on the United Nations to reflect on
a number of fundamental issues that are of critical
importance to the evolution of human society. We are
convinced that this General Assembly would
disappoint the expectations of the peoples of the world
and put itself in jeopardy if, for any reason whatsoever,
it did not address these issues.
We speak as we do because we represent the
people who are more sensitive to the imperatives of
what the world decides, given our experience during a
period when apartheid South Africa was correctly a
matter of focused and sustained interest by the United
Nations and the peoples of the world, including
ordinary folk, even in the most marginalized areas of
our globe.
This Organization, and all of us singly and
collectively, has spoken and frequently speaks about
the phenomenon of globalization. Correctly, we speak
of a global village driven by recognition of the fact of
the integration of all peoples within a common and
interdependent global society.
24

Certainly, humanity is more integrated today than
it was when the United Nations was established more
than fifty years ago. However, many have drawn
attention to the fact that, whereas objective social
processes have led to the emergence of the global
village, all of our political collectives have not yet
succeeded in designing the institutions of governance
made necessary by the reality of the birth of this global
village.
Correct observations have also been made that the
use of the image and concept of the village does not
imply that the residents of this village are equal. The
reality is that the same processes that bring all of us
closer together in a global village are simultaneously
placing the residents of the global village in different
positions. Some have emerged as dominant, and the
rest as the dominated, with the dominant being the
decision makers and the dominated being the recipients
and implementers of those decisions.
To the same extent that our political collectives
have not designed the institutions responsive to the
evolution of the global village, so have they failed to
respond to the imbalance in the distribution of power
inherent in contemporary global human society. We
speak here of power in all fields of human activity. Left
to its internal and autonomous impulses, the process of
globalization will inevitably result in the further
enhancement of the domination of the dominant and
the entrenchment of the subservience of the dominated,
however much the latter might resent such domination.
This will include the perpetuation of the
dominant positions by those who are dominant to
ensure the sustenance of their capacity to set the
agenda of the global village in the interest of their own
neighbourhoods within that village. Inherent within
this is, necessarily, reliance on the use of superior
power, of which the dominant dispose, to achieve the
objective of the perpetuation of the situation of an
unequal distribution of power.
In this situation, it is inevitable that the pursuit of
power in itself will assert itself as a unique legitimate
objective, apparently detached from any need to define
the uses of such power. This also signifies the
deification of force in all its forms as the final arbiter
in the ordering of human affairs.
However, from the point of view of the
disempowered, the struggle to ensure the use of such
power to address their own interests becomes a
strategic objective they cannot avoid. Necessarily this
means that power would have to be redistributed. That
would be done to empower the disempowered and to
regulate the use of power by those who are powerful.
Thus we come back to what I said earlier.
Because we are poor, we are partisan activists for a
strong, effective and popularly accepted United
Nations. We take those positions because there is no
way in which we could advance the interests of the
people, the majority of whom are poor, outside the
context of a strong, effective and popularly accepted
United Nations. An autonomous process of
globalization, driven by its own internal regularities,
can only result in the determination of our future
within the parameters set by those who enjoy the
superiority of power. The powerful will do this in their
own interests, which might not coincide with ours.
When this Organization was established 58 years
ago, its objectives and institutions necessarily reflected
both the collective global concerns as then perceived
and the then balance of power.
Among other things, our esteemed Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, has drawn attention to the
fact that the United Nations started off as an
Organization of 51 States and is now composed of 191
States. Undoubtedly, the perceived and real collective
global concerns of our day are, to some extent at least,
different from those that prevailed more than 50 years
ago, when the Organization was about a quarter of its
present size.
For more than a decade, this Organization has
been involved in discussions about its transformation.
Once more, the Secretary-General has reflected on this
challenge. The truth is that our discussions have gone
nowhere. Earlier this morning the Secretary-General
announced steps he will take to facilitate the adoption
of decisions that will help all of us to effect the
necessary and inevitable transformation of the United
Nations. We support the decisions he announced.
The global resolve to defeat such organizations as
al Qaeda has emerged out of our understanding that
international aggression should not necessarily be
expected to come from formal and recognized State
institutions. We have all come to understand that such a
threat coming from non-State institutions would
express itself as the most inhumane and despicable
terrorism, as was most painfully demonstrated on 11
September 2001.
25

Our collective experience   stretching from New
York and elsewhere in the United States on 11
September 2001; and reaching back to Nairobi and
Dar es Salaam, in Africa, earlier still; and, more
recently, to Bali, Indonesia; to Morocco; to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine; to Algeria, India, Russia
and elsewhere; and even our own country   tells us
that the United Nations, working in defence of the
collective interests of the peoples of the world, must
ensure that we act together to defeat the threat of
terrorism, collectively defined.
At the same time, we have to take on board the
conviction among some of our Member States that they
constitute special and particular targets of global
terrorism. Understandably, the argument is advanced
that it would be unreasonable and irrational to expect
such States not to act to deter such terrorist actions
against themselves. None of us can defend
international rules that prescribe that any one of us
should wait to be attacked knowing in specific ways
that we were going to be attacked by identified
terrorists, and then act against those who had attacked
us, with such horrendous costs as were experienced by
the United States during the 11 September attacks. I do
not imagine that any one of us would seek to impose
such a costly and unsustainable burden on any of our
Member States, which would also violate the self-
defence provisions of Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We also have no choice but to deal with the brute
reality that the reform process of the United Nations
and all its bodies, and other multilateral organizations,
has got to recognize the reality of the imbalance of
power, as represented by different countries and
regions. At the same time, we must proceed from the
position that such distribution of power is not
necessarily in the interests of the peoples of the world,
or even in the interests of those who today have the
power to determine what happens to our common
world. That includes acceptance of the fact that,
depending on the place we occupy in the global
community, we have different priorities. Among other
things, the rich are concerned about ways and means to
maintain the status quo, from which they benefit. In
practical terms that means that all matters that threaten
to destabilize the status quo must necessarily be
anathema to such people. Such matters will therefore
be an issue of principal concern to them. Necessarily
and understandably, they will then seek to get the rest
of the world to accept their assertion that the
maintenance of the status quo must be a universal
human preoccupation, precisely the kind of issue on
which the United Nations must take a united position.
On the other hand, the poor are interested in
changing their conditions for the better. Accordingly,
they will not accept the maintenance of the status quo,
which perpetuates their poverty. Accordingly, among
other things, the poor billions of the world will argue
for action by the United Nations to ensure the transfer
of resources to themselves, which will enable them to
extricate themselves from their condition of poverty
and underdevelopment, consistent with the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
the objectives of the Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development and other international
agreements. Inevitably, that will run counter to the
propositions of those who are more powerful than the
poor, namely, the Governments, peoples and countries
that keep them afloat with development assistance.
That will require   whether it is stated or not   that
the recipients of that assistance understand that such
assistance can dry up.
Important shifts in the global balance of power
and global objectives have taken place since the United
Nations was established, 58 years ago. The
Organization has not substantially changed, in terms of
its structures and mode of functioning, to reflect those
changes. That has served as a recipe for an inevitable
crisis, a disaster waiting to occur. And so as we meet
today we are confronted by global challenges that the
global Organization cannot solve. Impelled by the
urgent issues of the day, some of the powerful will not
wait for all of us to respond to the problems we have
raised, and which they face. They will act to solve
those problems; their actions will make the statement
that they do not need the United Nations to find
solutions to those problems. Simultaneously, that will
make the practical statement that the United Nations is
irrelevant to the solution of the most pending problems
of our day. The disempowered will continue to look to
the Organization, understanding, correctly, that they are
too weak to advance their interests singly outside the
collective voice of the United Nations. In that regard,
they expect that the United Nations will be informed by
its founding documents and other solemn decisions it
has taken since it was established, all of which have
been approved by successive sessions of the General
Assembly.
26

Global poverty and underdevelopment are the
principal problems that face the United Nations.
Billions across the world expect that the General
Assembly will address that challenge in a meaningful
manner. The masses of people of our world expect that
the statements we will make at this session of the
General Assembly as representatives of various
Governments will indicate a serious commitment to
implement what we say. The poor of the world expect
an end to violence and war everywhere. They want an
end to the killing that is taking too many Israeli and
Palestinian lives. They want Africans to stop killing
one another, continuing to convey the message that we
are incapable of living in peace among ourselves. They
desire the realization of the democratic objective
universally: that the people shall govern. They believe
that we are seriously committed to the objective of the
eradication of poverty and the provision of a better life
for all. They think that we mean it when we say that we
will not allow the process of globalization to result in
the further enrichment of the rich and the
impoverishment of the poor within and between
countries. They believe us when we say that our
collective future is one of hope, and not despair. They
are keenly interested to know whether our gathering,
the United Nations General Assembly, will produce
those results.
To collectively meet those requirements will
require that each and every one of us   both rich and
poor, the powerful and the disempowered   commit
ourselves practically to act in all circumstances in a
manner that recognizes and respects the fact that none
of us is an island sufficient unto ourselves. That
includes the most powerful. The latter face the
interesting challenge, important to themselves in their
national interests, that the poverty and
disempowerment of the billions will no longer serve as
a condition for their success and their possibility to
prosper in conditions of peace.
What we have said today may not be heard,
because we do not have the strength to have our voice
heard. Tomorrow we may be obliged to say, No more
water; the fire next time. As the fires burn, the United
Nations will die, consumed by the flames. So will the
hopes of the poor of the world die, as they did at
Cancun, Mexico, not so long ago. We must act together
to say in our words and in our actions, as countries and
as the United Nations, that there will be water next
time, and not fire.












