I
offer my warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your
election as President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session. I am confident that under your
presidency fruitful results will be achieved. I also wish
to pay a cordial tribute to Mr. Julian Robert Hunte,
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
The recent appalling terror in Beslan, Russia,
caused massive casualties, including many children.
On behalf of the Chinese Government, I strongly
condemn, once again, that inhuman act of terrorist
violence and extend our deep condolences to the
families of the victims.
Peace and development remain the dominant
themes in today’s world. Multipolarization and
economic globalization are moving forward in twists
and turns. Science and technology are advancing at a
dizzying speed. Forces that make for peace and factors
that lead to war are both on the rise. Human society is
moving in a bright, progressive and positive direction.
However, the light of peace has not fallen on
every corner of the globe, nor has development reached
every inch of the Earth. Threats to security, both
traditional and non-traditional, are intertwined. The
dark cloud of war remains menacing. Hot spots keep
springing up. Terrorist activities are raging, and cross-
border problems such as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, drug trafficking, transnational
crime and illegal immigration are erupting one after
another. Factors of uncertainty, instability and
unpredictability are increasing.
In the course of economic globalization, the gap
between the North and the South is widening.
Developing countries are confronting new difficulties
and challenges as a growing number of them are
further marginalized. Today, half the global population
lives on less than $2 a day, and of those, 1.2 billion live
on less than $1 a day. Much remains to be done to
implement the Millennium Development Goals.
Peace, development and cooperation are the
prerequisites for our times. People all over the world
are raising their voice in favour of peace, development
and cooperation and against war, poverty and
confrontation. Peace is the precondition for human
development and prosperity. Without a peaceful and
stable international environment, development is out of
the question for any country. A chaotic world benefits
no one. Having experienced the scourge of two world
wars, mankind would not tolerate any more war or
bloodshed. Thus it is the fervent aspiration of all
peoples to live and achieve development in a secure
and stable environment.
In tackling security issues, it is imperative to
foster a new security concept of mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation. This new concept
calls for nations to transcend their differences in
ideology and social systems, respect one another’s
security interests, promote greater democracy in
international relations and seek peaceful solutions to
disputes through dialogue.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the whole
world. China stands firmly opposed to terrorism in all
forms and manifestations. To prevent and fight
terrorism, we must intensify international cooperation
and address both the causes and symptoms of the
threat. Only when the root causes of terrorism are
eradicated can peoples live in peace and tranquillity
again.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to world peace and security. Non-
proliferation efforts therefore require the participation
of all members of the international community.
Likewise, it is important to discard unilateralism and
double standards and to give full credit and full latitude
to the role of the United Nations.
China takes an active part in multilateral non-
proliferation efforts and firmly defends the
international regime of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties. China believes that
multilateral arms control, disarmament and non-
proliferation processes can be steadily promoted in
order to further improve the international non-
proliferation regime.
There is still a long way to go before peace and
reconstruction can be realized in Iraq. We support an
important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s political
process, helping that country achieve the smooth
holding of elections.
10

We appeal to Palestine and Israel to resume
dialogue as soon as possible and to start implementing
the Middle East road map faithfully. As always, China
will work to resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean
Peninsula through dialogue and talks, in the interest of
peace and stability on the Peninsula.
Development is the foundation for human
progress. Lasting peace and stability throughout the
world depends on coordinated, balanced and universal
development. Development is of overriding
importance. Living in peace, abundance and harmony
between nations has been the dream of many
generations. Coordinated, balanced and sustainable
development serves the fundamental interests of all
peoples and works for their well-being.
In order to promote economic growth worldwide,
it is necessary for the international community to take
effective measures to put in place an open and fair
multilateral trading regime and gradually improve it. It
is also important to reform and improve the
international financial system.
The developed countries must honour their
commitments to debt reduction, technology transfer
and market access through concrete actions in order to
enable developing countries to really benefit from
globalization. The developing countries, for their part,
need to work together to attain development and take
part in a wide range of international efforts. They
should also deepen South-South cooperation.
We, the members of the international community,
should join hands in working for a just and equitable
new international economic order that meets the needs
of the growing economic globalization and serves the
common interests of all countries.
The Millennium Development Goals are our
solemn, collective pledge. The United Nations should
further mobilize resources, strengthen coordination and
increase its input to development activities in order to
help Member States achieve these important goals as
scheduled.
Cooperation is an effective way of dealing with
the collective challenges facing humankind. To
strengthen international cooperation, we must
champion multilateralism. The United Nations is the
centre of the international multilateral system and the
key platform for making multilateralism work. It is the
widespread desire of the international community to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, take more collective actions,
strengthen the role of the United Nations and safeguard
its authority.
The threats and challenges we face make it
imperative to strengthen, rather than weaken, the role
of the United Nations. A stronger United Nations is
indispensable for maintaining global peace and
stability and promoting the common development of
humankind. All Member States should honour their
commitments to the Charter of the United Nations and
fulfil their international responsibilities and
obligations.
The world is eagerly looking forward to a
dynamic and action-oriented United Nations. China
supports necessary and rational reforms of the
Organization. Such reforms should aim at enhancing
the leading role of the United Nations in international
affairs, reinforcing its capacity to tackle new threats
and challenges, and ensuring that better reflects the
aspirations and needs of the vast majority of
developing countries.
China is in favour of expanding the Security
Council and of giving priority to greater representation
of the developing countries. China also supports the
work of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change, and it is looking forward to the Panel’s
report by the end of this year, so that it can be reviewed
by Member States.
China is a staunch force working for world peace,
common development and international cooperation.
After over half a century of strenuous efforts and more
than two decades of reform and opening up, China has
now entered a new stage of development aimed at
building a moderately prosperous society all-round.
However, China is still a developing country, and a
large population and inadequate economic
development remain its basic national conditions. It
has a long way to go before achieving its development
goals.
The Chinese Government will always place
development at the top of its agenda. The fact that
China — a large, developing country with 1.3 billion
people — runs its own affairs well is in itself a major
contribution to peace and to the development of
humanity.
11

China desires peace, development and
cooperation, and strives to win peace and development
through cooperation. It is working to promote
democracy in international relations, diversity in its
modes of development and richness in the world’s
civilizations. It advocates a new security concept and
facilitates the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China will pursue with determination an
independent foreign policy of peace, adhere to the five
principles for Peaceful Coexistence, and engage in
mutually beneficial and friendly cooperation with other
countries on an equal footing.
China will unswervingly safeguard its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, brook no
interference in its internal affairs by foreign forces and,
at the same time, respect other countries’ sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
China remains committed to the common
interests of humankind. China’s national interests, in
the final analysis, are consistent with the common
interests of all humankind. In handling State-to-State
relations, China will safeguard its own interests while
taking into account the interests of other countries.
China will adhere to the policy of opening up, and
develop economic relations and trade with all other
nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
China’s development stands in the way of no one,
nor does it pose any threat to others. China is following
the path of peaceful development, seeking an
international environment of peace and stability for its
own development and promoting world peace and
progress through its own prosperity.
China is working steadily to develop its relations
with the world’s major countries. It will stay
committed to the policy of building friendship and
partnership with its neighbours and combine stronger
bilateral friendships with enhanced regional
cooperation. It will strengthen solidarity and
cooperation with other developing countries and
support any justified demands or legitimate
propositions on their part in international affairs. It will
play a constructive role in the political, economic,
social, disarmament, arms control and other
multilateral fields; safeguard the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations; and support any consensus that serves the
common interests of all countries.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory.
Safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and realizing complete national reunification
at an early date is the common will and firm resolve of
the 1.3 billion Chinese people. Pursuing the policy of
“peaceful reunification and one country, two systems”,
the Chinese Government is ready to work tirelessly
towards a peaceful reunification with the utmost
sincerity. We, more than anyone else, want to see a
peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question. But we
will never tolerate Taiwan independence, nor will we
allow anyone to separate Taiwan from the rest of China
in any way.
We hope that the international community will
fully recognize the complex and sensitive nature of the
current situation across the Taiwan Strait and the
serious threat posed by the separatist activities of the
Taiwan authorities to the stability of the Taiwan Strait
and the peace of the Asia-Pacific region. We expect the
Assembly to continue supporting the Chinese
Government’s efforts for peaceful reunification and to
join us in containing pro-independence activities, in the
interest of stability in the Strait and of world peace.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. As the basic
guidelines for State-to-State relations, the Five
Principles have withstood the test of half a century and
remain an irrefutable truth. The Five Principles, which
include peace, development and cooperation, are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. They provide guidance
for the establishment and development of relations
between countries with identical or different social
systems; point to the correct path towards the peaceful
settlement of outstanding issues between countries and
international disputes; firmly defend the interests of the
developing countries; and facilitate the improvement
and development of North-South relations. The Five
Principles present important ideas that must underpin
the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China not only initiated, but has faithfully
observed, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
Given the new realities of today, we will continue to
champion those Principles and join all the peoples of
12

the world in advancing the lofty cause of peace,
development and cooperation.Let me first
of all congratulate you, President Ping, on your
election and wish you every success in your
responsible post, and express my sincere thanks to the
outgoing President for his dedicated work.
I endorse the statement of the Netherlands
European Union presidency.
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, the world
is changing at dramatic speed. In just a few decades,
humanity will have reached the 8 billion mark. With
the networking of world trade and with global
communication technologies, we are growing ever closer.
We are going to become increasingly interdependent in
economic, technical and ecological terms.
At the same time, we all face a host of new
challenges and new dangers which threaten us all —
the South and the North, the developing and the
developed world alike.
On the one hand, there are threats to national and
global security such as the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the nuclear threat, the danger posed
by failed States or, as we all painfully remember in this
city, by terrorism, which does not respect humankind
or human dignity.
On the other hand, there are also so-called soft
threats, such as far-reaching environmental and
climatic changes, poverty, major shortfalls in education
and training and the negative aspects of globalization,
refugee flows, and diseases and epidemics such as
HIV/AIDS and malaria. They are a threat to security
and stability and take a heavy toll.
The two — hard and soft threats — are closely
connected. After all, we know that the causes of war
and violence, poverty, need and oppression are
multifaceted and deep-rooted. We also know that crises
are the fruit of poverty and a sense of hopelessness,
and vice-versa. We will have no peace without
development, nor indeed development without peace,
so we have comprehensively to secure peace and
stability — above all through economic and social
development.
The States of the world have to work together to
shape economic, technological and ecological
globalization and rise to the resulting challenges. They
will not be able to do so without close cooperation.
Indeed, that is now beyond the tools of traditional
diplomacy alone. Their ability to secure and stabilize
the international system on their own will in future
prove less and less adequate.
What we need is a far-reaching reform of the
international system and its institutions that takes due
account of these changes. That is a reform we need
urgently, because we have to create an effective
multilateral system which enables us to work together
to prevent crises and, where that does not work, find
long-term solutions.
There have already been promising developments
at the regional level. With their sometimes painful history
very much in mind, the States of Europe have joined
together in the European Union and thus have reached
a new level of multilateralism. This political and
economic community, now embracing 25 States, has
become an anchor of stability for Europe and beyond.
Since its foundation the African Union has been
impressively shouldering its shared responsibility for
preventing humanitarian disasters and resolving major
regional conflicts. This is a courageous and key step
forward. This breakthrough of multilateralism on the
African continent will develop an ever more
pronounced dynamism.
Given global interdependencies and connections,
we need a world organization that has close links to
these regional structures and can thus boost the
efficiency of joint action. The United Nations is the
most important forum for setting global rules. Its might
is the might of the right, as the Secretary-General
highlighted in his impressive speech at the opening of
this General Assembly session. With its legitimacy we
have a unique and universal competence for solving
problems together. Since the breaking of the internal
blockade caused by the cold war, the United Nations
has been playing an increasingly significant role. The
international community is making more and more use
of it as a forum for tackling the major challenges
facing humanity.
For millions of people today the Blue Flag means
quite tangible help, often on essential issues, and hope
for a better future. For this, we are all very much
indebted to the Organization and its staff. They are on
the ground in many crisis regions in Latin America,
Europe, Africa and Asia.
It is becoming ever clearer that different
approaches must be found to prevent or resolve each
17

individual crisis. The commitment of the United
Nations in all crisis areas is the proof. In Afghanistan
and in the Balkans, in Haiti and in the Great Lakes
region the United Nations is already making a
considerable contribution. But we must realize that
there will not be fewer conflicts in the future, and the
demands made of the Organization will grow.
Against this backdrop the question arises whether
the structures given to the United Nations at its
foundation almost sixty years ago are still suited to this
mandate, whether its work enjoys the international
acceptance it needs. In particular, the disputes
concerning the Iraq crisis highlighted this problem
once again.
We are convinced there is no alternative to a
world acting multilaterally. To make this multilateral
cooperation sustainable and capable, we need a
courageous and comprehensive reform of the United
Nations that faces up to the challenges we are facing.
It was the Secretary-General himself who took
the initiative, and for this we extend our thanks. To that
end, he appointed a panel of high-level international
experts who are to present him with reform proposals
at the end of the year. We look forward to that report
and the ensuing debate with great interest.
What is at stake is a new, shared understanding of
the Charter system. How can we shape prevention to
make it more effective, and peace-building to make it
more sustainable? How can we further implement the
proposals on the reform of peacekeeping? What exactly
do we understand by the right of self-defence? How do
we define terrorism? The answer to this question in
particular seems clear, yet real agreement would take us,
the international community of States, a step forward.
A number of very concrete proposals on the
reform of the United Nations institutions have already
been presented. Let me therefore outline some thoughts
on this matter.
I want to start with the General Assembly. It is
the central organ of the United Nations, the only one
with universal membership. For this very reason, the
Assembly has to be more than an annual forum where
we just go through the motions. What we need to do
first is focus our topics more carefully. We have to
discuss the truly crucial issues — otherwise, essential
questions will be dealt with in other forums. Secondly,
we need more efficient working methods.
The Economic and Social Council has to finally
become the central organ in the United Nations system
for consultation and decision-making on economic and
social issues. We believe that the Council has at two
levels vast potential that has yet to be fully tapped. On
the one hand, that body maintains a network of
expertise unequalled in the world. We have to make
better and more targeted use of it. On the other hand,
we see the Economic and Social Council as a partner
for the Security Council for peacekeeping, as laid
down in Article 65 of the Charter. When it comes to
fighting the causes of conflicts and to post-crisis
rehabilitation, the Economic and Social Council has an
important role to play that can support Security
Council efforts for conflict prevention and peace-
building. We should grant the Economic and Social
Council more competences in the operative sphere.
After all, the efforts we make in peace missions
will be successful only if the military commitment is
followed by a longer phase of stabilization, and very
often that phase turns out to be the most difficult one.
The Economic and Social Council advisory groups on
post-crisis rehabilitation in Africa are a step in the
right direction. That is what the decisive link between
conflict management and development cooperation
could indeed look like.
Such an all-embracing approach needs
appropriate financial resources. The instrument of
voluntary contributions has proven insufficient in
everyday life, and therefore I propose earmarking a
certain share of the United Nations peacekeeping budget
for post-crisis rehabilitation. This means we could
achieve what we have long been trying, a “prevention
share”, which — let us remember Haiti — could help
us save the costs of conflicts flaring up again.
Many criticize the proliferation of subsidiary and
subordinate organizations of the United Nations. Of
course, a reduction cannot be an end in itself. But we
ought to exercise enough self-criticism to ask ourselves
whether it would not be better to pool competences in
some cases.
However, there are also spheres that need to be
better equipped. I am thinking here, for example, of the
handling of environmental issues in the United Nations
system. We thus support the proposal made by French
President Jacques Chirac last year to upgrade the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to a
specialized agency with universal membership. That
18

could considerably strengthen UNFP’s contribution to
sustainable development.
At the heart of the reform of the United Nations
is the organ shouldering the central responsibility for
international peace: the Security Council. Conflicts are
on the increase. They stretch across all continents, and
they are growing in complexity. In turn, the
responsibility and competences of the Council have
expanded constantly. Crisis prevention will play an
increasingly important role. And for peace-building,
ever more comprehensive strategies, closer cooperation
and additional resources will be needed. This will
mean more and more decisions that entail long-term
obligations, create new international law and make
major inroads into State sovereignty.
If we really want Security Council decisions to be
accepted as legitimate and implemented effectively, we
have to reform the Council. It has to more broadly
represent a world organization that today embraces
more than 191 countries. That is inconceivable without
increasing the number of seats — for permanent and
non-permanent members alike. The reasons behind
such a move speak for themselves.
A Council with more members would enjoy
greater acceptance internationally as a basis for greater
authority. The more balanced and comprehensive
representation of all continents — also among the
permanent members — would lead to a better sense of
ownership of the Security Council for all States.
Similarly, an enlargement would considerably bolster
the motivation of the new Council members to make a
long-term contribution to realizing the goals of the
United Nations.
The enlargement must adequately reflect sea
changes such as decolonization, the end of the cold war
and globalization. The composition of the Council
must ultimately mirror the current geopolitical reality.
That means that all major regions of the South must be
represented by permanent members in the Security
Council. At the same time, account has to be taken of
Members that can and want to make a particularly
meaningful and sustainable contribution to maintaining
world peace and international security and to realizing
the purposes of the Organization. That twofold
approach would increase the Council’s efficiency and
its ability to act and to assert itself.
For 40 years, the composition of the Security
Council has remained unchanged. I believe it is high
time to adapt it to the new global reality. Half-baked or
interim solutions are neither necessary nor helpful.
Like Brazil, India and Japan, Germany too is ready to
take on the responsibility associated with a permanent
seat in the security Council. But it is especially
important to us that the African continent be
represented among the new permanent members.
A second aspect also has to be taken into account
in Security Council reform. All in all, a greater number
of Member States that are engaging themselves in the
work of the United Nations should be able to get more
involved in the work of the Security Council. For that
to happen, additional non-permanent seats also have to
be created. That would mean that the balance between
permanent and non-permanent members could be
retained.
As I said before, United Nations reform will be
the central and defining theme of this General
Assembly session. I thus call upon Member States: let
us use the fifty-ninth session, right up until the next
session in 2005, to launch the overdue reforms and
achieve tangible results. We, the Member States, have
to muster the political insight, the will and the
creativity to adapt the Organization to the global
reality. Germany is ready to make a committed
contribution.I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
election. We are pleased that a man of your ability, a
Francophone representative of a friendly country, is
directing our proceedings.
I also wish to warmly applaud our Secretary-
General. We have heard his message on respect for the
rule of law. And through the Secretary-General, I wish to
commend the entire staff of this institution, here and
everywhere in the world: their courage and commitment
are a credit to our ideals and to the organizations they
serve — sadly, sometimes at the cost of their own
lives.
How are we to meet the challenges facing the
world? That is the question we all keep asking
ourselves, one after another, from this rostrum. And
how are we to meet the world’s expectations unless we
all mobilize? More than ever, the United Nations
remains the one irreplaceable, legitimate framework
for harnessing that mobilization and translating it into
collective action.
We have much to do: conflicts remain unresolved,
while others are breaking out; poverty is declining all too
slowly; people are destroyed by wars; refugees are torn
from their land; and the threat of terrorism is not
fading. Yes, we have much to do. Yes, we have a duty
to act, and an obligation never to give up.
The United Nations is acting — on all fronts, on
the front line. To resolve conflicts and prevent them
from flaring up again, it is present everywhere, on all
continents, in Haiti, Kosovo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in Côte d’Ivoire, Afghanistan and many
other fronts, deploying over 50,000 Blue Helmets. It
provides assistance to 17 million people protected by
the High Commissioner for Refugees. Through the
World Food Programme, it feeds more than 100 million
individuals. And it helps, especially through the United
Nations Development Programme, 170 States or
territories to develop.
United Nations activities — our activities —
continue to expand. Thus, the Organization is called
upon to be at the centre of the counter-terrorism
measures that the international community is putting in
place. The threat of terrorism, now a global one,
calling for a global response. That is why France
committed itself here to the fight, and did so again
recently by supporting the strengthening of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The tragedy of 11 September, which I refer to
with feeling here in New York City, was an attack on
us all. Since then, terrorism has continued to strike: in
Europe, in Madrid, six months ago; and in Asia, in Bali
and Jakarta. Cowardly attacks are mounted against the
weakest. How can we not be appalled at the tragedy of
the school in Beslan where children — the symbol of
innocence — were violently massacred?
We are waging a merciless fight against
terrorism. Let us at the same time address its roots.
That means putting an end to situations that terrorists
exploit; giving the world’s excluded hope again;
restoring dignity to those peoples deprived of it; and
ensuring that dialogue and cooperation among
civilizations, cultures and religions prevail, rather than
conflict and intolerance.
Global threats require a strong, and always
collective, response. The threat of proliferation, which
29

could merge with that of terrorism, calls for resolute
and sustained action. The non-proliferation regime has
been seriously undermined by the combined action of
certain States and non-State actors. That is why
strengthening existing instruments is today essential.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) Review Conference in 2005 will be an
opportunity to do so.
A safer and freer world is, first, a more just
world. That is why we must act relentlessly to resolve
conflicts. I am, of course, thinking, first and foremost,
of the Middle East, where — in the wake of the hopes
raised by Madrid, Oslo, Camp David and Taba — the
absence of any prospect is today breeding despair,
extremism and violence of every kind. This central
crisis can be resolved only through a negotiated
settlement based on international law, enabling all the
peoples — I repeat, all the peoples — of the region to
live in dignity and security.
The road map, which the parties have accepted
and which the Security Council has endorsed, must be
implemented in full and in good faith. France hopes
that the withdrawal from Gaza is a first step in that
direction. It will make every effort to get the peace
process under way again. It will continue to act vis-à-
vis all the leaders — the elected and legitimate
leaders — of that region.
Let us make no mistake: building peace in the
Middle East is a historic responsibility for our
generation. Europe — the European Union — in
partnership with the United States, Russia and the
United Nations, is determined to play a political role in
order to stimulate this process.
In Iraq, violence is exploding. It seems to us that
only when the Iraqis themselves take control of their
future, and when the political process provided for by
the Security Council is pursued, will the country be
able to escape the chaos that is destabilizing the entire
region. France, as everyone knows, did not approve of
the conditions in which the conflict was unleashed.
Neither today nor tomorrow will it commit itself
militarily in Iraq. However, it reaffirms its willingness,
with its European partners, to assist the Iraqi people in
rebuilding their country and in restoring their
institutions.
Who can fail to see that, in the Middle East,
everything is fragile and everything is interconnected?
Who can fail to understand that the only path —
everywhere — is sovereignty and justice for peoples?
Only then will they make progress towards peace and
the economic and political modernization to which
they are entitled.
Africa, too, is where we will win or lose the battle
for justice. Without justice, there will be no peace.
Without peace, there will be no lasting development. The
future of the African continent, and its stability and
development, are a vital objective for us all.
Today, with the impetus of the United Nations,
longstanding crises have been, or will be, settled —
Mozambique, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Others,
however, have broken out, and together we must
prevent them from worsening or spreading: in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Central African Republic, and Darfur. The
Great Lakes region is slow to find the path to peace,
just as the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
slow to die, and the Somali question remains to be
resolved.
On that great continent, which is undergoing
profound change, facing real threats but also
considerable potential, political leaders are today
demonstrating a genuine determination to commit to
working to resolve conflicts and crises. That can be
seen from the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD); the resolute
commitment of the African Union on the political front
and in the field; and the growing role of regional
organizations. We resolutely support that commitment.
For development, but also for peace-building, we wish
to bring about the conditions for an effective and
coherent partnership between North and South.
Given the magnitude of the goals and needs of
the continent, I firmly believe in the importance of
pooling the efforts of the Europeans with those of our
African partners, under United Nations auspices,
whenever necessary. I am convinced that our
experience of European integration — without
attempting to teach any lessons — can simply be useful
to that continent, and that is the sense of the statement
made on our behalf by the representative of the
presidency of the European Union, Bernard Bot, before
the Assembly the day before yesterday.
France has long been involved in strengthening
African peacekeeping capacities. Today, the European
Union intends to make a commitment immediately and
with determination. Operation Artemis, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is proof of that
30

commitment. The creation of the European Peace
Facility now provides major support to African
organizations. We are willing, if the African Union so
wishes, to assist it in its action for peace, as in the
Sudan.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Justice and conflict prevention cannot be
dissociated from collective action to promote
development. The Millennium Goals — to which the
developing countries, donor States and multilateral
institutions are committed — are an overriding obligation
for us all, especially the wealthiest countries.
More than $50 billion a year is still needed to
achieve those objectives — a fact of which we all are
aware. On Monday, 100-odd countries endorsed the
New York Declaration on Action Against Hunger and
Poverty. Together they ask that additional resources be
provided for development, including through
innovative mechanisms. This is a powerful movement,
launched in this very forum of the United Nations,
aimed at generating the necessary resources for justice
and for development. It is an important milestone. My
country is proud to have contributed to it, through the
voice of the President of the Republic, and it will
continue to do so.
But France is also fighting for a more controlled,
and therefore most just, globalization that would give
everyone a chance. We advocate the establishment of a
political body, in which the United Nations must have
its due place — to improve coordination of multilateral
action in the economic, social and environmental fields
and to provide the necessary impetus. This is one of the
major issues that we must consider in coming months,
especially on the basis of the proposals that the Panel
on reform is expected to make.
Again, a more just world is a world that respects
human dignity and freedom. Fundamental human rights
are universal. Each man, woman and child has these
inherent rights, and it is up to us to see that they thrive
and are respected.
It is also up to us to fight firmly and
uncompromisingly against all manifestations of violence
and discrimination based on race, origin, gender or
religion. Our resolve in the area of human rights, as
elsewhere, must remain absolute and constant. I mean
that we need a genuine dialogue with the civil society
and with all non-governmental organizations. The time
has come, it seems to us, to conclude the negotiation of
a conventional instrument on forced disappearances, to
recognize the rights of indigenous peoples and to
mobilize against all forms of modern slavery.
Let us not rule out the use of force, in certain
cases and on the appeal of victims, to prevent massive
human rights violations and acts of violence against
civilians. The Security Council has the honour of
assuming this responsibility, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.
Let us also continue putting in place mechanisms
to combat impunity, often the prerequisite for durable
peace and lasting reconciliation. The establishment of
the International Criminal Court specifically meets this
objective. We welcome the major milestone reached
with the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
The dignity of humankind and peoples also
requires due respect for cultures in their diversity. The
sense of loss of identity contributes to the frustrations
that breed a good many conflicts. The unity of the
international community, it goes without saying, cannot
be synonymous with uniformity.
The negotiation of a convention on cultural
diversity, which has just started at the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is,
therefore, in our view, a key objective. It must produce
a concrete result, as planned, before the 2005 general
conference.
Our planet is dangerous; it is also in danger. The
earth is showing signs of strain; we are not maintaining
it; in fact, we are plundering it; the climate is
deteriorating. And yet, we should remember, scarcity
of resources has at all times been a factor in conflict.
For the future of our children, we must act while there
is still time.
Is there among us, for that matter, one single issue
that more obviously ignores borders than ecology and
ecological security and requires coordinated action —
that is, multilateral action? International governance in
environmental matters is, it seems to us, inadequate
today. We must simplify and strengthen the existing
international regime on environmental issues, develop
monitoring, and early warning expertise, and increase
financing, especially for developing countries.
Let us be clear-sighted. For the environment, as
for so many other issues, prevention costs less than
31

cure. In this regard, we hope the establishment of a
United Nations organization for the environment will
be considered, based on the achievements of the United
Nations Environment Programme. We propose that this
great undertaking, which is one of the Millennium Goals,
be on the agenda of the September 2005 summit.
In a world — our world — where 800 million
people do not have enough to eat, where more financial
resources are devoted to weapons than to development,
where millions of men, women and children are forced
to leave their land to escape destitution or massacres, the
international community has a duty to act and to show
imagination. It is here at the United Nations where we
can meet to take initiatives, to fight misfortune and to
apportion the tasks, all of them urgent.
The United Nations system, which is unique and
more indispensable than ever, also has an obligation to
reform itself to meet new needs and new threats, and to
make the most of new technologies merely in order to
live in our times. The Secretary-General got down to
this problem at the start of his first mandate.
Considerable work has already been done. The
proposals of the high-level panel will be the basis for
the next, still more ambitious, stages. France has made
proposals on many issues, such as peacekeeping
operations, human rights and development financing.
We have also indicated, with Germany, how the
representativity and legitimacy of Security Council
action might be improved. We advocate enlargement in
both categories of members, permanent and non-
permanent; and we have expressed support for the
aspirations of Germany, Japan, Brazil and India, which
should be accompanied by a country from Africa.
In a complex and unpredictable world, it is our
joint responsibility to maintain and strengthen the one
institution where all nations can work together, where
they can unite to shape and control their common
destiny. Through its legitimacy and ever-increasing
effectiveness, the United Nations must be the
instrument of universal conscience for which it remains
the crucible.Mr. President, I
offer my congratulations and those of my country on
your election as President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session.
Eighteen months ago, the United Nations faced
divisions more serious than any since the Cuban
missile crisis of October 1962. We all worried whether
the strength and unity which we had built up since the
end of the cold war could survive.
Then last year we watched, as Secretary-General
Kofi Annan stood at his now famous fork in the road.
In the year since, almost instinctively, we have decided
to follow our Secretary-Generalís directions. This
Organization has not been plunged, as some predicted,
into paralysis; instead, I have felt a powerful if
unspoken determination to make the United Nations
work, and to work more effectively, to fulfil its central
task: to secure peace around the world.
Over the last 12 months we have dealt with new
crises such as that in Darfur in the Sudan, where we
have set clear tasks for both the Sudanese Government
and the rebel groups. We have tackled the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes; mobilized international support for the new
Iraq; and addressed a long list of hugely important
subjects which rarely receive the coverage they should
in the media ó Haiti, Georgia, Timor-Leste,
Bougainville and Western Sahara.
We have shown in those actions the unity of
purpose which is one of the strongest weapons in our
hands to defeat the evils which today affect the globe.
And the search for consensus has not been confined to
the Security Council.
I am proud that just a few months after the
difficult times of early last year, France, Germany and
the United Kingdom came together to work, as we
continue to do, on the Iran dossier before the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
I recognize, of course, the frustrations which all
of us feel, not least over the Israel-Palestine conflict,
where the clear path to peace set out in the road map
and endorsed by the Security Council remains elusive.
But all in all we have shown the will to make collective
action work, though we know, too, that we need to go
further.
In particular, we need to get better at tackling
threats which have changed dramatically since the
founding of the United Nations. Today the greatest
threats to our security often come not from other
functioning sovereign States, but from terrorist
organizations, from failing States and from man-made
shocks to our environment like climate change, which
can exacerbate State failure and breed internal
instability.
The High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change appointed by the Secretary-General is
preparing its recommendations on ways to address the
various challenges. We should remember in all this that
we have one great advantage. Though its institutions
and the founding text of the Charter has hardly
changed in 60 years, the United Nations is not an
organization set in stone, but a set of living institutions
based on a shared will to make collective security
work. The United Nations has adapted in the past -
with the development of peacekeeping, a greater focus
on individual rights and the setting of global targets for
34

development - and I am confident that it can adapt in
the future.
Of course, institutional change is part of that. At
the United Nations foundation, one eighth of its
members could expect to be elected members of the
Security Council at any one time. Today that
proportion is less than one eighteenth. The United
Kingdom has long supported the case for expanding
the Security Council to, say, 24 members, and for
including amongst the permanent members: Germany
and Japan, two countries which between them
contribute 28 per cent of the budget of the United
Nations; India, which represents one sixth of the entire
worldís population; and Brazil, which just missed
permanent membership back in 1945.
But we should not see an expansion of the
Security Council, or other institutional change, as a
panacea. The biggest need is to adapt our common
understanding - the United Nations jurisprudence, if
you like - and its operational effectiveness so that we
can respond more quickly and more thoroughly to
todayís new threats.
Let me highlight three areas which to me seem
particularly important: first, our approach must be
broader and must tackle threats to the most vulnerable,
including poverty, disease and environmental
degradation; secondly, we must build a new consensus by
expanding the scope of collective action; and, thirdly, we
must deal with the threat of terrorism, which menaces
us all and everything for which we stand.
Let me now take these three points in turn. First,
there is the need for a broader approach which
addresses the complex and interdependent nature of
security today. Here, we have to do more to meet the
Millennium Development Goals and to promote
sustainable development, especially in Africa. We
cannot have security without development or
development without security.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in his
speech this week, we have to do more to entrench the
rule of law and justice, especially in States recovering
from conflict. The United Kingdom will pursue work
on the Secretary-Generalís report during its Security
Council presidency next month.
We could also use the United Nations better, to
agree to monitor and help implement globally accepted
norms of good governance.
And we need to act together quickly on climate
change, perhaps the greatest long-term threat to our
world in terms of stability and security. We have to
implement Kyoto - and I greatly welcome what my
colleague, His Excellency Sergey Lavrov had to say on
that today - and agree to emission reductions beyond
2012.
My second point is the need to build a new
consensus on the scope of collective action. We all
represent independent, sovereign states. But even as we
founded the United Nations we recognized that
sovereignty was a trust in the hands of a nationís
government: there to be respected, not abused, from
either without or within.
The Charter set out arrangements so that an abuse
from without could be dealt with through the inherent
right of self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the
Charter. But it also said that an abuse from within
which threatens the peace could and should be dealt
with by the Security Council, under the powers
enshrined in the other articles of Chapter VII of the
Charter, and by the many conventions concluded
within the United Nations framework, including, for
example, the 1948 Geneva Convention. No longer -
we all said - could or should the world turn away
from unspeakable barbarities like that of the Holocaust.
But we have not always lived up to those high
expectations, as the tragedies of Rwanda and Bosnia
ten years ago reminded us. Today we must resolve to
do so and to engage in situations of humanitarian
catastrophe or grave violations of international
humanitarian law and to act in the face of other threats
to international peace and security.
The principle of non-interference has to be
qualified by a duty to protect, especially where
Governments are failing in that duty.
We therefore need, for example, to be ready to
support greater use by the Secretary-General of his
powers under Article 99 of the Charter, to bring threats
to peace to the Security Council's attention. We have to
act quickly in response, because prevention is far better
than cure. We should look to work more closely with
regional organizations, as we are doing with the
African Union in Darfur. We need more discussion on
the criteria as to when the international community
might have to intervene with military force in extreme
circumstances. We must get better at engaging for the
long term in countries recovering from conflict,
35

coordinating our efforts in response to locally agreed
priorities.
My third point is the urgent need to combat
global terrorism, a menace directed at us all. If we have
learned anything in the three years since 11 September
2001 it is that international terrorism is indiscriminate
in its targets and merciless in its hatred. Christian, Jew,
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, Muslim, people of no religion
or any religion, and of every or no shade of political
opinion, all have died through the terroristsí bullet or
bomb.
My friend Sergey Lavrov spoke eloquently a
moment ago about the tears still wet for the terrible,
unspeakable massacre of the young and innocent that
took place in Beslan. Sergey, your tears are my tears;
Russiaís tears are the worldís tears. We are all in the
fight against terrorism together.
Today in Iraq we are seeing again the depths to
which the terrorists plumb. The vast majority of the
victims of terrorism in Iraq are Iraqis. Our thoughts
and condolences are with the Government and people
of Iraq and with their families. But some of the victims
of terrorism in Iraq are foreigners who are helping
Iraqis to build a more stable and prosperous country.
One of them is Kenneth Bigley, a British engineer held
hostage by terrorists who have already barbarically
murdered his two American comrades. Our thoughts
and prayers are with their families. We continue to do
all we can to secure Mr. Bigleyís release.
I know - how could I forget - that opinions
have differed over the rightness of the military action
taken in Iraq 18 months ago. But I warrant that no
nation is in favour of the terrorist insurgency now
occurring there. For we all recognize that what is being
attempted by the terrorists in Iraq is an attack both on
the Iraqi people and on everything for which the
Organization stands: safety, security and human rights.
We have to come together to defeat the terrorists and
their despicable aims.
The threat of terrorism confronts democratic,
properly functioning States with an acute dilemma,
namely, how to fight those who recognize none of the
values for which we stand while remaining true to
those values. Our commitments under international
conventions express many of those values and the
importance that we attach to them. But equally, those
conventions cannot be allowed to shelter those
involved in terrorism. The conventions were designed
to protect citizens from abuse by States, not by
terrorists.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees protects those with a well-founded fear of
persecution. I am proud that the United Kingdom and so
many other nations have offered that protection when and
where it was required. But as the 1951 Convention
itself sets out, asylum is not an unqualified right. It does
not apply to anyone who has committed a war crime, a
crime against humanity or other serious crime; nor
does it apply to anyone who is guilty of acts contrary
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We must never stoop to the level of the terrorist ó
to torture, mistreatment or unjustified incarceration ó
nor will any country within the European Union be
party to the return of suspects to such conditions, nor
to face the death penalty. But we cannot let terrorists
exploit a protection designed for the persecuted, not
the persecutors. We in the United Kingdom shall
therefore be working closely with Russia on its
important draft Security Council resolution, to see how
best we can prevent those who commit, support and
finance terrorism from sheltering behind a refugee
status to which they are not entitled. Along with the
Russian Federation and other partners in the Security
Council, we also wish to look at ways to ensure the
speedier extradition of such individuals.
We, the United Nations, have over the last year
begun to show a new determination to come together
and to make collective action work. A year from now,
we will meet again here to review the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, as well as the Millennium
Development Goals, and to set the United Nations
agenda for the next decade. The United Kingdomís
chairmanship of the G-8 next year will focus on
tackling climate change and on Africa, on which the
Independent Commission for Africa will be producing
recommendations as to how best we can support the
radical agenda for change and development designed
by Africa itself through the New Partnership for
Africaís Development and the African Union. Our
presidency of the European Union will help us to lead
efforts for a successful outcome in the Doha
Development Round, and for building the European
Unionís crisis-management capabilities.
More than ever, global security is our shared
responsibility. In the year ahead, as we continue to
36

adapt to todayís threats and challenges, we must find
renewed determination and political will to make
collective security work. The United Kingdom is
determined to play its full part in that endeavour.Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. May I assure you of
India’s full support in ensuring its success.
As we gather here in the sixtieth year since the
United Nations was founded, we might perhaps pause
to reflect on the fate of the ideas and ideals of the
international community that inspired its creation. The
post-war generation had already become aware that the
world which had emerged from the ashes of a global
war could no longer be a peaceful world unless the
underlying forces of conflict were addressed
effectively by the entire community of nations as a
collectivity. Nations were therefore united to make the
world a safer and more peaceful place — a world in
which free peoples could pursue together a destiny of
shared prosperity.
The impulse behind the creation of global
institutions nearly 60 years ago has become an even
more pressing reality today. If we look around us, the
single most defining characteristic of our contemporary
world is the global, transnational character of the
challenges we confront, whether these are in the realm
of international security or in that of development.
Virtually every major issue that we face as nation-
States has both a domestic and a transnational
dimension. It is becoming increasingly apparent as
never before that, unless we fashion a global response
to those challenges based on a meaningful consensus,
we will not succeed in creating a world that truly
manifests the ideals of the United Nations.
Terrorism is one such challenge for which many
of us have paid an unacceptable price. We shall not
forget that, three years ago, it was this great city that
witnessed the single most horrendous terrorist act in
human history. Approximately three weeks ago, in
Russia, the world saw another brutal act of terror
which took the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians,
including a large number of young children.
Terrorism exploits the technologies spawned by
globalization, recruits its foot soldiers on ideologies of
bigotry and hatred, and directly targets democracies.
And yet, it is a sad reality that international networks
of terror appear to cooperate more effectively among
themselves than the democratic nations that they target.
We speak about cooperation, but we often seem
hesitant to commit ourselves to a truly global offensive
to root out terrorism with the pooling of resources, the
exchanging of information, the sharing of intelligence
and the unambiguous unity of purpose that is required.
That must change. We do have a global coalition
against terrorism; we must now give it substance and
credibility, avoiding selective approaches and political
expediency.
I now turn to other challenges that we face today,
such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
There is an increasing reliance on restrictive regimes
and on the use of punitive action to confront this threat
to international peace and security. Although India is
firmly opposed to proliferation and has an impeccable
record in that respect, we believe that it is only a global
consensus of willing nations that will ultimately prove
to be truly effective in that regard.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is a good
model to follow with respect to other weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It is through
representative institutions, rather than through
exclusive clubs of privileged countries, that we can
address global threats posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. As far back as 1988, Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi outlined a series of specific steps in an action
plan, whose central proposition remains valid even
today — that progressive steps towards the elimination
14

of weapons of mass destruction must be based on a
balance of obligations between those who possess such
weapons and those who do not.
It is quite evident today that a global discourse is
required for evolving a more cooperative and
consensual international security order. India believes
that such consensus must differentiate between States
whose actions strengthen non-proliferation and those
that weaken the realization of its objectives.
Let me now turn to the central theme for the vast
majority of United Nations Members; the challenge of
development and the eradication of mass poverty.
Globalization has undoubtedly brought enhanced
effectiveness and efficiency in the functioning of our
economies. It has integrated marketplaces, higher
standards of living and a revolution in global
connectivity.
But there is also the phenomenon of widening
economic disparities, both within and among countries.
Connectivity also means that the people are painfully
aware — in real time — of how far and how fast they
are falling behind in their relative living conditions.
Development today is no longer a function of domestic
resources and national policies alone. It is a process
that is vitally linked to the international economic
environment that the developing countries face.
The international community must find ways to
contract those circles of exclusion. We need to find
innovative sources of financing and access to new
technologies that are necessary to assist those who are
on the margins of globalization. Just as prosperity
cannot be sustained by being walled in, poverty cannot
be banished to some invisible periphery. Development
must therefore return to the centre of the global
discourse. We must evolve equitable and rule-based
regimes to manage global trade, investment flows and
the movement of services.
Four years ago, at our Millennium Summit, we
adopted ambitious global development goals, but it is a
matter of concern that we have already fallen behind in
their implementation.
While globalization has generated new
challenges, it has also given us new technologies to
deal with those massive challenges. The world faces
ominous pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, but it today
also possesses remedies and skills that can rid the
world of that scourge. We face problems of
environmental degradation in many parts of our planet,
but we also have available safe and environment-
friendly technologies.
Many countries are beset by problems of hunger
and malnutrition, but we possess modern techniques of
food production and processing to make a hunger-free
world a credible and realistic dream. Although our
excessive dependence on hydrocarbons raises concerns
about the long-term availability of energy and about
the security of supplies, technology has made available
many environmentally sound alternative technologies.
What we lack, however, is a truly global agreement and
a mobilization of the international community to
overcome the massive challenges.
The experience of the decades since the inception
of the United Nations demonstrates the great
significance of democracy as an instrument for
achieving both peace and prosperity. While it is
gratifying that the frontiers of democracy have
expanded dramatically in the last decade and a half,
they still exclude significant numbers.
Only a few months ago, in India’s fourteenth
general election, our country went through the largest
exercise of popular will in the world. I can therefore
assert with confidence, the importance that national
articulations in global forums have in truly reflecting
the democratically expressed will of their people. We
choose to overlook the absence of democracy in too
many cases for reasons of political expediency.
Democracy’s representative nature validates the
commitments we take on as countries; it should also
determine the manner in which the architecture of
international institutions evolves. What is required for
the international community to successfully deal with
global challenges — whether they be security
challenges, economic challenges or challenges in the
sphere of the environment — is the existence of
international institutions and a culture of genuine
multilateralism.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
are the only instruments available for responding
effectively to the challenges we face collectively. But
what is missing is our sustained commitment to
democratizing the functioning of the United Nations.
It is common knowledge that the United Nations
is often unable to exert an effective influence on global
economic and political issues of critical importance.
15

That is due to what may be called its democracy
deficit, which stands in the way of an effective
multilateralism based on a democratically-evolved
global consensus.
Therefore, reform and restructuring of the United
Nations system can alone provide a crucial link in an
expanding chain of efforts to refashion international
structures, imbuing them with a greater degree of
participatory decision-making so as to make them more
representative of contemporary realities.
Our Millennium Declaration recognized the
urgency of the reform of the United Nations Security
Council. An overwhelming majority of the world’s
population cannot be excluded from an institution that
today legislates on an increasing number of issues,
with an ever-widening impact. The expansion of the
Security Council, in the categories of both permanent
and non-permanent members, and the inclusion of
countries like India as permanent Members would be a
first step in the process of making the United Nations a
truly representative body.
I would like to make brief references to two
countries with which India has had historically friendly
ties and whose early return to political normalcy is the
focus of the world’s attention.
The situation in Iraq causes us great concern. The
United Nations has a central role to play in erasing the
discord of the recent past and in ensuring that the Iraqi
people can soon exercise effective sovereignty,
preserving the country’s unity and territorial integrity.
An end to the suffering of the Iraqi people and
recognition of their aspirations should be the guiding
objectives. Consistent with our longstanding ties of
friendship with the Iraqi people, India will contribute
to Iraq’s humanitarian and economic reconstruction.
In the past three years, the international
community has assisted Afghanistan in pulling back
from the brink of chaos and chronic instability. We
sincerely hope that the upcoming presidential elections
and the subsequent parliamentary elections will allow
the Afghan people to express their will, free from
interference and intimidation. India’s assistance to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development will
continue.
Relations between India and Pakistan have been a
matter of attention for the international community. It
is known that in January this year India and Pakistan
initiated a composite dialogue to resolve all issues,
including that of Jammu and Kashmir. I reaffirm our
determination to carry forward that dialogue to a
purposeful and mutually acceptable conclusion.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm India’s
commitment to the principles that have brought us
together in this Organization. Those principles retain
their relevance and validity even while the global
economy and the international political order pose new
and very different challenges. All of us have to grow
out of the comfort of the predictable, discard
constraining habits of thought, and move forward with
confidence to meet the demands of the present and the
future. Each of us has to be prepared to take on new
obligations and larger responsibilities relevant to the
needs of our time.
I deem it a privilege to say unhesitatingly that
India is conscious of the responsibilities that lie ahead.
I speak of an India on the move — on the cutting edge
of economic, technological and developmental
transformations. This is an India endowed with
outstanding human resources, and we are putting in
place policies which will respond to emerging and
critical tasks. We have the capabilities and capacity to
take these on, and to participate in the restructuring of
a just and dynamic world order. We are confident that,
in the inextricably interdependent world we live in, our
commitment to the common good, which this
Organization embodies, will be resolute and full.
In this, we are inspired by the vision of
internationalism bequeathed to us by India’s first Prime
Minister, the great Jawaharlal Nehru — a vision of a
world order whose pillars are peace, harmony,
cooperation and development. That vision needs to
reanimate the collective wisdom of the world
community for a new partnership to meet the
unprecedented challenges we face.I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly
and to wish you much success.
The United Nations was established out of the
devastation of the Second World War in order to build
a world of unity and of peace. Today, 60 years after the
Organization came into being, we must ask ourselves:
What are we united for and what are we united against?
Are we united for peace and security? Are we united
for fairness and justice? Are we united against terror?
Are we united against tyranny?
Or are we, sadly, united only in cynical and
immoral majority votes that make a mockery of the
noble ideals on which this body was founded?
Tomorrow is Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the Jewish
calendar, when all Jews stand before God to account
for their actions. It is an appropriate time for all
19

nations, separately and together, to engage in such an
accounting.
I sense a change in the world. In the face of the
global campaign of terror which has left no country
free of its devastating impact, the world is beginning to
realize what we in Israel have long known: that
terrorism is a challenge to humanity as a whole, not
just to individual countries; that the response to that
global threat must also be global if it is to be effective;
that the threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to
freedom everywhere; that fighting terror is crucial to
our ability to bring peace.
There was a time when the problems of terror,
Islamic fundamentalism and Iranian nuclear ambition
were seen as local problems — Israel’s problems —
not challenges which threatened the community of
nations as a whole. Today, however, our community of
nations is more united than ever in the battle against
terrorism, whose sole objective is to undermine
everything that we seek to build: peace, stability,
prosperity and opportunity for all.
Today we are also more united than ever in
opposition to the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The international community now realizes
that Iran — with missiles that can reach London, Paris,
Berlin and southern Russia — poses a threat not only
to the security of Israel, but to the security and stability
of the whole world. Indeed, Iran has replaced Saddam
Hussein as the world’s number-one exporter of terror,
hate and instability.
The international community now also realizes,
as reflected in Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), that Syria’s occupation of Lebanon and its
support for Palestinian terror must end if our collective
aspirations are to be fulfilled.
And the international community now realizes
that terror and tyranny are the twin enemies of the
individual freedoms and human rights — including the
right to life itself — which define our humanity.
Today, the community of nations knows that
securing freedom and democracy for all the peoples of the
world must be our collective goal. The pictures of human
flesh torn apart by the terrorists, from New York to
Beslan — and just yesterday, once again, in Jerusalem
— are waking us up to the challenge we face.
In that spirit of unity, and in the name of all those
in the world who suffer from terror and tyranny, I call
on the Assembly to refocus its aspirations and its
priorities. I call on the Assembly to end its obsession
with Israel and to ensure that United Nations resources
are allocated more equally and more effectively. Our
United Nations must provide solutions to the global
challenges of hunger and poverty, of disease and
weapons proliferation, of drug trafficking and
sustainable development. We must not let the
Palestinian desire to vilify Israel distract our global
community from the obligation to address the needs of
all peoples.
I call on the Assembly to address head-on the
active involvement of Iran and Syria in terrorism and
Syria’s continued occupation of Lebanon. There can be
no place in the community of nations for those who
promote the killing of children. I call on the Assembly
to promote practical measures to help nations cut off
all financial and political lifelines of terror.
I call on the Assembly to address the growth of
anti-Semitism and other forms of racism and
intolerance. I urge you, Mr. President, and the
Secretary-General, to convene a special session of the
Assembly on that crucial matter. We all share the
responsibility to educate our children to understanding
and tolerance rather than to hatred and incitement.
We must build a united and global coalition to
fight terrorism, racism and anti-Semitism. We must
build a united front against the cold-blooded murderers
of our children. In that battle, there is no middle
ground. There is no room for explanations or excuses.
There are no mitigating circumstances. Declarations
and condemnations are very important, but they are not
enough. Every nation, every Government, every leader
has the responsibility to act. Those who choose instead
to support and sponsor terror must be isolated and held
to account for their crimes.
When I speak of terror and its dangers to life and
freedom, I speak from bitter personal experience. My
own home town of Beersheva suffered a double suicide
bombing just three weeks ago. Sixteen innocent people
were killed when their commuter buses were blown up.
In the middle of an important meeting with visiting
officials, I rushed to call my mother and brother to
check that they were alive. Hamas, which operates
freely from Palestinian territory and receives support
and safe haven from the regimes in Damascus and
Tehran, proudly claimed responsibility for that horrific
attack.
20

Again yesterday, as I was meeting with the
Secretary-General to discuss peace in the Middle East,
I was passed a note informing me of a suicide atrocity,
in which two more Israelis were blown to pieces by a
Palestinian terrorist. And this morning, once again, yet
more Palestinian murderers took the lives of three
young Israelis in an attack on Morag.
In the last year alone, 150 Israelis have been
killed and thousands more injured in more than 40
separate suicide bombings and other cold-blooded
attacks. More than 200 additional suicide-bombing
attempts were blocked by our defensive measures.
No Israeli mother is free of the fear that her child
may be lost. No Israeli child is immune to the
terrorists’ plans. In the name of God above and all
humanity here on Earth, this killing must stop.
Palestinian terrorism is the key reason that the
dream of peace in the Middle East has not yet become
a reality. Combating this terror is crucial to the
prospects for peace in our region. No peace initiative
can survive if terrorists continue to enjoy a free hand to
undermine it.
The road map recognizes this, calling, in phase
one, for sustained Palestinian action against terror, the
dismantling of terrorist organizations and the end of
incitement in schools and the media. Sadly, the current
Palestinian leadership has refused to fulfil those
fundamental obligations, preferring to blame Israel for
all its failures. The Palestinian side spends more energy
fighting Israel here at the United Nations than it does
fighting the terrorists in its own territory.
In the post-11-September world, this is not
acceptable. The Palestinians are not exempt from the
imperatives of the global war on terror. On the
contrary, it is in their clear interest to join it. To stand
up against Hamas and Islamic Jihad is to stand up for
Palestinian rights, not against them.
We urge the international community to recognize
this reality and help the voices of reform and
moderation within Palestinian society to emerge. The
future of the Palestinian people will be determined by
the choices that the Palestinians and their leadership
make on the ground. The solutions — for the
Palestinians and Israelis as one — lie in Gaza and
Ramallah, not in The Hague or New York.
Israel is acting in both the diplomatic and the
security arenas to deal with the consequences of this
chronic failure of the Palestinian leadership. On the
diplomatic front, Israel accepted the road map in May
2003, and we remain committed to its realization. At
this time, however, we have no responsible Palestinian
partner ready to join us in this effort. Israel is now
planning to implement the disengagement plan as a
means of enhancing security and establishing a new,
more promising platform for a return to negotiations.
We are in constant contact with the donor community
and the World Bank in a joint effort to rebuild Gaza in
the wake of Israel’s withdrawal.
On the security front, Israel is building a security
fence to stop the unchecked wave of Palestinian
attacks. After 20,000 terrorist attacks, we deserve to
protect our people. No other country would act
otherwise after 20, let alone 20,000, terrorist attacks.
The fence does not take lives. It saves them. Where
there is a fence, there is no terror. Where there is no
fence, there is terror. The modified route of the fence
reflects the necessary balance between the security of
our citizens and the welfare of the Palestinian
population, as called for by Israel’s Supreme Court.
Most important, the fence is reversible. The lives taken
by terror are irreversible. By helping take terrorism out
of the equation, the fence contributes to the prospect of
a return to negotiations and the realization of the road
map’s vision of peace.
I call on the Assembly to acknowledge this truth
and to reject the continued Palestinian effort to have
delegations address Israel’s response to terrorism,
instead of addressing the terrorism itself.
Ultimately, we need real contact and dialogue,
based on mutual respect for the humanity of the other
if we are to resolve the conflict in the Middle East. The
Government of Israel is ready for such contact. We are
ready to talk to any leadership — from Syria, Lebanon
or the Palestinians — that comes to the table without
terror and with the genuine intention of finding
mutually acceptable solutions to our differences.
Tomorrow, Yom Kippur, is a day of prayer,
fasting and soul-searching for the Jews. In Beersheva,
in a synagogue named after my father, I will be praying
together with those who have recently buried their
murdered children. I will pray that our collective
aspiration for life and freedom will prevail over the
terrorists and those who sponsor them. I will pray that
God will deliver peace on earth, for all humanity. And
I will pray that mankind can unite — through the
21

United Nations — to help make this dream become a
reality.
And I would like to say in Hebrew, Happy New
Year.Fifty-nine years ago the
United Nations was established by nations determined
to work collectively to find alternatives to conflict as a
means of resolving disputes and to create a stable,
secure and more just and prosperous world. Devastated
and exhausted by world war for the second time within
25 years, nations put their faith in multilateralism and
in this body in order to avoid future wars. The name
'United Nations' evoked the unity of humankind, in
which our shared needs and common humanity were
more important than our differences.
It is obvious as we consider the world today that
we have achieved that vision only in part. Yes, world
wars have been avoided. International covenants have
set out universally agreed human rights standards
against which the performance of governments can be
measured. International law has been developed and
strengthened. As Kofi Annan emphasized this morning
(see ), putting the rule of law into effect at
home and internationally is essential to achieving a
fair, just and civilized world. Cooperation has achieved
advances in meeting social, economic and
environmental needs.
But much more remains to be done. War, more
often within than across the boundaries of States, has
taken the lives of tens of millions of people since 1945,
most of them civilians. Weapons of mass destruction
have accumulated and access to them has spread to
more countries. New diseases such as HIV/AIDS have
emerged, with devastating consequences. The gap
between rich and poor countries has widened, not
diminished.
This year the Secretary-General's High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change will put
forward proposals for reforming and strengthening the
United Nations, aimed at ensuring its relevance and
effectiveness in addressing these issues. It is critical
that we seize this unique opportunity to institute
positive reforms and not squander it by adopting
narrow, self-interested and inflexible responses. Nor
will a lowest-common-denominator approach achieve
what we all require.
Reform is long overdue. The composition of the
Security Council cannot go on reflecting the world as it
was in 1945. An expanded Security Council and reform
of outmoded electoral groupings is necessary for the
Council to be representative of the international
community as it is today. Those changes will
strengthen the Councilís mandate and enhance its
credibility as the pre-eminent organ of the United
Nations. No solution, of course, will satisfy the
viewpoint of every Member nation. A willingness to
compromise on a package of proposals will be
essential. But clearly, enhancing the representation of
areas such as Asia, Latin America and Africa must be
an objective, and account must be taken of the
significant contributions to the United Nations of
nations such as Japan.
While the High-Level Panel will focus on reform
of the United Nations and security considerations,
development goals to create a fairer world and promote
economic and social progress in the developing world
are further vital considerations for the United Nations
in the year ahead. For hundreds of millions of people,
starvation, disease and poverty are more immediate
threats than the concerns others of us have about
terrorism and security.
We are now at a turning point in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Improving the quality
and quantity of development assistance is crucial.
However, real and lasting progress to meet
development challenges is also dependent on building
a fairer, more open and equitable global trading
system. Countries of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) spend
$360 billion each year on subsidizing agricultural
47

production in a way that excludes opportunities for the
developing world to export - not only to OECD
countries, but to third markets as well. That sum
dwarfs the amount the OECD countries provide in
development assistance.
New Zealand welcomes the progress made at the
World Trade Organization General Council meeting in
Geneva in July, which put the Doha Development
Agenda back on track. Agriculture is at the heart of the
round; the European Union and United States
agreement to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies
is particularly welcome.
The United Nations must also adapt itself to the
changing nature of security and humanitarian concerns.
The concept of national sovereignty being paramount
and standing in the way of international intervention in
local conflicts cannot be sustained. As the Secretary-
General has challenged us,
'if humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an
unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should
we respond to a Rwanda, to a Srebrenica - to
gross and systematic violations of human rights
that offend every precept of our common
humanity?' (A/54/2000, para. 217)
The International Commission on Intervention
and State Sovereignty concluded two and a half years
ago that sovereign States have the responsibility to
protect their own citizens from avoidable catastrophe:
from mass murder and rape, from starvation. When
they are unwilling or unable to do so, that
responsibility must be borne by the broader community
of nations.
We are today witnessing a humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe in Darfur. The World Health
Organization reports that up to 10,000 people a month
are dying or being killed. The very young and the
elderly are most vulnerable.
A few days ago, by its resolution 1564 (2004), the
Security Council resolved to support an enlarged
African Union monitoring mission, demanded that all
parties cease all violence and human rights violations
and threatened further steps against the Government of
the Sudan if it fails to disarm the militias and protect
civilians.
Within the General Assembly, countries must
work together in a united and determined way to
enforce those provisions and prevent the tragedy that is
unfolding. History will not forgive those who stand in
the way of protecting 1.5 million refugees in that
region and allowing them to return safely to their
homes. It is also important that those responsible for
the mass murders and the abuse of human rights there
be held to account for their actions. There must be no
impunity for such crimes.
That is true in Darfur, and is also true of those
responsible for the destruction of East Timor and the
murder of people there in 1999. The ad hoc tribunals in
Indonesia have failed to bring to justice those who are
responsible. That failure can only encourage such
people to commit further atrocities, believing that they
will never be held responsible for their actions.
New Zealand welcomes the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and the role that it will
now play in dealing with genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It urges all countries which
have not yet done so to accede to the convention
establishing that body and to recognize its jurisdiction.
In the area of conflict resolution, we face today
two major challenges: in Afghanistan and in Iraq. New
Zealand has strongly supported efforts to bring security
and stability to Afghanistan. As a small country we
have contributed more than NZ$80 million in military
and development assistance. We welcome progress
towards presidential elections next month and the
essential democratic mandate that they will provide to
the Government.
Strong international support, however, will be
necessary to meet the challenges which lie ahead. That
includes ending the production and trading of drugs.
Afghanistan provides about 75 per cent of the world
trade in opiates. The money derived funds warlords
and organized crime and undermines the ability of the
legitimate Government to function.
New Zealand deplores the violence in Iraq, which
continues to harm or take the lives of so many people,
and the circumstances which have contributed to that
violence. We call on those responsible for taking the
lives of innocent people to end their violence. They
now have access to a political process which they
should use to promote their views and interests. A
credible election process is vital to creating an Iraqi
Government which has a popular mandate. The United
Nations has a key role to play in that process, but
adequate security and a safe environment are first
necessary for that to occur. New Zealand will continue
48

to support the interim Iraqi authority and the United
Nations in their efforts to restore security, peace and
prosperity to the Iraqi people, who have suffered for so
long.
In Iraq and elsewhere, close attention also needs
to be given to the protection of United Nations staff.
The General Assembly this year will consider an
integrated security strategy for the United Nations,
which will incorporate a system-wide review of the
United Nations security apparatus, accountability and
resources. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be
strengthened and supported by all States Members of
the United Nations.
New Zealand condemns all acts of terrorism and
will continue to contribute strongly to the campaign
against terrorism. In particular, we condemn the
inhumanity of terrorists in Beslan who sacrificed
children as pawns in pursuit of their political
objectives. However, attempts to suppress terrorism by
force will not by themselves be enough unless we also
address the causes which drive people to support,
finance or be recruited into terrorism.
In that regard, no action will be more important
to the undermining of terrorism today than finding a
just and sustainable solution to the conflict between
Israel and the Palestinian people. The international
community must work with those countries to
overcome the failure of leadership, the lack of resolve
and the cycle of violence and retaliation which stand in
the way of solving that conflict.
Finally, in the Pacific region, New Zealand's own
neighbourhood, we can celebrate the progress which
has been made in Bougainville and in the Solomon
Islands in ending conflict and re-establishing the rule
of law. In both cases, a concerted regional response
with the support of the United Nations has been
effective. In Bougainville, that response created peace
from a situation where a 10-year civil war had resulted
in widespread devastation and the loss of thousands of
lives.
In the Solomon Islands, the intervention of the
Regional Assistance Mission has restored the rule of
law by its elected Government in place of the anarchy
created by armed militias. More than 3,500 weapons
have been collected and destroyed, social services and
a credible budgetary progress restored and militiamen
and corrupt elements from the police and Government
arrested and charged.
Much however, remains to be done to meet the
wide-ranging challenges which confront the Pacific
region, including environmental threats, ethnic
conflict, poor law enforcement and governance and the
threat of disease. Regional solutions are being applied
by the Pacific Islands Forum through greater
collaboration and integration in addressing problems.
International cooperation through processes such as the
10-year Review of the Barbados Programme of Action
set to take place in Mauritius next year will also help.
In conclusion, 59 years from the end of the
Second World War and the establishment of the United
Nations, the world continues to face major challenges
to its security and well-being. The opportunity exists
this year for us to consider and improve the ways by
which the Assembly can address the problems faced by
humanity and make a difference. Success or failure to
do so will be the collective responsibility of all of us.I am addressing the Assembly today at a most
difficult time for our country, when tears are still being
shed by those who lost their children and loved ones
during the horrific terrorist attack in the Russian city of
Beslan. I would like from this rostrum to take this
opportunity to express once again my gratitude to all
those who have shown their solidarity with Russia in
these tragic days. Our special thanks go to the States and
international organizations that extended their helping
hand to the victims and the bereaved families ó to all
those who have suffered from this outrage.
I am also addressing the Assembly at a moment
of truth, when there cannot possibly be any doubt
whatever remaining as to the true nature of
international terrorism and the challenge it has flung
down before the world community. With their actions
throughout the world, the terrorists have once and for
all placed themselves in opposition to civilized
mankind. In fact, having made the mass murder of
people an end in itself, they have knowingly violated
all norms of human morality.
Russia has drawn harsh conclusions. They have
been set forth in the 4 and 13 September addresses by
the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir V.
Putin. We will not allow anyone to encroach on the
sovereignty of our State. We will resolutely strengthen
the unity of the country and its people in order to
counter terror and to guarantee a secure and decent life
for our citizens in freedom and democracy.
The measures announced by the Russian
President to achieve these objectives will be
implemented on the basis of our countryís
Constitution; and we will continue to defend our
legitimate interests throughout the world, not through
confrontation, but by means of equitable dialogue,
cooperation and partnership. Moreover, a readiness to
engage in honest cooperation in fighting terrorism
without double standards, is becoming one of the key
criteria in our relations with any and all States.
We must enter into a qualitatively new and critical
stage in the activities of the anti-terrorist coalition. The
meeting of the Security Council of 1 September
demonstrated the strong determination of the
international community to continue its fight against
terrorism in a consistent way. It is important now to
translate this commitment into practical actions as
quickly as possible.
In the three years that have passed since the
terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, a
lot has been done to develop effective partnership in
this sphere. However, compared to the scale of the
threat, far from enough has been done. It is important
to learn lessons from the experience gained and to
draw conclusions for the future.
First, the global nature of the terrorist threat testifies
to the fact that security in todayís world is indivisible.
Consequently, only collective responsibility can make
the world secure. The fight against terrorism should
unite States rather than pit them against each other. We
can deal with this evil only on a multilateral basis by
combining our efforts and acting in the spirit of solidarity.
As President Putin has declared, Russia considers the
objective of strengthening the anti-terrorist coalition to
be one of our most important tasks.
A special emphasis here should be placed on
intensifying the cooperation among our special services,
which, we are convinced, must now be raised to a
qualitatively new level of trust and coordinated action.
Secondly, a clear strategy and a generally
acceptable legal framework are the prerequisites for
success in combating terrorism. Such a framework is
enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001) and in other
decisions of the Security Council. But now, additional
efforts are needed. They include making necessary
amendments to national legislation, acceding to
international anti-terrorist conventions and finalizing
new international counter-terrorism legal instruments.
In circumstances where international terrorism
has declared war on our entire civilization, the
determination of States to use their right of self-
defence in conformity with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter is of particular importance. Of course
international law is clearly not an inalterable dogma.
The fight against terrorism calls for its development
and improvement.
Thirdly, the time has come to renounce double
standards once and for all when it comes to terror,
regardless of the slogans in which it may be cloaked.
31

Those who slaughtered children in Beslan and hijacked
aeroplanes to attack America are creatures of the same
ilk.
Harbouring terrorists, their henchmen and their
sponsors undermines unity and mutual trust among
those that form part of the anti-terrorist front, serves as
justification for the actions of terrorists and indeed
encourages them to commit similar crimes in other
countries. I would recall that United Nations decisions
require States granting political asylum to carefully
examine the personal records of each individual to
make sure that he or she has no links to terrorism.
Attempts to use the fight against terrorism in various
geopolitical games are even more counterproductive
and dangerous.
Fourth, the utter atrociousness of the recent
terrorist attacks proves there is the need for reliable
safeguards against terrorists gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction. Russia is prepared for the closest
kind of international partnership in that area. Our
country was one of the sponsors of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). It is a participant in the
Proliferation Security Initiative and a co-sponsor of the
Group of Eight (G-8) Action Plan on Non-
Proliferation. Those initiatives are complementary and
are designed to increase the effectiveness of the regime of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
something which is especially relevant on the eve of the
2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Fifth, drug trafficking is increasingly interwoven
with terrorism. The drug flow from Afghanistan has
acquired global significance. The implementation of a
set of social, economic and law-enforcement measures
both within and outside the borders of that country is
now more urgent than ever. One of the key elements of
that strategy lies in strengthening the existing anti-drug
security belts and creating new ones.
Russia is making an important contribution
towards resolving the drug problem, including through
the formulation of specific legal, political and
operational measures within the framework of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). We are ready to
coordinate actions with the Government of
Afghanistan, and with the multinational and coalition
forces operating in that country.
Sixth, international terrorists have neither
nationality nor religion. In fact, it is specifically
religion and national culture that, today as never
before, require protection from the devastating impact
of extremism of any kind. There is a need for
respectful dialogue among various religions and
civilizations. Russia, which is open both to the West
and to the East, is ready to play its part in that process,
which is intended to prevent a split in civilization.
Another pressing task today is the saving of
world spiritual and cultural monuments from attacks by
extremists. We deem it essential to establish
cooperation in that area between the United Nations
and its specialized agencies, primarily the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). Failing to act here ó as well
as standing by in silence at the desecration of
memorials to Second World War heroes and victims
and at attempts to rehabilitate fascists ó can only play
into the hands of those who wish to incite extremist
trends in society.
Seventh, Russia believes that the United Nations
must continue to play a pivotal role in uniting the
efforts of the international community in its fight
against terrorism. As Chair of the Security Councilís
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), our country
intends to actively contribute to speeding up the reform
of that Committee. We propose drafting a new Security
Council resolution that would ensure the most effective
possible functioning of the CTC, so as to identify, in a
timely manner, weak links in the anti-terrorism
network and increase practical cooperation between the
CTC and international and regional organizations,
including the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the CSTO and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.
The CIS summit held recently in Astana,
Kazakhstan, reaffirmed the strong potential of CIS
regional structures in all areas, from anti-terrorist
activities and ensuring collective security to
intensifying economic integration.
Certainly, in an increasingly interdependent
world, the war on terrorism cannot be considered in
isolation from other pressing issues facing mankind.
This is especially relevant to the settlement of
conflicts, which for decades have been destabilizing
the situation at the regional and global levels. Through
its decisions, the General Assembly must promote a
32

Middle East settlement on the basis of commitments
made by the parties under the road map. Yesterday, the
Quartet of international mediators spoke out to that end.
The situation in Iraq is a source of serious
concern. Russia is ready to render all possible
assistance towards attaining a political settlement
aimed at preserving Iraqís territorial integrity and
ensuring its political sovereignty and a genuinely
democratic post-war recovery. The search for national
reconciliation within Iraq is of key significance; here,
the Iraqis could be assisted by the holding of an
international conference with the participation of all
major Iraqi political forces, friendly States, Security
Council members and the League of Arab States and
other organizations.
We must remain vigilant with regard to Kosovo,
which is a dangerous hotbed of tension. There is no
room for complacency. We must work to ensure that
universally recognized standards of human rights and
the rights of national minorities are applied in the
region. We also need to make full use of existing
mechanisms for conflict settlement within the CIS.
Consolidating the peacemaking capacity of the
international community is crucial to overcoming
regional crises. A collective response to humanitarian
crises, in particular those on the African continent, in
full compliance with the United Nations Charter and in
a spirit of partnership with regional structures, would
leave no doubt that the Charter remains a universal
basis for the effective solution of such problems.
The United Nations must continue to focus its
attention on other global threats to security and
sustainable development as well. Those include the
eradication of poverty and illiteracy as a breeding
ground for extremism. Annually, our country grants
1,000 scholarships to students from African countries.
Russia has contributed $7.5 million to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and has
provided bilateral humanitarian assistance to a number
of African countries.
Among the challenges and threats is that of
finding ways to bridge the gap between poor and rich
States. Russia has been making its contribution there;
between 1998 and 2002 it wrote off the debt of African
countries equivalent to $11.2 billion.
Another challenge is ensuring environmental
security. Here I would like to confirm that in
accordance with the decision of President Vladimir V.
Putin we are now engaged in serious consideration of
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
The challenges also include preventing the
transformation of outer space into a theatre of armed
confrontation. Together with China, we are calling for the
conclusion of a comprehensive agreement to that end. We
call upon all countries with space capability to join in that
initiative. There is also a growing need to elaborate a
United Nations convention on outer space law.
A further challenge is the fight against gross
violations of human rights, with a view to ensuring the
security and dignity of the individual. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and other
organizations should not remain passive spectators
when, in some countries, a considerable part of the
population is deprived of citizenship and consequently
of basic political, social and economic rights.
On Russiaís initiative, the General Assembly, at
its fifty-seventh and fifty-eighth sessions, adopted
resolutions 57/145 and 58/16 respectively, on
establishing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
comprehensive approach to countering new threats and
challenges. The resolutions contain specific guidelines
for bringing the international community closer to a
new security model that would meet the global
challenges of the twenty-first century.
Those are the lines along which the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, established
by the Secretary-General, is organizing its work. We
hope that its recommendations will pave the way for a
genuine enhancement of the effectiveness of the United
Nations. At the same time, reform of the Organization,
and particularly of the Security Council, should be
based on the broadest possible agreement and should
not provoke the alienation of States.
The international community is undergoing a
complex period in its establishment of a new system of
international relations. It is already clear that this will
be a long-term process with an uncertain future and
one that, so far, is difficult to predict. At the same time,
there is an enormous increase in the number of new
unresolved problems and new dangerous challenges to
security and the development of mankind. We still lack
a collective strategy and universally applicable
mechanisms for responding to those challenges. In fact,
33

we have to constantly improvise and use makeshift
means to ensure world stability.
A question arises as to whether we could soon
find ourselves in a situation in which events start to go
out of control. Is it not time for the international
community to assume an active role in impacting upon
global processes and taking targeted actions to
establish a more secure and just world order? Russia is
fully determined, together with other countries, to
build such a world order and take its proper place
therein as a free and democratic State.
More than half a century ago, the civilized world
put aside all its disputes and differences and mobilized
its efforts to counter the deadly threat of Nazi
enslavement. The enemy that opposes us today is no
less dangerous and no less merciless. Russia sincerely
hopes that the forthcoming sixtieth anniversary of the
end of World War II and the establishment of the
United Nations will become a historic milestone on the
path to a world order in which the twenty-first century
sees the noble principles of peace, stability and
development enshrined in the United Nations Charter
hold sway.Thank you for the honour of
addressing the General Assembly. The American
people respect the idealism that gave life to this
Organization. And we respect the men and women of
the United Nations, who stand for peace and human
rights in every part of the world. Welcome to New
York City, and welcome to the United States of
America.
During the past three years, I have addressed the
General Assembly in a time of tragedy for my country,
and in times of decision for all of us. Now we gather at
a time of tremendous opportunity for the United
Nations and for all peaceful nations. For decades, the
circle of liberty, security and development has been
expanding in our world. This progress has brought
unity to Europe, self-government to Latin America and
Asia and new hope to Africa. Now we have the historic
8

chance to widen the circle even further, to fight
radicalism and terror with justice and dignity and to
achieve a true peace, founded on human freedom.
The United Nations and my country share the
deepest commitments. Both the American Declaration
of Independence and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights proclaim the equal value and dignity of
every human life. That dignity is honoured by the rule
of law, limits on the power of the State, respect for
women, protection of private property, free speech,
equal justice and religious tolerance. That dignity is
dishonoured by oppression, corruption, tyranny,
bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent.
Both our founding documents affirm that this bright
line between justice and injustice — between right and
wrong — is the same in every age, every culture and
every nation.
Wise Governments also stand for these principles
for very practical and realistic reasons. We know that
dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free
nations strive to resolve differences in peace. We know
that oppressive Governments support terror, while free
Governments fight the terrorists in their midst. We
know that free peoples embrace progress and life,
instead of becoming the recruits for murderous
ideologies.
Every nation that wants peace will share the
benefits of a freer world. And every nation that seeks
peace has an obligation to help build that world.
Eventually there is no safe isolation from terror
networks, or failed States that shelter them, or outlaw
regimes or weapons of mass destruction. Eventually
there is no safety in looking away, seeking the quiet
life by ignoring the struggles and oppression of others.
In this young century our world needs a new
definition of security. Our security is not merely found
in spheres of influence or some balance of power. The
security of our world is found in the advancing rights
of mankind.
Those rights are advancing across the world. And
across the world, the enemies of human rights are
responding with violence. Terrorists and their allies
believe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the United States Bill of Rights and every charter of
liberty ever written are lies to be burned and destroyed
and forgotten. They believe that dictators should
control every mind and tongue in the Middle East and
beyond. They believe that suicide and torture and
murder are fully justified to serve any goal they
declare. And they act on their beliefs.
In the last year alone terrorists have attacked
police stations and banks and commuter trains and
synagogues and a school filled with children. This
month in Beslan we saw once again how the terrorists
measure their success in the death of the innocent and
in the pain of grieving families. Svetlana Dzebisov was
held hostage along with her son and her nephew. Her
nephew did not survive. She recently visited the
cemetery and saw what she called the “little graves”.
She said, “I understand that there is evil in the world,
but what have these little creatures done?”
The Russian children did nothing to deserve such
awful suffering and fright and death. The people of
Madrid and Jerusalem and Istanbul and Baghdad have
done nothing to deserve sudden and random murder.
Those acts violate the standards of justice in all
cultures and the principles of all religions. All civilized
nations are in this struggle together and all must fight
the murderers.
We are determined to destroy terror networks
wherever they operate, and the United States is grateful
to every nation that is helping to seize terrorist assets,
track down their operatives and disrupt their plans. We
are determined to end the State sponsorship of terror,
and my nation is grateful to all that participated in the
liberation of Afghanistan. We are determined to
prevent proliferation and to enforce the demands of the
world, and my nation is grateful to the soldiers of many
nations who have helped to deliver the Iraqi people
from an outlaw dictator.
The dictator agreed in 1991, as a condition of a
ceasefire, to fully comply with all Security Council
resolutions, then ignored more than a decade of those
resolutions. Finally, the Security Council promised
serious consequences for his defiance. The
commitments we make must have meaning. When we
say “serious consequences”, for the sake of peace there
must be serious consequences. So a coalition of nations
enforced the just demands of the world.
Defending our ideals is vital, but it is not enough.
Our broader mission as United Nations Members is to
apply those ideals to the great issues of our time. Our
wider goal is to promote hope and progress as the
alternatives to hatred and violence. Our great purpose
is to build a better world beyond the war on terror.
9

Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have established a
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
In three years the contributing countries have funded
projects in more than 90 countries, and pledged a total
of $5.6 billion to those efforts. America has undertaken
a $15 billion effort to provide prevention and treatment
and humane care in nations afflicted by AIDS, placing
a special focus on 15 countries where the need is most
urgent. AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time,
and our unprecedented commitment will bring new
hope to those who have walked too long in the shadow
of death.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have joined together to
confront the evil of trafficking in human beings. We
are supporting organizations that rescue the victims,
passing stronger anti-trafficking laws and warning
travellers that they will be held to account for
supporting this modern form of slavery. Women and
children should never be exploited for pleasure or
greed, anywhere on Earth.
Because we believe in human dignity, we should
take seriously the protection of life from exploitation
under any pretext. In this session, the General
Assembly will consider a draft resolution sponsored by
Costa Rica calling for a comprehensive ban on human
cloning. I support that draft resolution and urge all
Governments to affirm a basic ethical principle: no
human life should ever be produced or destroyed for
the benefit of another.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have changed the way
we fight poverty, curb corruption and provide aid. In
2002 we created the Monterrey Consensus, a bold
approach that links new aid from developed nations to
real reform in developing ones. And through the
Millennium Challenge Account, my nation is
increasing our aid to developing nations that expand
economic freedom and invest in the education and
health of their own people.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have acted to lift the
crushing burden of debt that limits the growth of
developing economies and holds millions of people in
poverty. Since those efforts began in 1996, poor
countries with the heaviest debt burdens have received
more than $30 billion of relief. And to prevent the
build-up of future debt, my country and other nations
have agreed that international financial institutions
should increasingly provide new aid in the form of
grants rather than loans.
Because we believe in human dignity, the world
must have more effective means to stabilize regions in
turmoil and to halt religious violence and ethnic
cleansing. We must create permanent capabilities to
respond to future crises.
The United States and Italy have proposed a
Global Peace Operations Initiative. Group of Eight
(G-8) countries will train 75,000 peacekeepers —
initially from Africa — so they can conduct operations
on that continent and elsewhere. The countries of the
G-8 will help that peacekeeping force with deployment
and logistical needs.
At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible
suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, crimes my Government has concluded are
genocide. The United States played a key role in efforts
to broker a ceasefire, and we are providing
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people.
Rwanda and Nigeria have deployed forces in the Sudan
to help improve security so that aid can be delivered.
The Security Council adopted a new resolution that
supports an expanded African Union force to help
prevent further bloodshed and that urges the
Government of the Sudan to stop flights by military
aircraft in Darfur. We congratulate the members of the
Council on this timely and necessary action. I call on
the Government of the Sudan to honour the ceasefire it
signed, and to stop the killing in Darfur.
Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful
nations must stand for the advance of democracy. No
other system of government has done more to protect
minorities, to secure the rights of labour, to raise the
status of women or to channel human energy to the
pursuits of peace. We have witnessed the rise of
democratic Governments in predominantly Hindu and
Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian cultures.
Democratic institutions have taken root in modern
societies and in traditional societies. When it comes to
the desire for liberty and justice, there is no clash of
civilizations. People everywhere are capable of
freedom and worthy of freedom.
Finding the full promise of representative
Government takes time, as America has found in two
centuries of debate and struggle. Nor is there only one
10

form of representative Government, because
democracies by definition take on the unique character
of the peoples that create them. Yet this much we know
with certainty: the desire for freedom resides in every
human heart, and that desire cannot be contained
forever by prison walls or martial laws or secret police.
Over time and across the Earth, freedom will find a
way.
Freedom is finding a way in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and we must continue to show our
commitment to democracies in those nations. The
liberty that many have won at a cost must be secured.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a stake
in the success of the world’s newest democracies. Not
long ago, outlaw regimes in Baghdad and Kabul
threatened the peace and sponsored terrorists. Those
regimes destabilized one of the world’s most vital and
most volatile regions. They brutalized their peoples in
defiance of all civilized norms.
Today, the Iraqi and Afghan peoples are on the
path to democracy and freedom. The Governments that
are rising will pose no threat to others. Instead of
harbouring terrorists, they are fighting terrorist groups.
And this progress is good for the long-term security of
all of us. The Afghan people are showing extraordinary
courage under difficult conditions. They are fighting to
defend their nation from Taliban hold-outs and helping
to strike against the terrorist killers. They are reviving
their economy. They have adopted a Constitution
that protects the rights of all, while honouring their
nation’s most cherished traditions. More than 10
million Afghan citizens — over four million of them
women — are now registered to vote in next month’s
presidential election. To any who still would question
whether Muslim societies can be democratic societies,
the Afghan people are giving their answer.
Since the last general debate of this General
Assembly, the people of Iraq have regained
sovereignty. Today, in this Hall, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and his delegation represent a country that has
rejoined the community of nations. The Government of
Prime Minister Allawi has earned the support of every
nation that believes in self-determination and desires
peace. And under Security Council resolutions 1511
(2003) and 1546 (2004), the world is providing that
support. The United Nations and its Member nations
must respond to Prime Minister Allawi’s request and
do more to help build an Iraq that is secure,
democratic, federal and free.
A democratic Iraq has ruthless enemies because
terrorists know the stakes in that country. They know
that a free Iraq in the heart of the Middle East will be a
decisive blow against their ambitions for that region.
So a terrorist group associated with Al Qaeda is now
one of the main groups killing the innocent in Iraq
today, conducting a campaign of bombings against
civilians and the beheadings of bound men. Coalition
forces now serving in Iraq are confronting the terrorists
and foreign fighters so that peaceful nations around the
world will never have to face them within our own
borders.
Our coalition is standing beside a growing Iraqi
security force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
is providing vital training to that force. More than 35
nations have contributed money and expertise to help
rebuild Iraq’s infrastructure and, as the Iraqi Interim
Government moves towards national elections,
officials from the United Nations are helping Iraqis
build the infrastructure of democracy. Those selfless
people are doing heroic work and are carrying on the
great legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello.
As we have seen in other countries, one of the
main terrorist goals is to undermine, disrupt and
influence election outcomes. We can expect terrorist
attacks to escalate as Afghanistan and Iraq approach
national elections. The work ahead is demanding, but
those difficulties will not shake our conviction that the
future of Afghanistan and Iraq is a future of liberty.
The proper response to difficulty is not to retreat — it
is to prevail.
The advance of freedom always carries a cost,
paid by the bravest among us. America mourns the
losses to our nation and to many others, and today I
assure every friend of Afghanistan and Iraq, and every
enemy of liberty: We will stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq until their hopes of freedom and
security are fulfilled.
These two nations will be a model for the broader
Middle East, a region where millions have been denied
basic human rights and simple justice. For too long,
many nations, including my own, tolerated and even
excused oppression in the Middle East in the name of
stability. Oppression became common, but stability
never arrived. We must take a different approach. We
must help the reformers of the Middle East as they
work for freedom and strive to build a community of
peaceful, democratic nations.
11

That commitment to democratic reform is
essential to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace
will not be achieved by Palestinian rulers who
intimidate opposition, tolerate corruption and maintain
ties to terrorist groups. The long-suffering Palestinian
people deserve better. They deserve true leaders
capable of creating and governing a free and peaceful
Palestinian State.
Even after the setbacks and frustrations of recent
months, good will and hard effort can achieve the
promise of the road map to peace. Those who would
lead a new Palestinian State should adopt peaceful
means to achieve the rights of their people and create
the reformed institutions of a stable democracy. Arab
States should end incitement in their own media, cut
off public and private funding for terrorism, and
establish normal relations with Israel. Israel should
impose a settlement freeze, dismantle unauthorized
outposts, end the daily humiliation of the Palestinian
people, and avoid any actions that prejudice final
negotiations. And world leaders should withdraw all
favour and support from any Palestinian ruler who fails
his people and betrays their cause.
The democratic hopes we see growing in the
Middle East are growing everywhere. In the words of
the Burmese democracy advocate Aung San Suu Kyi:
“We do not accept the notion that democracy is a
Western value. To the contrary, democracy simply
means good Government rooted in responsibility,
transparency and accountability.”
Here at the United Nations, Members know this to be
true. In recent years, this Organization has helped
create a new democracy in East Timor and the United
Nations has aided other nations in making the
transition to self-rule.
Because I believe that the advance of liberty is
the path to both a safer and better world, today I
propose establishing a democracy fund within the
United Nations. This is a great calling for this great
Organization. The fund would help countries lay the
foundations of democracy by instituting the rule of law,
independent courts, a free press, political parties and
trade unions. Money from the fund would also help set
up voter precincts and polling places and support the
work of election monitors. To show our commitment to
the new democracy fund, the United States will make
an initial contribution, and I urge all other nations to
contribute as well.
Today I have outlined a broad agenda to advance
human dignity and enhance the security of all of us.
The defeat of terror, the protection of human rights, the
spread of prosperity, the advance of democracy —
these causes, these ideals, call us to great work in the
world. Each of us alone can only do so much. Together
we can accomplish so much more.
History will honour the high ideals of this
Organization. The Charter states them with clarity: “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ...
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights ... to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom”.
Let history also record that our generation of
leaders followed through on these ideals, even in
adversity. Let history show that in a decisive decade,
members of the United Nations did not grow weary in
our duties, or waver in meeting them. I am confident
that this young century will be liberty’s century. I
believe we will rise to this moment, because I know the
character of so many nations and leaders represented
here today. And I have faith in the transforming power
of freedom.
May God bless you.There are some matters on
which we all agree. One of these is that, later this year,
we will receive the important report that will be tabled
by the High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change, which was constituted by our Secretary-
General. The other is that, next year, we will mark the
tenth anniversaries of the Copenhagen World Summit
on Sustainable Development and the Beijing World
Conference on Women and discuss their outcomes. The
third matter on which we all agree is that, next year, we
will observe the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
historic Millennium Declaration.
We will also agree that we took all these
initiatives ó the convening of the social, womenís and
millennium summits and the constitution of the High-
Level Panel ó because we were of one mind that we
had a number of problems that needed to be solved. In
the Millennium Declaration, we used inspiring words
to sum up our response to these problems. We said:
ìWe have a collective responsibility to uphold the
principles of human dignity, equality and equity
at the global level. As leaders we have a duty
therefore to all the world's people, especially the
most vulnerable and, in particular, the children of
the world, to whom the future belongs.î
(resolution 55/2, para. 2)
We went on to say:
ìWe are determined to establish a just and lasting
peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.î (ibid.,
para. 4)
We also said that our efforts to make globalization
fully inclusive and equitable
'must include policies and measures, at the
global level, which correspond to the needs of
developing countries and economies in transition
and are formulated and implemented with their
effective participation'. (ibid., para. 5)
To this we added the commitment that
'We will spare no effort to free our fellow men,
women and children from the abject and
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty'.
'We are committed to making the right to
development a reality for everyone and to freeing
the entire human race from want.' (ibid.,
para. 11)
Naturally, we have no choice but to agree that we
did say all these things and would undoubtedly agree
that we meant what we said. I trust that this will not
mark the end of the range of issues over which we
would speak with one voice. I say this because, when I
have asked myself the question 'Have we achieved the
goals we set ourselves?', I have found it impossible
not to answer that we have failed. There may very well
be others among us who will take a different view and
say that a good beginning has been made and therefore
that it is too early to say we have failed.
But I am certain that if we say to those affected
by violence and war that we have made a good
beginning towards the establishment of a just and
11

lasting peace all over the world, they will not believe
us. I am equally certain that if we say to those who go
to bed hungry every day that we have made a good
beginning towards freeing the entire human race from
want, they will also not believe us.
I would make bold to say that the vision of
human dignity, equality and equity at the global level
that we enunciated in this imposing forum four years
ago resonates among the ordinary people who are
victims of hunger and war as a beautiful dream that
will inevitably be deferred.
Does this mean that, when we made the promises
we made, we deliberately intended to tell the billions
of ordinary people a lie? The answer to that question is
obviously ìnoî. Did we speak as we did simply
because talk is easy and cheap? Again, the answer to
that question is obviously 'no'. The question must
therefore arise as to why the grandeur of our words and
the vision they paint ó of a world of peace, free of
war, a world characterized by shared prosperity, free of
poverty - has not produced the grand results we
sincerely sought and seek.
It would seem to me that the answer to that
question lies in the fact that we have as yet not
seriously confronted the difficult issues that relate to
the uses and perhaps the abuses of power. Yesterday, in
his statement on his report on the work of the
Organization, our Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
spoke eloquently about the 3,000-year-old Code of
Hammurabi, and said: 'That code was a landmark in
mankindís struggle to build an order where, instead of
might making right, right would make might'
(). We took it that the Secretary-General was,
in his own elegant way, drawing our attention to the
central question of our day: the uses and abuses of
power.
Contemporary human society is characterized by
a gross and entrenched imbalance in the distribution of
power. That power is held and exercised by human
beings. As human beings, the powerful share many
things with the powerless. Together, the powerful and
the disempowered share the common human needs to
eat, to drink water, to be protected from the elements,
to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, and to live.
But life itself tells us that all of that describes
only what human beings share. The rest, the relations
among us as social beings, is defined by our varied
access to power and its exercise.
Without fear of contradiction, I have said that we
all agree that later this year we will receive the report
of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change. I am equally convinced that, depending on
where we stand relative to the power equation, we will
hold radically different views about what constitutes
humanity's most serious threats and challenges, and
therefore what must be changed to respond to that
perceived reality.
Both the powerful and the disempowered will
undoubtedly agree that terrorism and war represent a
serious threat to all humanity. They will agree that we
were right to make the commitment in the Millennium
Declaration to work for
'a just and lasting peace all over the world in
accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter' (resolution 55/2, para. 4).
Many of those who have already addressed the
Assembly have correctly drawn our attention to many
instances of terrorism and war, to which we are all
opposed. They have spoken of the bombings of the
United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and of
the African and American lives those claimed; of the
heinous 11 September outrage in this city; and of the
acts of terrorism in Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Morocco,
Spain, Israel, Gatumba in Burundi, Beslan in the
Russian Federation, and elsewhere.
They have correctly drawn our attention to the
violent conflicts in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Burundi, the Sudan, Palestine, Israel, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Chechnya, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and
elsewhere, and to other unsolved problems, such as
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara,
that cry out for a solution.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront these situations and therefore
the threat and challenge of terrorism and war.
However, the powerful will also make the
additional determination that terrorism and war
constitute the central and principal threat and challenge
that human civilization faces. They will make that
determination because, almost by definition, the
terrorists target them simply because they are
powerful; they have no logical choice but to identify
terrorism as the central and principal threat and
challenge they face, and to which they must respond.
12

Because of their place in the power equation,
what they decide will necessarily represent the global
decision of what constitutes the central, principal and
most urgent threat and challenge to human society,
necessitating various changes in the global system of
governance. What they decide will translate into a set
of obligatory injunctions, issued by this Organization,
which all Member nations will have to accept and
implement.
Again, both the powerful and the disempowered
will undoubtedly also agree that poverty, want and
underdevelopment constitute serious problems that all
humanity must confront. Many of those who have
already addressed the Assembly have correctly drawn
our attention to the reality of poverty, which billions
across the globe continue to experience.
Among other things, they have correctly
reminded us of the fact that some countries are poorer
today than they were a decade ago. They have pointed
to the virtual certainty that we will fail to meet the
Millennium Development Goals we set ourselves four
years ago.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront this situation, and therefore
the threat and challenge of poverty and
underdevelopment. However, the disempowered, who
are also the poor of the world, will also make the
additional determination that poverty and
underdevelopment constitute the central and principal
threat and challenge that human civilization faces.
They will make the determination that, because
they are the daily victims of deprivation and want,
which claim the lives of millions every year ó
translating into cold statistics about shortened life
expectancy - deprivation and want represent the
central and principal threat and challenge that
humanity faces, necessitating changes in the global
system of governance in order effectively to respond to
that reality.
But because they are powerless, those billions -
the overwhelming majority of the same humanity that
needs to eat, to drink water, to be protected from the
elements, to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, to live -
will have no possibility of persuading this
Organization, laughably described in the Millennium
Declaration as 'the most universal and most
representative Organization in the world', to translate
what they have concluded into obligatory injunctions,
issued by this Organization, which all Member nations
will have to accept and implement.
If, for a moment, we resist the temptation to
speak in parables or in tongues, for fear that we might
be punished for telling the truth, we must say that this
stark and simple reality reflects the distribution of
power and wealth in contemporary human society.
The wealthy and powerful feel, correctly,
mortally threatened by the fanatical rage of the
terrorists. They have the power to respond to this
present and immediate danger with all their might, and,
because they are mighty, they can determine for all
humanity that the principal threat to them is the
principal threat that all humanity faces.
The poor and powerless feel threatened by a
permanent hurricane of poverty, which is devastating
their communities as horrendously as hurricane Ivan
destroyed the Caribbean island State of Grenada.
But, tragically, because they are poor, they do not
have the means to respond to this present and
immediate danger. Neither do they have the power to
determine for all humanity that what they decide is the
principal threat they confront, is also the principal
threat that all humanity, including the rich and
powerful, faces.
In the Millennium Declaration, we spoke of the
need to implement
'policies and measures, at the global level, which
correspond to the needs of developing countries
and economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective
participation' (ibid., para. 5).
Perhaps the mistake we made was to assume that
the contemporary distribution of power in human
society would permit this outcome, and that, regardless
of this fundamental consideration, it would be possible
for the concerns of the poor to take precedence on the
global agenda and the global programme of action.
We comforted, or perhaps deluded, ourselves
with the thought that this Organization is 'the most
universal and most representative organization in the
world' - afraid to ask the question, is it?
Every year many of us who have spoken, and will
speak, from this rostrum make an annual pilgrimage to
this great and vibrant city to plead the cause of the
13

poor of the world, hopeful that this time our voices will
be heard. Every year, after a few days, we pack up our
bags to return to the reality of our societies, whose
squalor stands out in sharp contrast to the splendour of
New York and this majestic precinct that constitutes
the headquarters of the United Nations.
In the aftermath, resolutions are passed. Again
and again our permanent representatives, with their
extraordinary and plenipotentiary powers, report that
those resolutions oblige us to act to thwart the deadly
plans of murderous terrorist gangs. Again and again
they report that yet another appeal has been made to
the mighty and the lowly alike, voluntarily to respond
to the cries of the wretched of the earth.
We are truly proud and inspired to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over the proceedings of the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, because we
know that you will discharge your obligations as a son
of the poor of the world should. We are moved by the
fact that you had as your predecessor President Julian
Hunte, who also understood intimately what must be
done to ensure that the United Nations can become, in
reality, the indispensable common house of the entire
human family.
As an Israeli said to us at our headquarters in
Pretoria a fortnight ago, it is perhaps time that we, the
poor and powerless, abandon our wheelchairs and
begin to walk unaided. Perhaps that will help to build
the social order of which Hammurabi - and Kofi
Annan - spoke, in which right makes might and not
might, right.I
offer my warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your
election as President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session. I am confident that under your
presidency fruitful results will be achieved. I also wish
to pay a cordial tribute to Mr. Julian Robert Hunte,
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
The recent appalling terror in Beslan, Russia,
caused massive casualties, including many children.
On behalf of the Chinese Government, I strongly
condemn, once again, that inhuman act of terrorist
violence and extend our deep condolences to the
families of the victims.
Peace and development remain the dominant
themes in today’s world. Multipolarization and
economic globalization are moving forward in twists
and turns. Science and technology are advancing at a
dizzying speed. Forces that make for peace and factors
that lead to war are both on the rise. Human society is
moving in a bright, progressive and positive direction.
However, the light of peace has not fallen on
every corner of the globe, nor has development reached
every inch of the Earth. Threats to security, both
traditional and non-traditional, are intertwined. The
dark cloud of war remains menacing. Hot spots keep
springing up. Terrorist activities are raging, and cross-
border problems such as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, drug trafficking, transnational
crime and illegal immigration are erupting one after
another. Factors of uncertainty, instability and
unpredictability are increasing.
In the course of economic globalization, the gap
between the North and the South is widening.
Developing countries are confronting new difficulties
and challenges as a growing number of them are
further marginalized. Today, half the global population
lives on less than $2 a day, and of those, 1.2 billion live
on less than $1 a day. Much remains to be done to
implement the Millennium Development Goals.
Peace, development and cooperation are the
prerequisites for our times. People all over the world
are raising their voice in favour of peace, development
and cooperation and against war, poverty and
confrontation. Peace is the precondition for human
development and prosperity. Without a peaceful and
stable international environment, development is out of
the question for any country. A chaotic world benefits
no one. Having experienced the scourge of two world
wars, mankind would not tolerate any more war or
bloodshed. Thus it is the fervent aspiration of all
peoples to live and achieve development in a secure
and stable environment.
In tackling security issues, it is imperative to
foster a new security concept of mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation. This new concept
calls for nations to transcend their differences in
ideology and social systems, respect one another’s
security interests, promote greater democracy in
international relations and seek peaceful solutions to
disputes through dialogue.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the whole
world. China stands firmly opposed to terrorism in all
forms and manifestations. To prevent and fight
terrorism, we must intensify international cooperation
and address both the causes and symptoms of the
threat. Only when the root causes of terrorism are
eradicated can peoples live in peace and tranquillity
again.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to world peace and security. Non-
proliferation efforts therefore require the participation
of all members of the international community.
Likewise, it is important to discard unilateralism and
double standards and to give full credit and full latitude
to the role of the United Nations.
China takes an active part in multilateral non-
proliferation efforts and firmly defends the
international regime of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties. China believes that
multilateral arms control, disarmament and non-
proliferation processes can be steadily promoted in
order to further improve the international non-
proliferation regime.
There is still a long way to go before peace and
reconstruction can be realized in Iraq. We support an
important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s political
process, helping that country achieve the smooth
holding of elections.
10

We appeal to Palestine and Israel to resume
dialogue as soon as possible and to start implementing
the Middle East road map faithfully. As always, China
will work to resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean
Peninsula through dialogue and talks, in the interest of
peace and stability on the Peninsula.
Development is the foundation for human
progress. Lasting peace and stability throughout the
world depends on coordinated, balanced and universal
development. Development is of overriding
importance. Living in peace, abundance and harmony
between nations has been the dream of many
generations. Coordinated, balanced and sustainable
development serves the fundamental interests of all
peoples and works for their well-being.
In order to promote economic growth worldwide,
it is necessary for the international community to take
effective measures to put in place an open and fair
multilateral trading regime and gradually improve it. It
is also important to reform and improve the
international financial system.
The developed countries must honour their
commitments to debt reduction, technology transfer
and market access through concrete actions in order to
enable developing countries to really benefit from
globalization. The developing countries, for their part,
need to work together to attain development and take
part in a wide range of international efforts. They
should also deepen South-South cooperation.
We, the members of the international community,
should join hands in working for a just and equitable
new international economic order that meets the needs
of the growing economic globalization and serves the
common interests of all countries.
The Millennium Development Goals are our
solemn, collective pledge. The United Nations should
further mobilize resources, strengthen coordination and
increase its input to development activities in order to
help Member States achieve these important goals as
scheduled.
Cooperation is an effective way of dealing with
the collective challenges facing humankind. To
strengthen international cooperation, we must
champion multilateralism. The United Nations is the
centre of the international multilateral system and the
key platform for making multilateralism work. It is the
widespread desire of the international community to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, take more collective actions,
strengthen the role of the United Nations and safeguard
its authority.
The threats and challenges we face make it
imperative to strengthen, rather than weaken, the role
of the United Nations. A stronger United Nations is
indispensable for maintaining global peace and
stability and promoting the common development of
humankind. All Member States should honour their
commitments to the Charter of the United Nations and
fulfil their international responsibilities and
obligations.
The world is eagerly looking forward to a
dynamic and action-oriented United Nations. China
supports necessary and rational reforms of the
Organization. Such reforms should aim at enhancing
the leading role of the United Nations in international
affairs, reinforcing its capacity to tackle new threats
and challenges, and ensuring that better reflects the
aspirations and needs of the vast majority of
developing countries.
China is in favour of expanding the Security
Council and of giving priority to greater representation
of the developing countries. China also supports the
work of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change, and it is looking forward to the Panel’s
report by the end of this year, so that it can be reviewed
by Member States.
China is a staunch force working for world peace,
common development and international cooperation.
After over half a century of strenuous efforts and more
than two decades of reform and opening up, China has
now entered a new stage of development aimed at
building a moderately prosperous society all-round.
However, China is still a developing country, and a
large population and inadequate economic
development remain its basic national conditions. It
has a long way to go before achieving its development
goals.
The Chinese Government will always place
development at the top of its agenda. The fact that
China — a large, developing country with 1.3 billion
people — runs its own affairs well is in itself a major
contribution to peace and to the development of
humanity.
11

China desires peace, development and
cooperation, and strives to win peace and development
through cooperation. It is working to promote
democracy in international relations, diversity in its
modes of development and richness in the world’s
civilizations. It advocates a new security concept and
facilitates the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China will pursue with determination an
independent foreign policy of peace, adhere to the five
principles for Peaceful Coexistence, and engage in
mutually beneficial and friendly cooperation with other
countries on an equal footing.
China will unswervingly safeguard its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, brook no
interference in its internal affairs by foreign forces and,
at the same time, respect other countries’ sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
China remains committed to the common
interests of humankind. China’s national interests, in
the final analysis, are consistent with the common
interests of all humankind. In handling State-to-State
relations, China will safeguard its own interests while
taking into account the interests of other countries.
China will adhere to the policy of opening up, and
develop economic relations and trade with all other
nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
China’s development stands in the way of no one,
nor does it pose any threat to others. China is following
the path of peaceful development, seeking an
international environment of peace and stability for its
own development and promoting world peace and
progress through its own prosperity.
China is working steadily to develop its relations
with the world’s major countries. It will stay
committed to the policy of building friendship and
partnership with its neighbours and combine stronger
bilateral friendships with enhanced regional
cooperation. It will strengthen solidarity and
cooperation with other developing countries and
support any justified demands or legitimate
propositions on their part in international affairs. It will
play a constructive role in the political, economic,
social, disarmament, arms control and other
multilateral fields; safeguard the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations; and support any consensus that serves the
common interests of all countries.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory.
Safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and realizing complete national reunification
at an early date is the common will and firm resolve of
the 1.3 billion Chinese people. Pursuing the policy of
“peaceful reunification and one country, two systems”,
the Chinese Government is ready to work tirelessly
towards a peaceful reunification with the utmost
sincerity. We, more than anyone else, want to see a
peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question. But we
will never tolerate Taiwan independence, nor will we
allow anyone to separate Taiwan from the rest of China
in any way.
We hope that the international community will
fully recognize the complex and sensitive nature of the
current situation across the Taiwan Strait and the
serious threat posed by the separatist activities of the
Taiwan authorities to the stability of the Taiwan Strait
and the peace of the Asia-Pacific region. We expect the
Assembly to continue supporting the Chinese
Government’s efforts for peaceful reunification and to
join us in containing pro-independence activities, in the
interest of stability in the Strait and of world peace.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. As the basic
guidelines for State-to-State relations, the Five
Principles have withstood the test of half a century and
remain an irrefutable truth. The Five Principles, which
include peace, development and cooperation, are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. They provide guidance
for the establishment and development of relations
between countries with identical or different social
systems; point to the correct path towards the peaceful
settlement of outstanding issues between countries and
international disputes; firmly defend the interests of the
developing countries; and facilitate the improvement
and development of North-South relations. The Five
Principles present important ideas that must underpin
the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China not only initiated, but has faithfully
observed, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
Given the new realities of today, we will continue to
champion those Principles and join all the peoples of
12

the world in advancing the lofty cause of peace,
development and cooperation.Let me first
of all congratulate you, President Ping, on your
election and wish you every success in your
responsible post, and express my sincere thanks to the
outgoing President for his dedicated work.
I endorse the statement of the Netherlands
European Union presidency.
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, the world
is changing at dramatic speed. In just a few decades,
humanity will have reached the 8 billion mark. With
the networking of world trade and with global
communication technologies, we are growing ever closer.
We are going to become increasingly interdependent in
economic, technical and ecological terms.
At the same time, we all face a host of new
challenges and new dangers which threaten us all —
the South and the North, the developing and the
developed world alike.
On the one hand, there are threats to national and
global security such as the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the nuclear threat, the danger posed
by failed States or, as we all painfully remember in this
city, by terrorism, which does not respect humankind
or human dignity.
On the other hand, there are also so-called soft
threats, such as far-reaching environmental and
climatic changes, poverty, major shortfalls in education
and training and the negative aspects of globalization,
refugee flows, and diseases and epidemics such as
HIV/AIDS and malaria. They are a threat to security
and stability and take a heavy toll.
The two — hard and soft threats — are closely
connected. After all, we know that the causes of war
and violence, poverty, need and oppression are
multifaceted and deep-rooted. We also know that crises
are the fruit of poverty and a sense of hopelessness,
and vice-versa. We will have no peace without
development, nor indeed development without peace,
so we have comprehensively to secure peace and
stability — above all through economic and social
development.
The States of the world have to work together to
shape economic, technological and ecological
globalization and rise to the resulting challenges. They
will not be able to do so without close cooperation.
Indeed, that is now beyond the tools of traditional
diplomacy alone. Their ability to secure and stabilize
the international system on their own will in future
prove less and less adequate.
What we need is a far-reaching reform of the
international system and its institutions that takes due
account of these changes. That is a reform we need
urgently, because we have to create an effective
multilateral system which enables us to work together
to prevent crises and, where that does not work, find
long-term solutions.
There have already been promising developments
at the regional level. With their sometimes painful history
very much in mind, the States of Europe have joined
together in the European Union and thus have reached
a new level of multilateralism. This political and
economic community, now embracing 25 States, has
become an anchor of stability for Europe and beyond.
Since its foundation the African Union has been
impressively shouldering its shared responsibility for
preventing humanitarian disasters and resolving major
regional conflicts. This is a courageous and key step
forward. This breakthrough of multilateralism on the
African continent will develop an ever more
pronounced dynamism.
Given global interdependencies and connections,
we need a world organization that has close links to
these regional structures and can thus boost the
efficiency of joint action. The United Nations is the
most important forum for setting global rules. Its might
is the might of the right, as the Secretary-General
highlighted in his impressive speech at the opening of
this General Assembly session. With its legitimacy we
have a unique and universal competence for solving
problems together. Since the breaking of the internal
blockade caused by the cold war, the United Nations
has been playing an increasingly significant role. The
international community is making more and more use
of it as a forum for tackling the major challenges
facing humanity.
For millions of people today the Blue Flag means
quite tangible help, often on essential issues, and hope
for a better future. For this, we are all very much
indebted to the Organization and its staff. They are on
the ground in many crisis regions in Latin America,
Europe, Africa and Asia.
It is becoming ever clearer that different
approaches must be found to prevent or resolve each
17

individual crisis. The commitment of the United
Nations in all crisis areas is the proof. In Afghanistan
and in the Balkans, in Haiti and in the Great Lakes
region the United Nations is already making a
considerable contribution. But we must realize that
there will not be fewer conflicts in the future, and the
demands made of the Organization will grow.
Against this backdrop the question arises whether
the structures given to the United Nations at its
foundation almost sixty years ago are still suited to this
mandate, whether its work enjoys the international
acceptance it needs. In particular, the disputes
concerning the Iraq crisis highlighted this problem
once again.
We are convinced there is no alternative to a
world acting multilaterally. To make this multilateral
cooperation sustainable and capable, we need a
courageous and comprehensive reform of the United
Nations that faces up to the challenges we are facing.
It was the Secretary-General himself who took
the initiative, and for this we extend our thanks. To that
end, he appointed a panel of high-level international
experts who are to present him with reform proposals
at the end of the year. We look forward to that report
and the ensuing debate with great interest.
What is at stake is a new, shared understanding of
the Charter system. How can we shape prevention to
make it more effective, and peace-building to make it
more sustainable? How can we further implement the
proposals on the reform of peacekeeping? What exactly
do we understand by the right of self-defence? How do
we define terrorism? The answer to this question in
particular seems clear, yet real agreement would take us,
the international community of States, a step forward.
A number of very concrete proposals on the
reform of the United Nations institutions have already
been presented. Let me therefore outline some thoughts
on this matter.
I want to start with the General Assembly. It is
the central organ of the United Nations, the only one
with universal membership. For this very reason, the
Assembly has to be more than an annual forum where
we just go through the motions. What we need to do
first is focus our topics more carefully. We have to
discuss the truly crucial issues — otherwise, essential
questions will be dealt with in other forums. Secondly,
we need more efficient working methods.
The Economic and Social Council has to finally
become the central organ in the United Nations system
for consultation and decision-making on economic and
social issues. We believe that the Council has at two
levels vast potential that has yet to be fully tapped. On
the one hand, that body maintains a network of
expertise unequalled in the world. We have to make
better and more targeted use of it. On the other hand,
we see the Economic and Social Council as a partner
for the Security Council for peacekeeping, as laid
down in Article 65 of the Charter. When it comes to
fighting the causes of conflicts and to post-crisis
rehabilitation, the Economic and Social Council has an
important role to play that can support Security
Council efforts for conflict prevention and peace-
building. We should grant the Economic and Social
Council more competences in the operative sphere.
After all, the efforts we make in peace missions
will be successful only if the military commitment is
followed by a longer phase of stabilization, and very
often that phase turns out to be the most difficult one.
The Economic and Social Council advisory groups on
post-crisis rehabilitation in Africa are a step in the
right direction. That is what the decisive link between
conflict management and development cooperation
could indeed look like.
Such an all-embracing approach needs
appropriate financial resources. The instrument of
voluntary contributions has proven insufficient in
everyday life, and therefore I propose earmarking a
certain share of the United Nations peacekeeping budget
for post-crisis rehabilitation. This means we could
achieve what we have long been trying, a “prevention
share”, which — let us remember Haiti — could help
us save the costs of conflicts flaring up again.
Many criticize the proliferation of subsidiary and
subordinate organizations of the United Nations. Of
course, a reduction cannot be an end in itself. But we
ought to exercise enough self-criticism to ask ourselves
whether it would not be better to pool competences in
some cases.
However, there are also spheres that need to be
better equipped. I am thinking here, for example, of the
handling of environmental issues in the United Nations
system. We thus support the proposal made by French
President Jacques Chirac last year to upgrade the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to a
specialized agency with universal membership. That
18

could considerably strengthen UNFP’s contribution to
sustainable development.
At the heart of the reform of the United Nations
is the organ shouldering the central responsibility for
international peace: the Security Council. Conflicts are
on the increase. They stretch across all continents, and
they are growing in complexity. In turn, the
responsibility and competences of the Council have
expanded constantly. Crisis prevention will play an
increasingly important role. And for peace-building,
ever more comprehensive strategies, closer cooperation
and additional resources will be needed. This will
mean more and more decisions that entail long-term
obligations, create new international law and make
major inroads into State sovereignty.
If we really want Security Council decisions to be
accepted as legitimate and implemented effectively, we
have to reform the Council. It has to more broadly
represent a world organization that today embraces
more than 191 countries. That is inconceivable without
increasing the number of seats — for permanent and
non-permanent members alike. The reasons behind
such a move speak for themselves.
A Council with more members would enjoy
greater acceptance internationally as a basis for greater
authority. The more balanced and comprehensive
representation of all continents — also among the
permanent members — would lead to a better sense of
ownership of the Security Council for all States.
Similarly, an enlargement would considerably bolster
the motivation of the new Council members to make a
long-term contribution to realizing the goals of the
United Nations.
The enlargement must adequately reflect sea
changes such as decolonization, the end of the cold war
and globalization. The composition of the Council
must ultimately mirror the current geopolitical reality.
That means that all major regions of the South must be
represented by permanent members in the Security
Council. At the same time, account has to be taken of
Members that can and want to make a particularly
meaningful and sustainable contribution to maintaining
world peace and international security and to realizing
the purposes of the Organization. That twofold
approach would increase the Council’s efficiency and
its ability to act and to assert itself.
For 40 years, the composition of the Security
Council has remained unchanged. I believe it is high
time to adapt it to the new global reality. Half-baked or
interim solutions are neither necessary nor helpful.
Like Brazil, India and Japan, Germany too is ready to
take on the responsibility associated with a permanent
seat in the security Council. But it is especially
important to us that the African continent be
represented among the new permanent members.
A second aspect also has to be taken into account
in Security Council reform. All in all, a greater number
of Member States that are engaging themselves in the
work of the United Nations should be able to get more
involved in the work of the Security Council. For that
to happen, additional non-permanent seats also have to
be created. That would mean that the balance between
permanent and non-permanent members could be
retained.
As I said before, United Nations reform will be
the central and defining theme of this General
Assembly session. I thus call upon Member States: let
us use the fifty-ninth session, right up until the next
session in 2005, to launch the overdue reforms and
achieve tangible results. We, the Member States, have
to muster the political insight, the will and the
creativity to adapt the Organization to the global
reality. Germany is ready to make a committed
contribution.I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
election. We are pleased that a man of your ability, a
Francophone representative of a friendly country, is
directing our proceedings.
I also wish to warmly applaud our Secretary-
General. We have heard his message on respect for the
rule of law. And through the Secretary-General, I wish to
commend the entire staff of this institution, here and
everywhere in the world: their courage and commitment
are a credit to our ideals and to the organizations they
serve — sadly, sometimes at the cost of their own
lives.
How are we to meet the challenges facing the
world? That is the question we all keep asking
ourselves, one after another, from this rostrum. And
how are we to meet the world’s expectations unless we
all mobilize? More than ever, the United Nations
remains the one irreplaceable, legitimate framework
for harnessing that mobilization and translating it into
collective action.
We have much to do: conflicts remain unresolved,
while others are breaking out; poverty is declining all too
slowly; people are destroyed by wars; refugees are torn
from their land; and the threat of terrorism is not
fading. Yes, we have much to do. Yes, we have a duty
to act, and an obligation never to give up.
The United Nations is acting — on all fronts, on
the front line. To resolve conflicts and prevent them
from flaring up again, it is present everywhere, on all
continents, in Haiti, Kosovo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in Côte d’Ivoire, Afghanistan and many
other fronts, deploying over 50,000 Blue Helmets. It
provides assistance to 17 million people protected by
the High Commissioner for Refugees. Through the
World Food Programme, it feeds more than 100 million
individuals. And it helps, especially through the United
Nations Development Programme, 170 States or
territories to develop.
United Nations activities — our activities —
continue to expand. Thus, the Organization is called
upon to be at the centre of the counter-terrorism
measures that the international community is putting in
place. The threat of terrorism, now a global one,
calling for a global response. That is why France
committed itself here to the fight, and did so again
recently by supporting the strengthening of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The tragedy of 11 September, which I refer to
with feeling here in New York City, was an attack on
us all. Since then, terrorism has continued to strike: in
Europe, in Madrid, six months ago; and in Asia, in Bali
and Jakarta. Cowardly attacks are mounted against the
weakest. How can we not be appalled at the tragedy of
the school in Beslan where children — the symbol of
innocence — were violently massacred?
We are waging a merciless fight against
terrorism. Let us at the same time address its roots.
That means putting an end to situations that terrorists
exploit; giving the world’s excluded hope again;
restoring dignity to those peoples deprived of it; and
ensuring that dialogue and cooperation among
civilizations, cultures and religions prevail, rather than
conflict and intolerance.
Global threats require a strong, and always
collective, response. The threat of proliferation, which
29

could merge with that of terrorism, calls for resolute
and sustained action. The non-proliferation regime has
been seriously undermined by the combined action of
certain States and non-State actors. That is why
strengthening existing instruments is today essential.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) Review Conference in 2005 will be an
opportunity to do so.
A safer and freer world is, first, a more just
world. That is why we must act relentlessly to resolve
conflicts. I am, of course, thinking, first and foremost,
of the Middle East, where — in the wake of the hopes
raised by Madrid, Oslo, Camp David and Taba — the
absence of any prospect is today breeding despair,
extremism and violence of every kind. This central
crisis can be resolved only through a negotiated
settlement based on international law, enabling all the
peoples — I repeat, all the peoples — of the region to
live in dignity and security.
The road map, which the parties have accepted
and which the Security Council has endorsed, must be
implemented in full and in good faith. France hopes
that the withdrawal from Gaza is a first step in that
direction. It will make every effort to get the peace
process under way again. It will continue to act vis-à-
vis all the leaders — the elected and legitimate
leaders — of that region.
Let us make no mistake: building peace in the
Middle East is a historic responsibility for our
generation. Europe — the European Union — in
partnership with the United States, Russia and the
United Nations, is determined to play a political role in
order to stimulate this process.
In Iraq, violence is exploding. It seems to us that
only when the Iraqis themselves take control of their
future, and when the political process provided for by
the Security Council is pursued, will the country be
able to escape the chaos that is destabilizing the entire
region. France, as everyone knows, did not approve of
the conditions in which the conflict was unleashed.
Neither today nor tomorrow will it commit itself
militarily in Iraq. However, it reaffirms its willingness,
with its European partners, to assist the Iraqi people in
rebuilding their country and in restoring their
institutions.
Who can fail to see that, in the Middle East,
everything is fragile and everything is interconnected?
Who can fail to understand that the only path —
everywhere — is sovereignty and justice for peoples?
Only then will they make progress towards peace and
the economic and political modernization to which
they are entitled.
Africa, too, is where we will win or lose the battle
for justice. Without justice, there will be no peace.
Without peace, there will be no lasting development. The
future of the African continent, and its stability and
development, are a vital objective for us all.
Today, with the impetus of the United Nations,
longstanding crises have been, or will be, settled —
Mozambique, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Others,
however, have broken out, and together we must
prevent them from worsening or spreading: in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Central African Republic, and Darfur. The
Great Lakes region is slow to find the path to peace,
just as the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
slow to die, and the Somali question remains to be
resolved.
On that great continent, which is undergoing
profound change, facing real threats but also
considerable potential, political leaders are today
demonstrating a genuine determination to commit to
working to resolve conflicts and crises. That can be
seen from the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD); the resolute
commitment of the African Union on the political front
and in the field; and the growing role of regional
organizations. We resolutely support that commitment.
For development, but also for peace-building, we wish
to bring about the conditions for an effective and
coherent partnership between North and South.
Given the magnitude of the goals and needs of
the continent, I firmly believe in the importance of
pooling the efforts of the Europeans with those of our
African partners, under United Nations auspices,
whenever necessary. I am convinced that our
experience of European integration — without
attempting to teach any lessons — can simply be useful
to that continent, and that is the sense of the statement
made on our behalf by the representative of the
presidency of the European Union, Bernard Bot, before
the Assembly the day before yesterday.
France has long been involved in strengthening
African peacekeeping capacities. Today, the European
Union intends to make a commitment immediately and
with determination. Operation Artemis, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is proof of that
30

commitment. The creation of the European Peace
Facility now provides major support to African
organizations. We are willing, if the African Union so
wishes, to assist it in its action for peace, as in the
Sudan.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Justice and conflict prevention cannot be
dissociated from collective action to promote
development. The Millennium Goals — to which the
developing countries, donor States and multilateral
institutions are committed — are an overriding obligation
for us all, especially the wealthiest countries.
More than $50 billion a year is still needed to
achieve those objectives — a fact of which we all are
aware. On Monday, 100-odd countries endorsed the
New York Declaration on Action Against Hunger and
Poverty. Together they ask that additional resources be
provided for development, including through
innovative mechanisms. This is a powerful movement,
launched in this very forum of the United Nations,
aimed at generating the necessary resources for justice
and for development. It is an important milestone. My
country is proud to have contributed to it, through the
voice of the President of the Republic, and it will
continue to do so.
But France is also fighting for a more controlled,
and therefore most just, globalization that would give
everyone a chance. We advocate the establishment of a
political body, in which the United Nations must have
its due place — to improve coordination of multilateral
action in the economic, social and environmental fields
and to provide the necessary impetus. This is one of the
major issues that we must consider in coming months,
especially on the basis of the proposals that the Panel
on reform is expected to make.
Again, a more just world is a world that respects
human dignity and freedom. Fundamental human rights
are universal. Each man, woman and child has these
inherent rights, and it is up to us to see that they thrive
and are respected.
It is also up to us to fight firmly and
uncompromisingly against all manifestations of violence
and discrimination based on race, origin, gender or
religion. Our resolve in the area of human rights, as
elsewhere, must remain absolute and constant. I mean
that we need a genuine dialogue with the civil society
and with all non-governmental organizations. The time
has come, it seems to us, to conclude the negotiation of
a conventional instrument on forced disappearances, to
recognize the rights of indigenous peoples and to
mobilize against all forms of modern slavery.
Let us not rule out the use of force, in certain
cases and on the appeal of victims, to prevent massive
human rights violations and acts of violence against
civilians. The Security Council has the honour of
assuming this responsibility, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.
Let us also continue putting in place mechanisms
to combat impunity, often the prerequisite for durable
peace and lasting reconciliation. The establishment of
the International Criminal Court specifically meets this
objective. We welcome the major milestone reached
with the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
The dignity of humankind and peoples also
requires due respect for cultures in their diversity. The
sense of loss of identity contributes to the frustrations
that breed a good many conflicts. The unity of the
international community, it goes without saying, cannot
be synonymous with uniformity.
The negotiation of a convention on cultural
diversity, which has just started at the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is,
therefore, in our view, a key objective. It must produce
a concrete result, as planned, before the 2005 general
conference.
Our planet is dangerous; it is also in danger. The
earth is showing signs of strain; we are not maintaining
it; in fact, we are plundering it; the climate is
deteriorating. And yet, we should remember, scarcity
of resources has at all times been a factor in conflict.
For the future of our children, we must act while there
is still time.
Is there among us, for that matter, one single issue
that more obviously ignores borders than ecology and
ecological security and requires coordinated action —
that is, multilateral action? International governance in
environmental matters is, it seems to us, inadequate
today. We must simplify and strengthen the existing
international regime on environmental issues, develop
monitoring, and early warning expertise, and increase
financing, especially for developing countries.
Let us be clear-sighted. For the environment, as
for so many other issues, prevention costs less than
31

cure. In this regard, we hope the establishment of a
United Nations organization for the environment will
be considered, based on the achievements of the United
Nations Environment Programme. We propose that this
great undertaking, which is one of the Millennium Goals,
be on the agenda of the September 2005 summit.
In a world — our world — where 800 million
people do not have enough to eat, where more financial
resources are devoted to weapons than to development,
where millions of men, women and children are forced
to leave their land to escape destitution or massacres, the
international community has a duty to act and to show
imagination. It is here at the United Nations where we
can meet to take initiatives, to fight misfortune and to
apportion the tasks, all of them urgent.
The United Nations system, which is unique and
more indispensable than ever, also has an obligation to
reform itself to meet new needs and new threats, and to
make the most of new technologies merely in order to
live in our times. The Secretary-General got down to
this problem at the start of his first mandate.
Considerable work has already been done. The
proposals of the high-level panel will be the basis for
the next, still more ambitious, stages. France has made
proposals on many issues, such as peacekeeping
operations, human rights and development financing.
We have also indicated, with Germany, how the
representativity and legitimacy of Security Council
action might be improved. We advocate enlargement in
both categories of members, permanent and non-
permanent; and we have expressed support for the
aspirations of Germany, Japan, Brazil and India, which
should be accompanied by a country from Africa.
In a complex and unpredictable world, it is our
joint responsibility to maintain and strengthen the one
institution where all nations can work together, where
they can unite to shape and control their common
destiny. Through its legitimacy and ever-increasing
effectiveness, the United Nations must be the
instrument of universal conscience for which it remains
the crucible.Mr. President, I
offer my congratulations and those of my country on
your election as President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session.
Eighteen months ago, the United Nations faced
divisions more serious than any since the Cuban
missile crisis of October 1962. We all worried whether
the strength and unity which we had built up since the
end of the cold war could survive.
Then last year we watched, as Secretary-General
Kofi Annan stood at his now famous fork in the road.
In the year since, almost instinctively, we have decided
to follow our Secretary-Generalís directions. This
Organization has not been plunged, as some predicted,
into paralysis; instead, I have felt a powerful if
unspoken determination to make the United Nations
work, and to work more effectively, to fulfil its central
task: to secure peace around the world.
Over the last 12 months we have dealt with new
crises such as that in Darfur in the Sudan, where we
have set clear tasks for both the Sudanese Government
and the rebel groups. We have tackled the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes; mobilized international support for the new
Iraq; and addressed a long list of hugely important
subjects which rarely receive the coverage they should
in the media ó Haiti, Georgia, Timor-Leste,
Bougainville and Western Sahara.
We have shown in those actions the unity of
purpose which is one of the strongest weapons in our
hands to defeat the evils which today affect the globe.
And the search for consensus has not been confined to
the Security Council.
I am proud that just a few months after the
difficult times of early last year, France, Germany and
the United Kingdom came together to work, as we
continue to do, on the Iran dossier before the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
I recognize, of course, the frustrations which all
of us feel, not least over the Israel-Palestine conflict,
where the clear path to peace set out in the road map
and endorsed by the Security Council remains elusive.
But all in all we have shown the will to make collective
action work, though we know, too, that we need to go
further.
In particular, we need to get better at tackling
threats which have changed dramatically since the
founding of the United Nations. Today the greatest
threats to our security often come not from other
functioning sovereign States, but from terrorist
organizations, from failing States and from man-made
shocks to our environment like climate change, which
can exacerbate State failure and breed internal
instability.
The High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change appointed by the Secretary-General is
preparing its recommendations on ways to address the
various challenges. We should remember in all this that
we have one great advantage. Though its institutions
and the founding text of the Charter has hardly
changed in 60 years, the United Nations is not an
organization set in stone, but a set of living institutions
based on a shared will to make collective security
work. The United Nations has adapted in the past -
with the development of peacekeeping, a greater focus
on individual rights and the setting of global targets for
34

development - and I am confident that it can adapt in
the future.
Of course, institutional change is part of that. At
the United Nations foundation, one eighth of its
members could expect to be elected members of the
Security Council at any one time. Today that
proportion is less than one eighteenth. The United
Kingdom has long supported the case for expanding
the Security Council to, say, 24 members, and for
including amongst the permanent members: Germany
and Japan, two countries which between them
contribute 28 per cent of the budget of the United
Nations; India, which represents one sixth of the entire
worldís population; and Brazil, which just missed
permanent membership back in 1945.
But we should not see an expansion of the
Security Council, or other institutional change, as a
panacea. The biggest need is to adapt our common
understanding - the United Nations jurisprudence, if
you like - and its operational effectiveness so that we
can respond more quickly and more thoroughly to
todayís new threats.
Let me highlight three areas which to me seem
particularly important: first, our approach must be
broader and must tackle threats to the most vulnerable,
including poverty, disease and environmental
degradation; secondly, we must build a new consensus by
expanding the scope of collective action; and, thirdly, we
must deal with the threat of terrorism, which menaces
us all and everything for which we stand.
Let me now take these three points in turn. First,
there is the need for a broader approach which
addresses the complex and interdependent nature of
security today. Here, we have to do more to meet the
Millennium Development Goals and to promote
sustainable development, especially in Africa. We
cannot have security without development or
development without security.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in his
speech this week, we have to do more to entrench the
rule of law and justice, especially in States recovering
from conflict. The United Kingdom will pursue work
on the Secretary-Generalís report during its Security
Council presidency next month.
We could also use the United Nations better, to
agree to monitor and help implement globally accepted
norms of good governance.
And we need to act together quickly on climate
change, perhaps the greatest long-term threat to our
world in terms of stability and security. We have to
implement Kyoto - and I greatly welcome what my
colleague, His Excellency Sergey Lavrov had to say on
that today - and agree to emission reductions beyond
2012.
My second point is the need to build a new
consensus on the scope of collective action. We all
represent independent, sovereign states. But even as we
founded the United Nations we recognized that
sovereignty was a trust in the hands of a nationís
government: there to be respected, not abused, from
either without or within.
The Charter set out arrangements so that an abuse
from without could be dealt with through the inherent
right of self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the
Charter. But it also said that an abuse from within
which threatens the peace could and should be dealt
with by the Security Council, under the powers
enshrined in the other articles of Chapter VII of the
Charter, and by the many conventions concluded
within the United Nations framework, including, for
example, the 1948 Geneva Convention. No longer -
we all said - could or should the world turn away
from unspeakable barbarities like that of the Holocaust.
But we have not always lived up to those high
expectations, as the tragedies of Rwanda and Bosnia
ten years ago reminded us. Today we must resolve to
do so and to engage in situations of humanitarian
catastrophe or grave violations of international
humanitarian law and to act in the face of other threats
to international peace and security.
The principle of non-interference has to be
qualified by a duty to protect, especially where
Governments are failing in that duty.
We therefore need, for example, to be ready to
support greater use by the Secretary-General of his
powers under Article 99 of the Charter, to bring threats
to peace to the Security Council's attention. We have to
act quickly in response, because prevention is far better
than cure. We should look to work more closely with
regional organizations, as we are doing with the
African Union in Darfur. We need more discussion on
the criteria as to when the international community
might have to intervene with military force in extreme
circumstances. We must get better at engaging for the
long term in countries recovering from conflict,
35

coordinating our efforts in response to locally agreed
priorities.
My third point is the urgent need to combat
global terrorism, a menace directed at us all. If we have
learned anything in the three years since 11 September
2001 it is that international terrorism is indiscriminate
in its targets and merciless in its hatred. Christian, Jew,
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, Muslim, people of no religion
or any religion, and of every or no shade of political
opinion, all have died through the terroristsí bullet or
bomb.
My friend Sergey Lavrov spoke eloquently a
moment ago about the tears still wet for the terrible,
unspeakable massacre of the young and innocent that
took place in Beslan. Sergey, your tears are my tears;
Russiaís tears are the worldís tears. We are all in the
fight against terrorism together.
Today in Iraq we are seeing again the depths to
which the terrorists plumb. The vast majority of the
victims of terrorism in Iraq are Iraqis. Our thoughts
and condolences are with the Government and people
of Iraq and with their families. But some of the victims
of terrorism in Iraq are foreigners who are helping
Iraqis to build a more stable and prosperous country.
One of them is Kenneth Bigley, a British engineer held
hostage by terrorists who have already barbarically
murdered his two American comrades. Our thoughts
and prayers are with their families. We continue to do
all we can to secure Mr. Bigleyís release.
I know - how could I forget - that opinions
have differed over the rightness of the military action
taken in Iraq 18 months ago. But I warrant that no
nation is in favour of the terrorist insurgency now
occurring there. For we all recognize that what is being
attempted by the terrorists in Iraq is an attack both on
the Iraqi people and on everything for which the
Organization stands: safety, security and human rights.
We have to come together to defeat the terrorists and
their despicable aims.
The threat of terrorism confronts democratic,
properly functioning States with an acute dilemma,
namely, how to fight those who recognize none of the
values for which we stand while remaining true to
those values. Our commitments under international
conventions express many of those values and the
importance that we attach to them. But equally, those
conventions cannot be allowed to shelter those
involved in terrorism. The conventions were designed
to protect citizens from abuse by States, not by
terrorists.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees protects those with a well-founded fear of
persecution. I am proud that the United Kingdom and so
many other nations have offered that protection when and
where it was required. But as the 1951 Convention
itself sets out, asylum is not an unqualified right. It does
not apply to anyone who has committed a war crime, a
crime against humanity or other serious crime; nor
does it apply to anyone who is guilty of acts contrary
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We must never stoop to the level of the terrorist ó
to torture, mistreatment or unjustified incarceration ó
nor will any country within the European Union be
party to the return of suspects to such conditions, nor
to face the death penalty. But we cannot let terrorists
exploit a protection designed for the persecuted, not
the persecutors. We in the United Kingdom shall
therefore be working closely with Russia on its
important draft Security Council resolution, to see how
best we can prevent those who commit, support and
finance terrorism from sheltering behind a refugee
status to which they are not entitled. Along with the
Russian Federation and other partners in the Security
Council, we also wish to look at ways to ensure the
speedier extradition of such individuals.
We, the United Nations, have over the last year
begun to show a new determination to come together
and to make collective action work. A year from now,
we will meet again here to review the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, as well as the Millennium
Development Goals, and to set the United Nations
agenda for the next decade. The United Kingdomís
chairmanship of the G-8 next year will focus on
tackling climate change and on Africa, on which the
Independent Commission for Africa will be producing
recommendations as to how best we can support the
radical agenda for change and development designed
by Africa itself through the New Partnership for
Africaís Development and the African Union. Our
presidency of the European Union will help us to lead
efforts for a successful outcome in the Doha
Development Round, and for building the European
Unionís crisis-management capabilities.
More than ever, global security is our shared
responsibility. In the year ahead, as we continue to
36

adapt to todayís threats and challenges, we must find
renewed determination and political will to make
collective security work. The United Kingdom is
determined to play its full part in that endeavour.Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. May I assure you of
India’s full support in ensuring its success.
As we gather here in the sixtieth year since the
United Nations was founded, we might perhaps pause
to reflect on the fate of the ideas and ideals of the
international community that inspired its creation. The
post-war generation had already become aware that the
world which had emerged from the ashes of a global
war could no longer be a peaceful world unless the
underlying forces of conflict were addressed
effectively by the entire community of nations as a
collectivity. Nations were therefore united to make the
world a safer and more peaceful place — a world in
which free peoples could pursue together a destiny of
shared prosperity.
The impulse behind the creation of global
institutions nearly 60 years ago has become an even
more pressing reality today. If we look around us, the
single most defining characteristic of our contemporary
world is the global, transnational character of the
challenges we confront, whether these are in the realm
of international security or in that of development.
Virtually every major issue that we face as nation-
States has both a domestic and a transnational
dimension. It is becoming increasingly apparent as
never before that, unless we fashion a global response
to those challenges based on a meaningful consensus,
we will not succeed in creating a world that truly
manifests the ideals of the United Nations.
Terrorism is one such challenge for which many
of us have paid an unacceptable price. We shall not
forget that, three years ago, it was this great city that
witnessed the single most horrendous terrorist act in
human history. Approximately three weeks ago, in
Russia, the world saw another brutal act of terror
which took the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians,
including a large number of young children.
Terrorism exploits the technologies spawned by
globalization, recruits its foot soldiers on ideologies of
bigotry and hatred, and directly targets democracies.
And yet, it is a sad reality that international networks
of terror appear to cooperate more effectively among
themselves than the democratic nations that they target.
We speak about cooperation, but we often seem
hesitant to commit ourselves to a truly global offensive
to root out terrorism with the pooling of resources, the
exchanging of information, the sharing of intelligence
and the unambiguous unity of purpose that is required.
That must change. We do have a global coalition
against terrorism; we must now give it substance and
credibility, avoiding selective approaches and political
expediency.
I now turn to other challenges that we face today,
such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
There is an increasing reliance on restrictive regimes
and on the use of punitive action to confront this threat
to international peace and security. Although India is
firmly opposed to proliferation and has an impeccable
record in that respect, we believe that it is only a global
consensus of willing nations that will ultimately prove
to be truly effective in that regard.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is a good
model to follow with respect to other weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It is through
representative institutions, rather than through
exclusive clubs of privileged countries, that we can
address global threats posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. As far back as 1988, Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi outlined a series of specific steps in an action
plan, whose central proposition remains valid even
today — that progressive steps towards the elimination
14

of weapons of mass destruction must be based on a
balance of obligations between those who possess such
weapons and those who do not.
It is quite evident today that a global discourse is
required for evolving a more cooperative and
consensual international security order. India believes
that such consensus must differentiate between States
whose actions strengthen non-proliferation and those
that weaken the realization of its objectives.
Let me now turn to the central theme for the vast
majority of United Nations Members; the challenge of
development and the eradication of mass poverty.
Globalization has undoubtedly brought enhanced
effectiveness and efficiency in the functioning of our
economies. It has integrated marketplaces, higher
standards of living and a revolution in global
connectivity.
But there is also the phenomenon of widening
economic disparities, both within and among countries.
Connectivity also means that the people are painfully
aware — in real time — of how far and how fast they
are falling behind in their relative living conditions.
Development today is no longer a function of domestic
resources and national policies alone. It is a process
that is vitally linked to the international economic
environment that the developing countries face.
The international community must find ways to
contract those circles of exclusion. We need to find
innovative sources of financing and access to new
technologies that are necessary to assist those who are
on the margins of globalization. Just as prosperity
cannot be sustained by being walled in, poverty cannot
be banished to some invisible periphery. Development
must therefore return to the centre of the global
discourse. We must evolve equitable and rule-based
regimes to manage global trade, investment flows and
the movement of services.
Four years ago, at our Millennium Summit, we
adopted ambitious global development goals, but it is a
matter of concern that we have already fallen behind in
their implementation.
While globalization has generated new
challenges, it has also given us new technologies to
deal with those massive challenges. The world faces
ominous pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, but it today
also possesses remedies and skills that can rid the
world of that scourge. We face problems of
environmental degradation in many parts of our planet,
but we also have available safe and environment-
friendly technologies.
Many countries are beset by problems of hunger
and malnutrition, but we possess modern techniques of
food production and processing to make a hunger-free
world a credible and realistic dream. Although our
excessive dependence on hydrocarbons raises concerns
about the long-term availability of energy and about
the security of supplies, technology has made available
many environmentally sound alternative technologies.
What we lack, however, is a truly global agreement and
a mobilization of the international community to
overcome the massive challenges.
The experience of the decades since the inception
of the United Nations demonstrates the great
significance of democracy as an instrument for
achieving both peace and prosperity. While it is
gratifying that the frontiers of democracy have
expanded dramatically in the last decade and a half,
they still exclude significant numbers.
Only a few months ago, in India’s fourteenth
general election, our country went through the largest
exercise of popular will in the world. I can therefore
assert with confidence, the importance that national
articulations in global forums have in truly reflecting
the democratically expressed will of their people. We
choose to overlook the absence of democracy in too
many cases for reasons of political expediency.
Democracy’s representative nature validates the
commitments we take on as countries; it should also
determine the manner in which the architecture of
international institutions evolves. What is required for
the international community to successfully deal with
global challenges — whether they be security
challenges, economic challenges or challenges in the
sphere of the environment — is the existence of
international institutions and a culture of genuine
multilateralism.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
are the only instruments available for responding
effectively to the challenges we face collectively. But
what is missing is our sustained commitment to
democratizing the functioning of the United Nations.
It is common knowledge that the United Nations
is often unable to exert an effective influence on global
economic and political issues of critical importance.
15

That is due to what may be called its democracy
deficit, which stands in the way of an effective
multilateralism based on a democratically-evolved
global consensus.
Therefore, reform and restructuring of the United
Nations system can alone provide a crucial link in an
expanding chain of efforts to refashion international
structures, imbuing them with a greater degree of
participatory decision-making so as to make them more
representative of contemporary realities.
Our Millennium Declaration recognized the
urgency of the reform of the United Nations Security
Council. An overwhelming majority of the world’s
population cannot be excluded from an institution that
today legislates on an increasing number of issues,
with an ever-widening impact. The expansion of the
Security Council, in the categories of both permanent
and non-permanent members, and the inclusion of
countries like India as permanent Members would be a
first step in the process of making the United Nations a
truly representative body.
I would like to make brief references to two
countries with which India has had historically friendly
ties and whose early return to political normalcy is the
focus of the world’s attention.
The situation in Iraq causes us great concern. The
United Nations has a central role to play in erasing the
discord of the recent past and in ensuring that the Iraqi
people can soon exercise effective sovereignty,
preserving the country’s unity and territorial integrity.
An end to the suffering of the Iraqi people and
recognition of their aspirations should be the guiding
objectives. Consistent with our longstanding ties of
friendship with the Iraqi people, India will contribute
to Iraq’s humanitarian and economic reconstruction.
In the past three years, the international
community has assisted Afghanistan in pulling back
from the brink of chaos and chronic instability. We
sincerely hope that the upcoming presidential elections
and the subsequent parliamentary elections will allow
the Afghan people to express their will, free from
interference and intimidation. India’s assistance to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development will
continue.
Relations between India and Pakistan have been a
matter of attention for the international community. It
is known that in January this year India and Pakistan
initiated a composite dialogue to resolve all issues,
including that of Jammu and Kashmir. I reaffirm our
determination to carry forward that dialogue to a
purposeful and mutually acceptable conclusion.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm India’s
commitment to the principles that have brought us
together in this Organization. Those principles retain
their relevance and validity even while the global
economy and the international political order pose new
and very different challenges. All of us have to grow
out of the comfort of the predictable, discard
constraining habits of thought, and move forward with
confidence to meet the demands of the present and the
future. Each of us has to be prepared to take on new
obligations and larger responsibilities relevant to the
needs of our time.
I deem it a privilege to say unhesitatingly that
India is conscious of the responsibilities that lie ahead.
I speak of an India on the move — on the cutting edge
of economic, technological and developmental
transformations. This is an India endowed with
outstanding human resources, and we are putting in
place policies which will respond to emerging and
critical tasks. We have the capabilities and capacity to
take these on, and to participate in the restructuring of
a just and dynamic world order. We are confident that,
in the inextricably interdependent world we live in, our
commitment to the common good, which this
Organization embodies, will be resolute and full.
In this, we are inspired by the vision of
internationalism bequeathed to us by India’s first Prime
Minister, the great Jawaharlal Nehru — a vision of a
world order whose pillars are peace, harmony,
cooperation and development. That vision needs to
reanimate the collective wisdom of the world
community for a new partnership to meet the
unprecedented challenges we face.I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly
and to wish you much success.
The United Nations was established out of the
devastation of the Second World War in order to build
a world of unity and of peace. Today, 60 years after the
Organization came into being, we must ask ourselves:
What are we united for and what are we united against?
Are we united for peace and security? Are we united
for fairness and justice? Are we united against terror?
Are we united against tyranny?
Or are we, sadly, united only in cynical and
immoral majority votes that make a mockery of the
noble ideals on which this body was founded?
Tomorrow is Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the Jewish
calendar, when all Jews stand before God to account
for their actions. It is an appropriate time for all
19

nations, separately and together, to engage in such an
accounting.
I sense a change in the world. In the face of the
global campaign of terror which has left no country
free of its devastating impact, the world is beginning to
realize what we in Israel have long known: that
terrorism is a challenge to humanity as a whole, not
just to individual countries; that the response to that
global threat must also be global if it is to be effective;
that the threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to
freedom everywhere; that fighting terror is crucial to
our ability to bring peace.
There was a time when the problems of terror,
Islamic fundamentalism and Iranian nuclear ambition
were seen as local problems — Israel’s problems —
not challenges which threatened the community of
nations as a whole. Today, however, our community of
nations is more united than ever in the battle against
terrorism, whose sole objective is to undermine
everything that we seek to build: peace, stability,
prosperity and opportunity for all.
Today we are also more united than ever in
opposition to the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The international community now realizes
that Iran — with missiles that can reach London, Paris,
Berlin and southern Russia — poses a threat not only
to the security of Israel, but to the security and stability
of the whole world. Indeed, Iran has replaced Saddam
Hussein as the world’s number-one exporter of terror,
hate and instability.
The international community now also realizes,
as reflected in Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), that Syria’s occupation of Lebanon and its
support for Palestinian terror must end if our collective
aspirations are to be fulfilled.
And the international community now realizes
that terror and tyranny are the twin enemies of the
individual freedoms and human rights — including the
right to life itself — which define our humanity.
Today, the community of nations knows that
securing freedom and democracy for all the peoples of the
world must be our collective goal. The pictures of human
flesh torn apart by the terrorists, from New York to
Beslan — and just yesterday, once again, in Jerusalem
— are waking us up to the challenge we face.
In that spirit of unity, and in the name of all those
in the world who suffer from terror and tyranny, I call
on the Assembly to refocus its aspirations and its
priorities. I call on the Assembly to end its obsession
with Israel and to ensure that United Nations resources
are allocated more equally and more effectively. Our
United Nations must provide solutions to the global
challenges of hunger and poverty, of disease and
weapons proliferation, of drug trafficking and
sustainable development. We must not let the
Palestinian desire to vilify Israel distract our global
community from the obligation to address the needs of
all peoples.
I call on the Assembly to address head-on the
active involvement of Iran and Syria in terrorism and
Syria’s continued occupation of Lebanon. There can be
no place in the community of nations for those who
promote the killing of children. I call on the Assembly
to promote practical measures to help nations cut off
all financial and political lifelines of terror.
I call on the Assembly to address the growth of
anti-Semitism and other forms of racism and
intolerance. I urge you, Mr. President, and the
Secretary-General, to convene a special session of the
Assembly on that crucial matter. We all share the
responsibility to educate our children to understanding
and tolerance rather than to hatred and incitement.
We must build a united and global coalition to
fight terrorism, racism and anti-Semitism. We must
build a united front against the cold-blooded murderers
of our children. In that battle, there is no middle
ground. There is no room for explanations or excuses.
There are no mitigating circumstances. Declarations
and condemnations are very important, but they are not
enough. Every nation, every Government, every leader
has the responsibility to act. Those who choose instead
to support and sponsor terror must be isolated and held
to account for their crimes.
When I speak of terror and its dangers to life and
freedom, I speak from bitter personal experience. My
own home town of Beersheva suffered a double suicide
bombing just three weeks ago. Sixteen innocent people
were killed when their commuter buses were blown up.
In the middle of an important meeting with visiting
officials, I rushed to call my mother and brother to
check that they were alive. Hamas, which operates
freely from Palestinian territory and receives support
and safe haven from the regimes in Damascus and
Tehran, proudly claimed responsibility for that horrific
attack.
20

Again yesterday, as I was meeting with the
Secretary-General to discuss peace in the Middle East,
I was passed a note informing me of a suicide atrocity,
in which two more Israelis were blown to pieces by a
Palestinian terrorist. And this morning, once again, yet
more Palestinian murderers took the lives of three
young Israelis in an attack on Morag.
In the last year alone, 150 Israelis have been
killed and thousands more injured in more than 40
separate suicide bombings and other cold-blooded
attacks. More than 200 additional suicide-bombing
attempts were blocked by our defensive measures.
No Israeli mother is free of the fear that her child
may be lost. No Israeli child is immune to the
terrorists’ plans. In the name of God above and all
humanity here on Earth, this killing must stop.
Palestinian terrorism is the key reason that the
dream of peace in the Middle East has not yet become
a reality. Combating this terror is crucial to the
prospects for peace in our region. No peace initiative
can survive if terrorists continue to enjoy a free hand to
undermine it.
The road map recognizes this, calling, in phase
one, for sustained Palestinian action against terror, the
dismantling of terrorist organizations and the end of
incitement in schools and the media. Sadly, the current
Palestinian leadership has refused to fulfil those
fundamental obligations, preferring to blame Israel for
all its failures. The Palestinian side spends more energy
fighting Israel here at the United Nations than it does
fighting the terrorists in its own territory.
In the post-11-September world, this is not
acceptable. The Palestinians are not exempt from the
imperatives of the global war on terror. On the
contrary, it is in their clear interest to join it. To stand
up against Hamas and Islamic Jihad is to stand up for
Palestinian rights, not against them.
We urge the international community to recognize
this reality and help the voices of reform and
moderation within Palestinian society to emerge. The
future of the Palestinian people will be determined by
the choices that the Palestinians and their leadership
make on the ground. The solutions — for the
Palestinians and Israelis as one — lie in Gaza and
Ramallah, not in The Hague or New York.
Israel is acting in both the diplomatic and the
security arenas to deal with the consequences of this
chronic failure of the Palestinian leadership. On the
diplomatic front, Israel accepted the road map in May
2003, and we remain committed to its realization. At
this time, however, we have no responsible Palestinian
partner ready to join us in this effort. Israel is now
planning to implement the disengagement plan as a
means of enhancing security and establishing a new,
more promising platform for a return to negotiations.
We are in constant contact with the donor community
and the World Bank in a joint effort to rebuild Gaza in
the wake of Israel’s withdrawal.
On the security front, Israel is building a security
fence to stop the unchecked wave of Palestinian
attacks. After 20,000 terrorist attacks, we deserve to
protect our people. No other country would act
otherwise after 20, let alone 20,000, terrorist attacks.
The fence does not take lives. It saves them. Where
there is a fence, there is no terror. Where there is no
fence, there is terror. The modified route of the fence
reflects the necessary balance between the security of
our citizens and the welfare of the Palestinian
population, as called for by Israel’s Supreme Court.
Most important, the fence is reversible. The lives taken
by terror are irreversible. By helping take terrorism out
of the equation, the fence contributes to the prospect of
a return to negotiations and the realization of the road
map’s vision of peace.
I call on the Assembly to acknowledge this truth
and to reject the continued Palestinian effort to have
delegations address Israel’s response to terrorism,
instead of addressing the terrorism itself.
Ultimately, we need real contact and dialogue,
based on mutual respect for the humanity of the other
if we are to resolve the conflict in the Middle East. The
Government of Israel is ready for such contact. We are
ready to talk to any leadership — from Syria, Lebanon
or the Palestinians — that comes to the table without
terror and with the genuine intention of finding
mutually acceptable solutions to our differences.
Tomorrow, Yom Kippur, is a day of prayer,
fasting and soul-searching for the Jews. In Beersheva,
in a synagogue named after my father, I will be praying
together with those who have recently buried their
murdered children. I will pray that our collective
aspiration for life and freedom will prevail over the
terrorists and those who sponsor them. I will pray that
God will deliver peace on earth, for all humanity. And
I will pray that mankind can unite — through the
21

United Nations — to help make this dream become a
reality.
And I would like to say in Hebrew, Happy New
Year.Fifty-nine years ago the
United Nations was established by nations determined
to work collectively to find alternatives to conflict as a
means of resolving disputes and to create a stable,
secure and more just and prosperous world. Devastated
and exhausted by world war for the second time within
25 years, nations put their faith in multilateralism and
in this body in order to avoid future wars. The name
'United Nations' evoked the unity of humankind, in
which our shared needs and common humanity were
more important than our differences.
It is obvious as we consider the world today that
we have achieved that vision only in part. Yes, world
wars have been avoided. International covenants have
set out universally agreed human rights standards
against which the performance of governments can be
measured. International law has been developed and
strengthened. As Kofi Annan emphasized this morning
(see ), putting the rule of law into effect at
home and internationally is essential to achieving a
fair, just and civilized world. Cooperation has achieved
advances in meeting social, economic and
environmental needs.
But much more remains to be done. War, more
often within than across the boundaries of States, has
taken the lives of tens of millions of people since 1945,
most of them civilians. Weapons of mass destruction
have accumulated and access to them has spread to
more countries. New diseases such as HIV/AIDS have
emerged, with devastating consequences. The gap
between rich and poor countries has widened, not
diminished.
This year the Secretary-General's High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change will put
forward proposals for reforming and strengthening the
United Nations, aimed at ensuring its relevance and
effectiveness in addressing these issues. It is critical
that we seize this unique opportunity to institute
positive reforms and not squander it by adopting
narrow, self-interested and inflexible responses. Nor
will a lowest-common-denominator approach achieve
what we all require.
Reform is long overdue. The composition of the
Security Council cannot go on reflecting the world as it
was in 1945. An expanded Security Council and reform
of outmoded electoral groupings is necessary for the
Council to be representative of the international
community as it is today. Those changes will
strengthen the Councilís mandate and enhance its
credibility as the pre-eminent organ of the United
Nations. No solution, of course, will satisfy the
viewpoint of every Member nation. A willingness to
compromise on a package of proposals will be
essential. But clearly, enhancing the representation of
areas such as Asia, Latin America and Africa must be
an objective, and account must be taken of the
significant contributions to the United Nations of
nations such as Japan.
While the High-Level Panel will focus on reform
of the United Nations and security considerations,
development goals to create a fairer world and promote
economic and social progress in the developing world
are further vital considerations for the United Nations
in the year ahead. For hundreds of millions of people,
starvation, disease and poverty are more immediate
threats than the concerns others of us have about
terrorism and security.
We are now at a turning point in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Improving the quality
and quantity of development assistance is crucial.
However, real and lasting progress to meet
development challenges is also dependent on building
a fairer, more open and equitable global trading
system. Countries of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) spend
$360 billion each year on subsidizing agricultural
47

production in a way that excludes opportunities for the
developing world to export - not only to OECD
countries, but to third markets as well. That sum
dwarfs the amount the OECD countries provide in
development assistance.
New Zealand welcomes the progress made at the
World Trade Organization General Council meeting in
Geneva in July, which put the Doha Development
Agenda back on track. Agriculture is at the heart of the
round; the European Union and United States
agreement to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies
is particularly welcome.
The United Nations must also adapt itself to the
changing nature of security and humanitarian concerns.
The concept of national sovereignty being paramount
and standing in the way of international intervention in
local conflicts cannot be sustained. As the Secretary-
General has challenged us,
'if humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an
unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should
we respond to a Rwanda, to a Srebrenica - to
gross and systematic violations of human rights
that offend every precept of our common
humanity?' (A/54/2000, para. 217)
The International Commission on Intervention
and State Sovereignty concluded two and a half years
ago that sovereign States have the responsibility to
protect their own citizens from avoidable catastrophe:
from mass murder and rape, from starvation. When
they are unwilling or unable to do so, that
responsibility must be borne by the broader community
of nations.
We are today witnessing a humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe in Darfur. The World Health
Organization reports that up to 10,000 people a month
are dying or being killed. The very young and the
elderly are most vulnerable.
A few days ago, by its resolution 1564 (2004), the
Security Council resolved to support an enlarged
African Union monitoring mission, demanded that all
parties cease all violence and human rights violations
and threatened further steps against the Government of
the Sudan if it fails to disarm the militias and protect
civilians.
Within the General Assembly, countries must
work together in a united and determined way to
enforce those provisions and prevent the tragedy that is
unfolding. History will not forgive those who stand in
the way of protecting 1.5 million refugees in that
region and allowing them to return safely to their
homes. It is also important that those responsible for
the mass murders and the abuse of human rights there
be held to account for their actions. There must be no
impunity for such crimes.
That is true in Darfur, and is also true of those
responsible for the destruction of East Timor and the
murder of people there in 1999. The ad hoc tribunals in
Indonesia have failed to bring to justice those who are
responsible. That failure can only encourage such
people to commit further atrocities, believing that they
will never be held responsible for their actions.
New Zealand welcomes the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and the role that it will
now play in dealing with genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It urges all countries which
have not yet done so to accede to the convention
establishing that body and to recognize its jurisdiction.
In the area of conflict resolution, we face today
two major challenges: in Afghanistan and in Iraq. New
Zealand has strongly supported efforts to bring security
and stability to Afghanistan. As a small country we
have contributed more than NZ$80 million in military
and development assistance. We welcome progress
towards presidential elections next month and the
essential democratic mandate that they will provide to
the Government.
Strong international support, however, will be
necessary to meet the challenges which lie ahead. That
includes ending the production and trading of drugs.
Afghanistan provides about 75 per cent of the world
trade in opiates. The money derived funds warlords
and organized crime and undermines the ability of the
legitimate Government to function.
New Zealand deplores the violence in Iraq, which
continues to harm or take the lives of so many people,
and the circumstances which have contributed to that
violence. We call on those responsible for taking the
lives of innocent people to end their violence. They
now have access to a political process which they
should use to promote their views and interests. A
credible election process is vital to creating an Iraqi
Government which has a popular mandate. The United
Nations has a key role to play in that process, but
adequate security and a safe environment are first
necessary for that to occur. New Zealand will continue
48

to support the interim Iraqi authority and the United
Nations in their efforts to restore security, peace and
prosperity to the Iraqi people, who have suffered for so
long.
In Iraq and elsewhere, close attention also needs
to be given to the protection of United Nations staff.
The General Assembly this year will consider an
integrated security strategy for the United Nations,
which will incorporate a system-wide review of the
United Nations security apparatus, accountability and
resources. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be
strengthened and supported by all States Members of
the United Nations.
New Zealand condemns all acts of terrorism and
will continue to contribute strongly to the campaign
against terrorism. In particular, we condemn the
inhumanity of terrorists in Beslan who sacrificed
children as pawns in pursuit of their political
objectives. However, attempts to suppress terrorism by
force will not by themselves be enough unless we also
address the causes which drive people to support,
finance or be recruited into terrorism.
In that regard, no action will be more important
to the undermining of terrorism today than finding a
just and sustainable solution to the conflict between
Israel and the Palestinian people. The international
community must work with those countries to
overcome the failure of leadership, the lack of resolve
and the cycle of violence and retaliation which stand in
the way of solving that conflict.
Finally, in the Pacific region, New Zealand's own
neighbourhood, we can celebrate the progress which
has been made in Bougainville and in the Solomon
Islands in ending conflict and re-establishing the rule
of law. In both cases, a concerted regional response
with the support of the United Nations has been
effective. In Bougainville, that response created peace
from a situation where a 10-year civil war had resulted
in widespread devastation and the loss of thousands of
lives.
In the Solomon Islands, the intervention of the
Regional Assistance Mission has restored the rule of
law by its elected Government in place of the anarchy
created by armed militias. More than 3,500 weapons
have been collected and destroyed, social services and
a credible budgetary progress restored and militiamen
and corrupt elements from the police and Government
arrested and charged.
Much however, remains to be done to meet the
wide-ranging challenges which confront the Pacific
region, including environmental threats, ethnic
conflict, poor law enforcement and governance and the
threat of disease. Regional solutions are being applied
by the Pacific Islands Forum through greater
collaboration and integration in addressing problems.
International cooperation through processes such as the
10-year Review of the Barbados Programme of Action
set to take place in Mauritius next year will also help.
In conclusion, 59 years from the end of the
Second World War and the establishment of the United
Nations, the world continues to face major challenges
to its security and well-being. The opportunity exists
this year for us to consider and improve the ways by
which the Assembly can address the problems faced by
humanity and make a difference. Success or failure to
do so will be the collective responsibility of all of us.I am addressing the Assembly today at a most
difficult time for our country, when tears are still being
shed by those who lost their children and loved ones
during the horrific terrorist attack in the Russian city of
Beslan. I would like from this rostrum to take this
opportunity to express once again my gratitude to all
those who have shown their solidarity with Russia in
these tragic days. Our special thanks go to the States and
international organizations that extended their helping
hand to the victims and the bereaved families ó to all
those who have suffered from this outrage.
I am also addressing the Assembly at a moment
of truth, when there cannot possibly be any doubt
whatever remaining as to the true nature of
international terrorism and the challenge it has flung
down before the world community. With their actions
throughout the world, the terrorists have once and for
all placed themselves in opposition to civilized
mankind. In fact, having made the mass murder of
people an end in itself, they have knowingly violated
all norms of human morality.
Russia has drawn harsh conclusions. They have
been set forth in the 4 and 13 September addresses by
the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir V.
Putin. We will not allow anyone to encroach on the
sovereignty of our State. We will resolutely strengthen
the unity of the country and its people in order to
counter terror and to guarantee a secure and decent life
for our citizens in freedom and democracy.
The measures announced by the Russian
President to achieve these objectives will be
implemented on the basis of our countryís
Constitution; and we will continue to defend our
legitimate interests throughout the world, not through
confrontation, but by means of equitable dialogue,
cooperation and partnership. Moreover, a readiness to
engage in honest cooperation in fighting terrorism
without double standards, is becoming one of the key
criteria in our relations with any and all States.
We must enter into a qualitatively new and critical
stage in the activities of the anti-terrorist coalition. The
meeting of the Security Council of 1 September
demonstrated the strong determination of the
international community to continue its fight against
terrorism in a consistent way. It is important now to
translate this commitment into practical actions as
quickly as possible.
In the three years that have passed since the
terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, a
lot has been done to develop effective partnership in
this sphere. However, compared to the scale of the
threat, far from enough has been done. It is important
to learn lessons from the experience gained and to
draw conclusions for the future.
First, the global nature of the terrorist threat testifies
to the fact that security in todayís world is indivisible.
Consequently, only collective responsibility can make
the world secure. The fight against terrorism should
unite States rather than pit them against each other. We
can deal with this evil only on a multilateral basis by
combining our efforts and acting in the spirit of solidarity.
As President Putin has declared, Russia considers the
objective of strengthening the anti-terrorist coalition to
be one of our most important tasks.
A special emphasis here should be placed on
intensifying the cooperation among our special services,
which, we are convinced, must now be raised to a
qualitatively new level of trust and coordinated action.
Secondly, a clear strategy and a generally
acceptable legal framework are the prerequisites for
success in combating terrorism. Such a framework is
enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001) and in other
decisions of the Security Council. But now, additional
efforts are needed. They include making necessary
amendments to national legislation, acceding to
international anti-terrorist conventions and finalizing
new international counter-terrorism legal instruments.
In circumstances where international terrorism
has declared war on our entire civilization, the
determination of States to use their right of self-
defence in conformity with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter is of particular importance. Of course
international law is clearly not an inalterable dogma.
The fight against terrorism calls for its development
and improvement.
Thirdly, the time has come to renounce double
standards once and for all when it comes to terror,
regardless of the slogans in which it may be cloaked.
31

Those who slaughtered children in Beslan and hijacked
aeroplanes to attack America are creatures of the same
ilk.
Harbouring terrorists, their henchmen and their
sponsors undermines unity and mutual trust among
those that form part of the anti-terrorist front, serves as
justification for the actions of terrorists and indeed
encourages them to commit similar crimes in other
countries. I would recall that United Nations decisions
require States granting political asylum to carefully
examine the personal records of each individual to
make sure that he or she has no links to terrorism.
Attempts to use the fight against terrorism in various
geopolitical games are even more counterproductive
and dangerous.
Fourth, the utter atrociousness of the recent
terrorist attacks proves there is the need for reliable
safeguards against terrorists gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction. Russia is prepared for the closest
kind of international partnership in that area. Our
country was one of the sponsors of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). It is a participant in the
Proliferation Security Initiative and a co-sponsor of the
Group of Eight (G-8) Action Plan on Non-
Proliferation. Those initiatives are complementary and
are designed to increase the effectiveness of the regime of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
something which is especially relevant on the eve of the
2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Fifth, drug trafficking is increasingly interwoven
with terrorism. The drug flow from Afghanistan has
acquired global significance. The implementation of a
set of social, economic and law-enforcement measures
both within and outside the borders of that country is
now more urgent than ever. One of the key elements of
that strategy lies in strengthening the existing anti-drug
security belts and creating new ones.
Russia is making an important contribution
towards resolving the drug problem, including through
the formulation of specific legal, political and
operational measures within the framework of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). We are ready to
coordinate actions with the Government of
Afghanistan, and with the multinational and coalition
forces operating in that country.
Sixth, international terrorists have neither
nationality nor religion. In fact, it is specifically
religion and national culture that, today as never
before, require protection from the devastating impact
of extremism of any kind. There is a need for
respectful dialogue among various religions and
civilizations. Russia, which is open both to the West
and to the East, is ready to play its part in that process,
which is intended to prevent a split in civilization.
Another pressing task today is the saving of
world spiritual and cultural monuments from attacks by
extremists. We deem it essential to establish
cooperation in that area between the United Nations
and its specialized agencies, primarily the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). Failing to act here ó as well
as standing by in silence at the desecration of
memorials to Second World War heroes and victims
and at attempts to rehabilitate fascists ó can only play
into the hands of those who wish to incite extremist
trends in society.
Seventh, Russia believes that the United Nations
must continue to play a pivotal role in uniting the
efforts of the international community in its fight
against terrorism. As Chair of the Security Councilís
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), our country
intends to actively contribute to speeding up the reform
of that Committee. We propose drafting a new Security
Council resolution that would ensure the most effective
possible functioning of the CTC, so as to identify, in a
timely manner, weak links in the anti-terrorism
network and increase practical cooperation between the
CTC and international and regional organizations,
including the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the CSTO and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.
The CIS summit held recently in Astana,
Kazakhstan, reaffirmed the strong potential of CIS
regional structures in all areas, from anti-terrorist
activities and ensuring collective security to
intensifying economic integration.
Certainly, in an increasingly interdependent
world, the war on terrorism cannot be considered in
isolation from other pressing issues facing mankind.
This is especially relevant to the settlement of
conflicts, which for decades have been destabilizing
the situation at the regional and global levels. Through
its decisions, the General Assembly must promote a
32

Middle East settlement on the basis of commitments
made by the parties under the road map. Yesterday, the
Quartet of international mediators spoke out to that end.
The situation in Iraq is a source of serious
concern. Russia is ready to render all possible
assistance towards attaining a political settlement
aimed at preserving Iraqís territorial integrity and
ensuring its political sovereignty and a genuinely
democratic post-war recovery. The search for national
reconciliation within Iraq is of key significance; here,
the Iraqis could be assisted by the holding of an
international conference with the participation of all
major Iraqi political forces, friendly States, Security
Council members and the League of Arab States and
other organizations.
We must remain vigilant with regard to Kosovo,
which is a dangerous hotbed of tension. There is no
room for complacency. We must work to ensure that
universally recognized standards of human rights and
the rights of national minorities are applied in the
region. We also need to make full use of existing
mechanisms for conflict settlement within the CIS.
Consolidating the peacemaking capacity of the
international community is crucial to overcoming
regional crises. A collective response to humanitarian
crises, in particular those on the African continent, in
full compliance with the United Nations Charter and in
a spirit of partnership with regional structures, would
leave no doubt that the Charter remains a universal
basis for the effective solution of such problems.
The United Nations must continue to focus its
attention on other global threats to security and
sustainable development as well. Those include the
eradication of poverty and illiteracy as a breeding
ground for extremism. Annually, our country grants
1,000 scholarships to students from African countries.
Russia has contributed $7.5 million to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and has
provided bilateral humanitarian assistance to a number
of African countries.
Among the challenges and threats is that of
finding ways to bridge the gap between poor and rich
States. Russia has been making its contribution there;
between 1998 and 2002 it wrote off the debt of African
countries equivalent to $11.2 billion.
Another challenge is ensuring environmental
security. Here I would like to confirm that in
accordance with the decision of President Vladimir V.
Putin we are now engaged in serious consideration of
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
The challenges also include preventing the
transformation of outer space into a theatre of armed
confrontation. Together with China, we are calling for the
conclusion of a comprehensive agreement to that end. We
call upon all countries with space capability to join in that
initiative. There is also a growing need to elaborate a
United Nations convention on outer space law.
A further challenge is the fight against gross
violations of human rights, with a view to ensuring the
security and dignity of the individual. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and other
organizations should not remain passive spectators
when, in some countries, a considerable part of the
population is deprived of citizenship and consequently
of basic political, social and economic rights.
On Russiaís initiative, the General Assembly, at
its fifty-seventh and fifty-eighth sessions, adopted
resolutions 57/145 and 58/16 respectively, on
establishing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
comprehensive approach to countering new threats and
challenges. The resolutions contain specific guidelines
for bringing the international community closer to a
new security model that would meet the global
challenges of the twenty-first century.
Those are the lines along which the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, established
by the Secretary-General, is organizing its work. We
hope that its recommendations will pave the way for a
genuine enhancement of the effectiveness of the United
Nations. At the same time, reform of the Organization,
and particularly of the Security Council, should be
based on the broadest possible agreement and should
not provoke the alienation of States.
The international community is undergoing a
complex period in its establishment of a new system of
international relations. It is already clear that this will
be a long-term process with an uncertain future and
one that, so far, is difficult to predict. At the same time,
there is an enormous increase in the number of new
unresolved problems and new dangerous challenges to
security and the development of mankind. We still lack
a collective strategy and universally applicable
mechanisms for responding to those challenges. In fact,
33

we have to constantly improvise and use makeshift
means to ensure world stability.
A question arises as to whether we could soon
find ourselves in a situation in which events start to go
out of control. Is it not time for the international
community to assume an active role in impacting upon
global processes and taking targeted actions to
establish a more secure and just world order? Russia is
fully determined, together with other countries, to
build such a world order and take its proper place
therein as a free and democratic State.
More than half a century ago, the civilized world
put aside all its disputes and differences and mobilized
its efforts to counter the deadly threat of Nazi
enslavement. The enemy that opposes us today is no
less dangerous and no less merciless. Russia sincerely
hopes that the forthcoming sixtieth anniversary of the
end of World War II and the establishment of the
United Nations will become a historic milestone on the
path to a world order in which the twenty-first century
sees the noble principles of peace, stability and
development enshrined in the United Nations Charter
hold sway.Thank you for the honour of
addressing the General Assembly. The American
people respect the idealism that gave life to this
Organization. And we respect the men and women of
the United Nations, who stand for peace and human
rights in every part of the world. Welcome to New
York City, and welcome to the United States of
America.
During the past three years, I have addressed the
General Assembly in a time of tragedy for my country,
and in times of decision for all of us. Now we gather at
a time of tremendous opportunity for the United
Nations and for all peaceful nations. For decades, the
circle of liberty, security and development has been
expanding in our world. This progress has brought
unity to Europe, self-government to Latin America and
Asia and new hope to Africa. Now we have the historic
8

chance to widen the circle even further, to fight
radicalism and terror with justice and dignity and to
achieve a true peace, founded on human freedom.
The United Nations and my country share the
deepest commitments. Both the American Declaration
of Independence and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights proclaim the equal value and dignity of
every human life. That dignity is honoured by the rule
of law, limits on the power of the State, respect for
women, protection of private property, free speech,
equal justice and religious tolerance. That dignity is
dishonoured by oppression, corruption, tyranny,
bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent.
Both our founding documents affirm that this bright
line between justice and injustice — between right and
wrong — is the same in every age, every culture and
every nation.
Wise Governments also stand for these principles
for very practical and realistic reasons. We know that
dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free
nations strive to resolve differences in peace. We know
that oppressive Governments support terror, while free
Governments fight the terrorists in their midst. We
know that free peoples embrace progress and life,
instead of becoming the recruits for murderous
ideologies.
Every nation that wants peace will share the
benefits of a freer world. And every nation that seeks
peace has an obligation to help build that world.
Eventually there is no safe isolation from terror
networks, or failed States that shelter them, or outlaw
regimes or weapons of mass destruction. Eventually
there is no safety in looking away, seeking the quiet
life by ignoring the struggles and oppression of others.
In this young century our world needs a new
definition of security. Our security is not merely found
in spheres of influence or some balance of power. The
security of our world is found in the advancing rights
of mankind.
Those rights are advancing across the world. And
across the world, the enemies of human rights are
responding with violence. Terrorists and their allies
believe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the United States Bill of Rights and every charter of
liberty ever written are lies to be burned and destroyed
and forgotten. They believe that dictators should
control every mind and tongue in the Middle East and
beyond. They believe that suicide and torture and
murder are fully justified to serve any goal they
declare. And they act on their beliefs.
In the last year alone terrorists have attacked
police stations and banks and commuter trains and
synagogues and a school filled with children. This
month in Beslan we saw once again how the terrorists
measure their success in the death of the innocent and
in the pain of grieving families. Svetlana Dzebisov was
held hostage along with her son and her nephew. Her
nephew did not survive. She recently visited the
cemetery and saw what she called the “little graves”.
She said, “I understand that there is evil in the world,
but what have these little creatures done?”
The Russian children did nothing to deserve such
awful suffering and fright and death. The people of
Madrid and Jerusalem and Istanbul and Baghdad have
done nothing to deserve sudden and random murder.
Those acts violate the standards of justice in all
cultures and the principles of all religions. All civilized
nations are in this struggle together and all must fight
the murderers.
We are determined to destroy terror networks
wherever they operate, and the United States is grateful
to every nation that is helping to seize terrorist assets,
track down their operatives and disrupt their plans. We
are determined to end the State sponsorship of terror,
and my nation is grateful to all that participated in the
liberation of Afghanistan. We are determined to
prevent proliferation and to enforce the demands of the
world, and my nation is grateful to the soldiers of many
nations who have helped to deliver the Iraqi people
from an outlaw dictator.
The dictator agreed in 1991, as a condition of a
ceasefire, to fully comply with all Security Council
resolutions, then ignored more than a decade of those
resolutions. Finally, the Security Council promised
serious consequences for his defiance. The
commitments we make must have meaning. When we
say “serious consequences”, for the sake of peace there
must be serious consequences. So a coalition of nations
enforced the just demands of the world.
Defending our ideals is vital, but it is not enough.
Our broader mission as United Nations Members is to
apply those ideals to the great issues of our time. Our
wider goal is to promote hope and progress as the
alternatives to hatred and violence. Our great purpose
is to build a better world beyond the war on terror.
9

Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have established a
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
In three years the contributing countries have funded
projects in more than 90 countries, and pledged a total
of $5.6 billion to those efforts. America has undertaken
a $15 billion effort to provide prevention and treatment
and humane care in nations afflicted by AIDS, placing
a special focus on 15 countries where the need is most
urgent. AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time,
and our unprecedented commitment will bring new
hope to those who have walked too long in the shadow
of death.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have joined together to
confront the evil of trafficking in human beings. We
are supporting organizations that rescue the victims,
passing stronger anti-trafficking laws and warning
travellers that they will be held to account for
supporting this modern form of slavery. Women and
children should never be exploited for pleasure or
greed, anywhere on Earth.
Because we believe in human dignity, we should
take seriously the protection of life from exploitation
under any pretext. In this session, the General
Assembly will consider a draft resolution sponsored by
Costa Rica calling for a comprehensive ban on human
cloning. I support that draft resolution and urge all
Governments to affirm a basic ethical principle: no
human life should ever be produced or destroyed for
the benefit of another.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have changed the way
we fight poverty, curb corruption and provide aid. In
2002 we created the Monterrey Consensus, a bold
approach that links new aid from developed nations to
real reform in developing ones. And through the
Millennium Challenge Account, my nation is
increasing our aid to developing nations that expand
economic freedom and invest in the education and
health of their own people.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have acted to lift the
crushing burden of debt that limits the growth of
developing economies and holds millions of people in
poverty. Since those efforts began in 1996, poor
countries with the heaviest debt burdens have received
more than $30 billion of relief. And to prevent the
build-up of future debt, my country and other nations
have agreed that international financial institutions
should increasingly provide new aid in the form of
grants rather than loans.
Because we believe in human dignity, the world
must have more effective means to stabilize regions in
turmoil and to halt religious violence and ethnic
cleansing. We must create permanent capabilities to
respond to future crises.
The United States and Italy have proposed a
Global Peace Operations Initiative. Group of Eight
(G-8) countries will train 75,000 peacekeepers —
initially from Africa — so they can conduct operations
on that continent and elsewhere. The countries of the
G-8 will help that peacekeeping force with deployment
and logistical needs.
At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible
suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, crimes my Government has concluded are
genocide. The United States played a key role in efforts
to broker a ceasefire, and we are providing
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people.
Rwanda and Nigeria have deployed forces in the Sudan
to help improve security so that aid can be delivered.
The Security Council adopted a new resolution that
supports an expanded African Union force to help
prevent further bloodshed and that urges the
Government of the Sudan to stop flights by military
aircraft in Darfur. We congratulate the members of the
Council on this timely and necessary action. I call on
the Government of the Sudan to honour the ceasefire it
signed, and to stop the killing in Darfur.
Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful
nations must stand for the advance of democracy. No
other system of government has done more to protect
minorities, to secure the rights of labour, to raise the
status of women or to channel human energy to the
pursuits of peace. We have witnessed the rise of
democratic Governments in predominantly Hindu and
Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian cultures.
Democratic institutions have taken root in modern
societies and in traditional societies. When it comes to
the desire for liberty and justice, there is no clash of
civilizations. People everywhere are capable of
freedom and worthy of freedom.
Finding the full promise of representative
Government takes time, as America has found in two
centuries of debate and struggle. Nor is there only one
10

form of representative Government, because
democracies by definition take on the unique character
of the peoples that create them. Yet this much we know
with certainty: the desire for freedom resides in every
human heart, and that desire cannot be contained
forever by prison walls or martial laws or secret police.
Over time and across the Earth, freedom will find a
way.
Freedom is finding a way in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and we must continue to show our
commitment to democracies in those nations. The
liberty that many have won at a cost must be secured.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a stake
in the success of the world’s newest democracies. Not
long ago, outlaw regimes in Baghdad and Kabul
threatened the peace and sponsored terrorists. Those
regimes destabilized one of the world’s most vital and
most volatile regions. They brutalized their peoples in
defiance of all civilized norms.
Today, the Iraqi and Afghan peoples are on the
path to democracy and freedom. The Governments that
are rising will pose no threat to others. Instead of
harbouring terrorists, they are fighting terrorist groups.
And this progress is good for the long-term security of
all of us. The Afghan people are showing extraordinary
courage under difficult conditions. They are fighting to
defend their nation from Taliban hold-outs and helping
to strike against the terrorist killers. They are reviving
their economy. They have adopted a Constitution
that protects the rights of all, while honouring their
nation’s most cherished traditions. More than 10
million Afghan citizens — over four million of them
women — are now registered to vote in next month’s
presidential election. To any who still would question
whether Muslim societies can be democratic societies,
the Afghan people are giving their answer.
Since the last general debate of this General
Assembly, the people of Iraq have regained
sovereignty. Today, in this Hall, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and his delegation represent a country that has
rejoined the community of nations. The Government of
Prime Minister Allawi has earned the support of every
nation that believes in self-determination and desires
peace. And under Security Council resolutions 1511
(2003) and 1546 (2004), the world is providing that
support. The United Nations and its Member nations
must respond to Prime Minister Allawi’s request and
do more to help build an Iraq that is secure,
democratic, federal and free.
A democratic Iraq has ruthless enemies because
terrorists know the stakes in that country. They know
that a free Iraq in the heart of the Middle East will be a
decisive blow against their ambitions for that region.
So a terrorist group associated with Al Qaeda is now
one of the main groups killing the innocent in Iraq
today, conducting a campaign of bombings against
civilians and the beheadings of bound men. Coalition
forces now serving in Iraq are confronting the terrorists
and foreign fighters so that peaceful nations around the
world will never have to face them within our own
borders.
Our coalition is standing beside a growing Iraqi
security force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
is providing vital training to that force. More than 35
nations have contributed money and expertise to help
rebuild Iraq’s infrastructure and, as the Iraqi Interim
Government moves towards national elections,
officials from the United Nations are helping Iraqis
build the infrastructure of democracy. Those selfless
people are doing heroic work and are carrying on the
great legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello.
As we have seen in other countries, one of the
main terrorist goals is to undermine, disrupt and
influence election outcomes. We can expect terrorist
attacks to escalate as Afghanistan and Iraq approach
national elections. The work ahead is demanding, but
those difficulties will not shake our conviction that the
future of Afghanistan and Iraq is a future of liberty.
The proper response to difficulty is not to retreat — it
is to prevail.
The advance of freedom always carries a cost,
paid by the bravest among us. America mourns the
losses to our nation and to many others, and today I
assure every friend of Afghanistan and Iraq, and every
enemy of liberty: We will stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq until their hopes of freedom and
security are fulfilled.
These two nations will be a model for the broader
Middle East, a region where millions have been denied
basic human rights and simple justice. For too long,
many nations, including my own, tolerated and even
excused oppression in the Middle East in the name of
stability. Oppression became common, but stability
never arrived. We must take a different approach. We
must help the reformers of the Middle East as they
work for freedom and strive to build a community of
peaceful, democratic nations.
11

That commitment to democratic reform is
essential to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace
will not be achieved by Palestinian rulers who
intimidate opposition, tolerate corruption and maintain
ties to terrorist groups. The long-suffering Palestinian
people deserve better. They deserve true leaders
capable of creating and governing a free and peaceful
Palestinian State.
Even after the setbacks and frustrations of recent
months, good will and hard effort can achieve the
promise of the road map to peace. Those who would
lead a new Palestinian State should adopt peaceful
means to achieve the rights of their people and create
the reformed institutions of a stable democracy. Arab
States should end incitement in their own media, cut
off public and private funding for terrorism, and
establish normal relations with Israel. Israel should
impose a settlement freeze, dismantle unauthorized
outposts, end the daily humiliation of the Palestinian
people, and avoid any actions that prejudice final
negotiations. And world leaders should withdraw all
favour and support from any Palestinian ruler who fails
his people and betrays their cause.
The democratic hopes we see growing in the
Middle East are growing everywhere. In the words of
the Burmese democracy advocate Aung San Suu Kyi:
“We do not accept the notion that democracy is a
Western value. To the contrary, democracy simply
means good Government rooted in responsibility,
transparency and accountability.”
Here at the United Nations, Members know this to be
true. In recent years, this Organization has helped
create a new democracy in East Timor and the United
Nations has aided other nations in making the
transition to self-rule.
Because I believe that the advance of liberty is
the path to both a safer and better world, today I
propose establishing a democracy fund within the
United Nations. This is a great calling for this great
Organization. The fund would help countries lay the
foundations of democracy by instituting the rule of law,
independent courts, a free press, political parties and
trade unions. Money from the fund would also help set
up voter precincts and polling places and support the
work of election monitors. To show our commitment to
the new democracy fund, the United States will make
an initial contribution, and I urge all other nations to
contribute as well.
Today I have outlined a broad agenda to advance
human dignity and enhance the security of all of us.
The defeat of terror, the protection of human rights, the
spread of prosperity, the advance of democracy —
these causes, these ideals, call us to great work in the
world. Each of us alone can only do so much. Together
we can accomplish so much more.
History will honour the high ideals of this
Organization. The Charter states them with clarity: “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ...
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights ... to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom”.
Let history also record that our generation of
leaders followed through on these ideals, even in
adversity. Let history show that in a decisive decade,
members of the United Nations did not grow weary in
our duties, or waver in meeting them. I am confident
that this young century will be liberty’s century. I
believe we will rise to this moment, because I know the
character of so many nations and leaders represented
here today. And I have faith in the transforming power
of freedom.
May God bless you.There are some matters on
which we all agree. One of these is that, later this year,
we will receive the important report that will be tabled
by the High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change, which was constituted by our Secretary-
General. The other is that, next year, we will mark the
tenth anniversaries of the Copenhagen World Summit
on Sustainable Development and the Beijing World
Conference on Women and discuss their outcomes. The
third matter on which we all agree is that, next year, we
will observe the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
historic Millennium Declaration.
We will also agree that we took all these
initiatives ó the convening of the social, womenís and
millennium summits and the constitution of the High-
Level Panel ó because we were of one mind that we
had a number of problems that needed to be solved. In
the Millennium Declaration, we used inspiring words
to sum up our response to these problems. We said:
ìWe have a collective responsibility to uphold the
principles of human dignity, equality and equity
at the global level. As leaders we have a duty
therefore to all the world's people, especially the
most vulnerable and, in particular, the children of
the world, to whom the future belongs.î
(resolution 55/2, para. 2)
We went on to say:
ìWe are determined to establish a just and lasting
peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.î (ibid.,
para. 4)
We also said that our efforts to make globalization
fully inclusive and equitable
'must include policies and measures, at the
global level, which correspond to the needs of
developing countries and economies in transition
and are formulated and implemented with their
effective participation'. (ibid., para. 5)
To this we added the commitment that
'We will spare no effort to free our fellow men,
women and children from the abject and
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty'.
'We are committed to making the right to
development a reality for everyone and to freeing
the entire human race from want.' (ibid.,
para. 11)
Naturally, we have no choice but to agree that we
did say all these things and would undoubtedly agree
that we meant what we said. I trust that this will not
mark the end of the range of issues over which we
would speak with one voice. I say this because, when I
have asked myself the question 'Have we achieved the
goals we set ourselves?', I have found it impossible
not to answer that we have failed. There may very well
be others among us who will take a different view and
say that a good beginning has been made and therefore
that it is too early to say we have failed.
But I am certain that if we say to those affected
by violence and war that we have made a good
beginning towards the establishment of a just and
11

lasting peace all over the world, they will not believe
us. I am equally certain that if we say to those who go
to bed hungry every day that we have made a good
beginning towards freeing the entire human race from
want, they will also not believe us.
I would make bold to say that the vision of
human dignity, equality and equity at the global level
that we enunciated in this imposing forum four years
ago resonates among the ordinary people who are
victims of hunger and war as a beautiful dream that
will inevitably be deferred.
Does this mean that, when we made the promises
we made, we deliberately intended to tell the billions
of ordinary people a lie? The answer to that question is
obviously ìnoî. Did we speak as we did simply
because talk is easy and cheap? Again, the answer to
that question is obviously 'no'. The question must
therefore arise as to why the grandeur of our words and
the vision they paint ó of a world of peace, free of
war, a world characterized by shared prosperity, free of
poverty - has not produced the grand results we
sincerely sought and seek.
It would seem to me that the answer to that
question lies in the fact that we have as yet not
seriously confronted the difficult issues that relate to
the uses and perhaps the abuses of power. Yesterday, in
his statement on his report on the work of the
Organization, our Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
spoke eloquently about the 3,000-year-old Code of
Hammurabi, and said: 'That code was a landmark in
mankindís struggle to build an order where, instead of
might making right, right would make might'
(). We took it that the Secretary-General was,
in his own elegant way, drawing our attention to the
central question of our day: the uses and abuses of
power.
Contemporary human society is characterized by
a gross and entrenched imbalance in the distribution of
power. That power is held and exercised by human
beings. As human beings, the powerful share many
things with the powerless. Together, the powerful and
the disempowered share the common human needs to
eat, to drink water, to be protected from the elements,
to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, and to live.
But life itself tells us that all of that describes
only what human beings share. The rest, the relations
among us as social beings, is defined by our varied
access to power and its exercise.
Without fear of contradiction, I have said that we
all agree that later this year we will receive the report
of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change. I am equally convinced that, depending on
where we stand relative to the power equation, we will
hold radically different views about what constitutes
humanity's most serious threats and challenges, and
therefore what must be changed to respond to that
perceived reality.
Both the powerful and the disempowered will
undoubtedly agree that terrorism and war represent a
serious threat to all humanity. They will agree that we
were right to make the commitment in the Millennium
Declaration to work for
'a just and lasting peace all over the world in
accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter' (resolution 55/2, para. 4).
Many of those who have already addressed the
Assembly have correctly drawn our attention to many
instances of terrorism and war, to which we are all
opposed. They have spoken of the bombings of the
United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and of
the African and American lives those claimed; of the
heinous 11 September outrage in this city; and of the
acts of terrorism in Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Morocco,
Spain, Israel, Gatumba in Burundi, Beslan in the
Russian Federation, and elsewhere.
They have correctly drawn our attention to the
violent conflicts in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Burundi, the Sudan, Palestine, Israel, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Chechnya, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and
elsewhere, and to other unsolved problems, such as
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara,
that cry out for a solution.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront these situations and therefore
the threat and challenge of terrorism and war.
However, the powerful will also make the
additional determination that terrorism and war
constitute the central and principal threat and challenge
that human civilization faces. They will make that
determination because, almost by definition, the
terrorists target them simply because they are
powerful; they have no logical choice but to identify
terrorism as the central and principal threat and
challenge they face, and to which they must respond.
12

Because of their place in the power equation,
what they decide will necessarily represent the global
decision of what constitutes the central, principal and
most urgent threat and challenge to human society,
necessitating various changes in the global system of
governance. What they decide will translate into a set
of obligatory injunctions, issued by this Organization,
which all Member nations will have to accept and
implement.
Again, both the powerful and the disempowered
will undoubtedly also agree that poverty, want and
underdevelopment constitute serious problems that all
humanity must confront. Many of those who have
already addressed the Assembly have correctly drawn
our attention to the reality of poverty, which billions
across the globe continue to experience.
Among other things, they have correctly
reminded us of the fact that some countries are poorer
today than they were a decade ago. They have pointed
to the virtual certainty that we will fail to meet the
Millennium Development Goals we set ourselves four
years ago.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront this situation, and therefore
the threat and challenge of poverty and
underdevelopment. However, the disempowered, who
are also the poor of the world, will also make the
additional determination that poverty and
underdevelopment constitute the central and principal
threat and challenge that human civilization faces.
They will make the determination that, because
they are the daily victims of deprivation and want,
which claim the lives of millions every year ó
translating into cold statistics about shortened life
expectancy - deprivation and want represent the
central and principal threat and challenge that
humanity faces, necessitating changes in the global
system of governance in order effectively to respond to
that reality.
But because they are powerless, those billions -
the overwhelming majority of the same humanity that
needs to eat, to drink water, to be protected from the
elements, to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, to live -
will have no possibility of persuading this
Organization, laughably described in the Millennium
Declaration as 'the most universal and most
representative Organization in the world', to translate
what they have concluded into obligatory injunctions,
issued by this Organization, which all Member nations
will have to accept and implement.
If, for a moment, we resist the temptation to
speak in parables or in tongues, for fear that we might
be punished for telling the truth, we must say that this
stark and simple reality reflects the distribution of
power and wealth in contemporary human society.
The wealthy and powerful feel, correctly,
mortally threatened by the fanatical rage of the
terrorists. They have the power to respond to this
present and immediate danger with all their might, and,
because they are mighty, they can determine for all
humanity that the principal threat to them is the
principal threat that all humanity faces.
The poor and powerless feel threatened by a
permanent hurricane of poverty, which is devastating
their communities as horrendously as hurricane Ivan
destroyed the Caribbean island State of Grenada.
But, tragically, because they are poor, they do not
have the means to respond to this present and
immediate danger. Neither do they have the power to
determine for all humanity that what they decide is the
principal threat they confront, is also the principal
threat that all humanity, including the rich and
powerful, faces.
In the Millennium Declaration, we spoke of the
need to implement
'policies and measures, at the global level, which
correspond to the needs of developing countries
and economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective
participation' (ibid., para. 5).
Perhaps the mistake we made was to assume that
the contemporary distribution of power in human
society would permit this outcome, and that, regardless
of this fundamental consideration, it would be possible
for the concerns of the poor to take precedence on the
global agenda and the global programme of action.
We comforted, or perhaps deluded, ourselves
with the thought that this Organization is 'the most
universal and most representative organization in the
world' - afraid to ask the question, is it?
Every year many of us who have spoken, and will
speak, from this rostrum make an annual pilgrimage to
this great and vibrant city to plead the cause of the
13

poor of the world, hopeful that this time our voices will
be heard. Every year, after a few days, we pack up our
bags to return to the reality of our societies, whose
squalor stands out in sharp contrast to the splendour of
New York and this majestic precinct that constitutes
the headquarters of the United Nations.
In the aftermath, resolutions are passed. Again
and again our permanent representatives, with their
extraordinary and plenipotentiary powers, report that
those resolutions oblige us to act to thwart the deadly
plans of murderous terrorist gangs. Again and again
they report that yet another appeal has been made to
the mighty and the lowly alike, voluntarily to respond
to the cries of the wretched of the earth.
We are truly proud and inspired to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over the proceedings of the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, because we
know that you will discharge your obligations as a son
of the poor of the world should. We are moved by the
fact that you had as your predecessor President Julian
Hunte, who also understood intimately what must be
done to ensure that the United Nations can become, in
reality, the indispensable common house of the entire
human family.
As an Israeli said to us at our headquarters in
Pretoria a fortnight ago, it is perhaps time that we, the
poor and powerless, abandon our wheelchairs and
begin to walk unaided. Perhaps that will help to build
the social order of which Hammurabi - and Kofi
Annan - spoke, in which right makes might and not
might, right.I
offer my warm congratulations to you, Sir, on your
election as President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session. I am confident that under your
presidency fruitful results will be achieved. I also wish
to pay a cordial tribute to Mr. Julian Robert Hunte,
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
The recent appalling terror in Beslan, Russia,
caused massive casualties, including many children.
On behalf of the Chinese Government, I strongly
condemn, once again, that inhuman act of terrorist
violence and extend our deep condolences to the
families of the victims.
Peace and development remain the dominant
themes in today’s world. Multipolarization and
economic globalization are moving forward in twists
and turns. Science and technology are advancing at a
dizzying speed. Forces that make for peace and factors
that lead to war are both on the rise. Human society is
moving in a bright, progressive and positive direction.
However, the light of peace has not fallen on
every corner of the globe, nor has development reached
every inch of the Earth. Threats to security, both
traditional and non-traditional, are intertwined. The
dark cloud of war remains menacing. Hot spots keep
springing up. Terrorist activities are raging, and cross-
border problems such as the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, drug trafficking, transnational
crime and illegal immigration are erupting one after
another. Factors of uncertainty, instability and
unpredictability are increasing.
In the course of economic globalization, the gap
between the North and the South is widening.
Developing countries are confronting new difficulties
and challenges as a growing number of them are
further marginalized. Today, half the global population
lives on less than $2 a day, and of those, 1.2 billion live
on less than $1 a day. Much remains to be done to
implement the Millennium Development Goals.
Peace, development and cooperation are the
prerequisites for our times. People all over the world
are raising their voice in favour of peace, development
and cooperation and against war, poverty and
confrontation. Peace is the precondition for human
development and prosperity. Without a peaceful and
stable international environment, development is out of
the question for any country. A chaotic world benefits
no one. Having experienced the scourge of two world
wars, mankind would not tolerate any more war or
bloodshed. Thus it is the fervent aspiration of all
peoples to live and achieve development in a secure
and stable environment.
In tackling security issues, it is imperative to
foster a new security concept of mutual trust, mutual
benefit, equality and cooperation. This new concept
calls for nations to transcend their differences in
ideology and social systems, respect one another’s
security interests, promote greater democracy in
international relations and seek peaceful solutions to
disputes through dialogue.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the whole
world. China stands firmly opposed to terrorism in all
forms and manifestations. To prevent and fight
terrorism, we must intensify international cooperation
and address both the causes and symptoms of the
threat. Only when the root causes of terrorism are
eradicated can peoples live in peace and tranquillity
again.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to world peace and security. Non-
proliferation efforts therefore require the participation
of all members of the international community.
Likewise, it is important to discard unilateralism and
double standards and to give full credit and full latitude
to the role of the United Nations.
China takes an active part in multilateral non-
proliferation efforts and firmly defends the
international regime of arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties. China believes that
multilateral arms control, disarmament and non-
proliferation processes can be steadily promoted in
order to further improve the international non-
proliferation regime.
There is still a long way to go before peace and
reconstruction can be realized in Iraq. We support an
important role for the United Nations in Iraq’s political
process, helping that country achieve the smooth
holding of elections.
10

We appeal to Palestine and Israel to resume
dialogue as soon as possible and to start implementing
the Middle East road map faithfully. As always, China
will work to resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean
Peninsula through dialogue and talks, in the interest of
peace and stability on the Peninsula.
Development is the foundation for human
progress. Lasting peace and stability throughout the
world depends on coordinated, balanced and universal
development. Development is of overriding
importance. Living in peace, abundance and harmony
between nations has been the dream of many
generations. Coordinated, balanced and sustainable
development serves the fundamental interests of all
peoples and works for their well-being.
In order to promote economic growth worldwide,
it is necessary for the international community to take
effective measures to put in place an open and fair
multilateral trading regime and gradually improve it. It
is also important to reform and improve the
international financial system.
The developed countries must honour their
commitments to debt reduction, technology transfer
and market access through concrete actions in order to
enable developing countries to really benefit from
globalization. The developing countries, for their part,
need to work together to attain development and take
part in a wide range of international efforts. They
should also deepen South-South cooperation.
We, the members of the international community,
should join hands in working for a just and equitable
new international economic order that meets the needs
of the growing economic globalization and serves the
common interests of all countries.
The Millennium Development Goals are our
solemn, collective pledge. The United Nations should
further mobilize resources, strengthen coordination and
increase its input to development activities in order to
help Member States achieve these important goals as
scheduled.
Cooperation is an effective way of dealing with
the collective challenges facing humankind. To
strengthen international cooperation, we must
champion multilateralism. The United Nations is the
centre of the international multilateral system and the
key platform for making multilateralism work. It is the
widespread desire of the international community to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, take more collective actions,
strengthen the role of the United Nations and safeguard
its authority.
The threats and challenges we face make it
imperative to strengthen, rather than weaken, the role
of the United Nations. A stronger United Nations is
indispensable for maintaining global peace and
stability and promoting the common development of
humankind. All Member States should honour their
commitments to the Charter of the United Nations and
fulfil their international responsibilities and
obligations.
The world is eagerly looking forward to a
dynamic and action-oriented United Nations. China
supports necessary and rational reforms of the
Organization. Such reforms should aim at enhancing
the leading role of the United Nations in international
affairs, reinforcing its capacity to tackle new threats
and challenges, and ensuring that better reflects the
aspirations and needs of the vast majority of
developing countries.
China is in favour of expanding the Security
Council and of giving priority to greater representation
of the developing countries. China also supports the
work of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change, and it is looking forward to the Panel’s
report by the end of this year, so that it can be reviewed
by Member States.
China is a staunch force working for world peace,
common development and international cooperation.
After over half a century of strenuous efforts and more
than two decades of reform and opening up, China has
now entered a new stage of development aimed at
building a moderately prosperous society all-round.
However, China is still a developing country, and a
large population and inadequate economic
development remain its basic national conditions. It
has a long way to go before achieving its development
goals.
The Chinese Government will always place
development at the top of its agenda. The fact that
China — a large, developing country with 1.3 billion
people — runs its own affairs well is in itself a major
contribution to peace and to the development of
humanity.
11

China desires peace, development and
cooperation, and strives to win peace and development
through cooperation. It is working to promote
democracy in international relations, diversity in its
modes of development and richness in the world’s
civilizations. It advocates a new security concept and
facilitates the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China will pursue with determination an
independent foreign policy of peace, adhere to the five
principles for Peaceful Coexistence, and engage in
mutually beneficial and friendly cooperation with other
countries on an equal footing.
China will unswervingly safeguard its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, brook no
interference in its internal affairs by foreign forces and,
at the same time, respect other countries’ sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
China remains committed to the common
interests of humankind. China’s national interests, in
the final analysis, are consistent with the common
interests of all humankind. In handling State-to-State
relations, China will safeguard its own interests while
taking into account the interests of other countries.
China will adhere to the policy of opening up, and
develop economic relations and trade with all other
nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
China’s development stands in the way of no one,
nor does it pose any threat to others. China is following
the path of peaceful development, seeking an
international environment of peace and stability for its
own development and promoting world peace and
progress through its own prosperity.
China is working steadily to develop its relations
with the world’s major countries. It will stay
committed to the policy of building friendship and
partnership with its neighbours and combine stronger
bilateral friendships with enhanced regional
cooperation. It will strengthen solidarity and
cooperation with other developing countries and
support any justified demands or legitimate
propositions on their part in international affairs. It will
play a constructive role in the political, economic,
social, disarmament, arms control and other
multilateral fields; safeguard the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recognized norms governing international
relations; and support any consensus that serves the
common interests of all countries.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory.
Safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and realizing complete national reunification
at an early date is the common will and firm resolve of
the 1.3 billion Chinese people. Pursuing the policy of
“peaceful reunification and one country, two systems”,
the Chinese Government is ready to work tirelessly
towards a peaceful reunification with the utmost
sincerity. We, more than anyone else, want to see a
peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question. But we
will never tolerate Taiwan independence, nor will we
allow anyone to separate Taiwan from the rest of China
in any way.
We hope that the international community will
fully recognize the complex and sensitive nature of the
current situation across the Taiwan Strait and the
serious threat posed by the separatist activities of the
Taiwan authorities to the stability of the Taiwan Strait
and the peace of the Asia-Pacific region. We expect the
Assembly to continue supporting the Chinese
Government’s efforts for peaceful reunification and to
join us in containing pro-independence activities, in the
interest of stability in the Strait and of world peace.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. As the basic
guidelines for State-to-State relations, the Five
Principles have withstood the test of half a century and
remain an irrefutable truth. The Five Principles, which
include peace, development and cooperation, are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. They provide guidance
for the establishment and development of relations
between countries with identical or different social
systems; point to the correct path towards the peaceful
settlement of outstanding issues between countries and
international disputes; firmly defend the interests of the
developing countries; and facilitate the improvement
and development of North-South relations. The Five
Principles present important ideas that must underpin
the establishment of a fair and equitable new
international order.
China not only initiated, but has faithfully
observed, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
Given the new realities of today, we will continue to
champion those Principles and join all the peoples of
12

the world in advancing the lofty cause of peace,
development and cooperation.Let me first
of all congratulate you, President Ping, on your
election and wish you every success in your
responsible post, and express my sincere thanks to the
outgoing President for his dedicated work.
I endorse the statement of the Netherlands
European Union presidency.
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, the world
is changing at dramatic speed. In just a few decades,
humanity will have reached the 8 billion mark. With
the networking of world trade and with global
communication technologies, we are growing ever closer.
We are going to become increasingly interdependent in
economic, technical and ecological terms.
At the same time, we all face a host of new
challenges and new dangers which threaten us all —
the South and the North, the developing and the
developed world alike.
On the one hand, there are threats to national and
global security such as the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the nuclear threat, the danger posed
by failed States or, as we all painfully remember in this
city, by terrorism, which does not respect humankind
or human dignity.
On the other hand, there are also so-called soft
threats, such as far-reaching environmental and
climatic changes, poverty, major shortfalls in education
and training and the negative aspects of globalization,
refugee flows, and diseases and epidemics such as
HIV/AIDS and malaria. They are a threat to security
and stability and take a heavy toll.
The two — hard and soft threats — are closely
connected. After all, we know that the causes of war
and violence, poverty, need and oppression are
multifaceted and deep-rooted. We also know that crises
are the fruit of poverty and a sense of hopelessness,
and vice-versa. We will have no peace without
development, nor indeed development without peace,
so we have comprehensively to secure peace and
stability — above all through economic and social
development.
The States of the world have to work together to
shape economic, technological and ecological
globalization and rise to the resulting challenges. They
will not be able to do so without close cooperation.
Indeed, that is now beyond the tools of traditional
diplomacy alone. Their ability to secure and stabilize
the international system on their own will in future
prove less and less adequate.
What we need is a far-reaching reform of the
international system and its institutions that takes due
account of these changes. That is a reform we need
urgently, because we have to create an effective
multilateral system which enables us to work together
to prevent crises and, where that does not work, find
long-term solutions.
There have already been promising developments
at the regional level. With their sometimes painful history
very much in mind, the States of Europe have joined
together in the European Union and thus have reached
a new level of multilateralism. This political and
economic community, now embracing 25 States, has
become an anchor of stability for Europe and beyond.
Since its foundation the African Union has been
impressively shouldering its shared responsibility for
preventing humanitarian disasters and resolving major
regional conflicts. This is a courageous and key step
forward. This breakthrough of multilateralism on the
African continent will develop an ever more
pronounced dynamism.
Given global interdependencies and connections,
we need a world organization that has close links to
these regional structures and can thus boost the
efficiency of joint action. The United Nations is the
most important forum for setting global rules. Its might
is the might of the right, as the Secretary-General
highlighted in his impressive speech at the opening of
this General Assembly session. With its legitimacy we
have a unique and universal competence for solving
problems together. Since the breaking of the internal
blockade caused by the cold war, the United Nations
has been playing an increasingly significant role. The
international community is making more and more use
of it as a forum for tackling the major challenges
facing humanity.
For millions of people today the Blue Flag means
quite tangible help, often on essential issues, and hope
for a better future. For this, we are all very much
indebted to the Organization and its staff. They are on
the ground in many crisis regions in Latin America,
Europe, Africa and Asia.
It is becoming ever clearer that different
approaches must be found to prevent or resolve each
17

individual crisis. The commitment of the United
Nations in all crisis areas is the proof. In Afghanistan
and in the Balkans, in Haiti and in the Great Lakes
region the United Nations is already making a
considerable contribution. But we must realize that
there will not be fewer conflicts in the future, and the
demands made of the Organization will grow.
Against this backdrop the question arises whether
the structures given to the United Nations at its
foundation almost sixty years ago are still suited to this
mandate, whether its work enjoys the international
acceptance it needs. In particular, the disputes
concerning the Iraq crisis highlighted this problem
once again.
We are convinced there is no alternative to a
world acting multilaterally. To make this multilateral
cooperation sustainable and capable, we need a
courageous and comprehensive reform of the United
Nations that faces up to the challenges we are facing.
It was the Secretary-General himself who took
the initiative, and for this we extend our thanks. To that
end, he appointed a panel of high-level international
experts who are to present him with reform proposals
at the end of the year. We look forward to that report
and the ensuing debate with great interest.
What is at stake is a new, shared understanding of
the Charter system. How can we shape prevention to
make it more effective, and peace-building to make it
more sustainable? How can we further implement the
proposals on the reform of peacekeeping? What exactly
do we understand by the right of self-defence? How do
we define terrorism? The answer to this question in
particular seems clear, yet real agreement would take us,
the international community of States, a step forward.
A number of very concrete proposals on the
reform of the United Nations institutions have already
been presented. Let me therefore outline some thoughts
on this matter.
I want to start with the General Assembly. It is
the central organ of the United Nations, the only one
with universal membership. For this very reason, the
Assembly has to be more than an annual forum where
we just go through the motions. What we need to do
first is focus our topics more carefully. We have to
discuss the truly crucial issues — otherwise, essential
questions will be dealt with in other forums. Secondly,
we need more efficient working methods.
The Economic and Social Council has to finally
become the central organ in the United Nations system
for consultation and decision-making on economic and
social issues. We believe that the Council has at two
levels vast potential that has yet to be fully tapped. On
the one hand, that body maintains a network of
expertise unequalled in the world. We have to make
better and more targeted use of it. On the other hand,
we see the Economic and Social Council as a partner
for the Security Council for peacekeeping, as laid
down in Article 65 of the Charter. When it comes to
fighting the causes of conflicts and to post-crisis
rehabilitation, the Economic and Social Council has an
important role to play that can support Security
Council efforts for conflict prevention and peace-
building. We should grant the Economic and Social
Council more competences in the operative sphere.
After all, the efforts we make in peace missions
will be successful only if the military commitment is
followed by a longer phase of stabilization, and very
often that phase turns out to be the most difficult one.
The Economic and Social Council advisory groups on
post-crisis rehabilitation in Africa are a step in the
right direction. That is what the decisive link between
conflict management and development cooperation
could indeed look like.
Such an all-embracing approach needs
appropriate financial resources. The instrument of
voluntary contributions has proven insufficient in
everyday life, and therefore I propose earmarking a
certain share of the United Nations peacekeeping budget
for post-crisis rehabilitation. This means we could
achieve what we have long been trying, a “prevention
share”, which — let us remember Haiti — could help
us save the costs of conflicts flaring up again.
Many criticize the proliferation of subsidiary and
subordinate organizations of the United Nations. Of
course, a reduction cannot be an end in itself. But we
ought to exercise enough self-criticism to ask ourselves
whether it would not be better to pool competences in
some cases.
However, there are also spheres that need to be
better equipped. I am thinking here, for example, of the
handling of environmental issues in the United Nations
system. We thus support the proposal made by French
President Jacques Chirac last year to upgrade the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to a
specialized agency with universal membership. That
18

could considerably strengthen UNFP’s contribution to
sustainable development.
At the heart of the reform of the United Nations
is the organ shouldering the central responsibility for
international peace: the Security Council. Conflicts are
on the increase. They stretch across all continents, and
they are growing in complexity. In turn, the
responsibility and competences of the Council have
expanded constantly. Crisis prevention will play an
increasingly important role. And for peace-building,
ever more comprehensive strategies, closer cooperation
and additional resources will be needed. This will
mean more and more decisions that entail long-term
obligations, create new international law and make
major inroads into State sovereignty.
If we really want Security Council decisions to be
accepted as legitimate and implemented effectively, we
have to reform the Council. It has to more broadly
represent a world organization that today embraces
more than 191 countries. That is inconceivable without
increasing the number of seats — for permanent and
non-permanent members alike. The reasons behind
such a move speak for themselves.
A Council with more members would enjoy
greater acceptance internationally as a basis for greater
authority. The more balanced and comprehensive
representation of all continents — also among the
permanent members — would lead to a better sense of
ownership of the Security Council for all States.
Similarly, an enlargement would considerably bolster
the motivation of the new Council members to make a
long-term contribution to realizing the goals of the
United Nations.
The enlargement must adequately reflect sea
changes such as decolonization, the end of the cold war
and globalization. The composition of the Council
must ultimately mirror the current geopolitical reality.
That means that all major regions of the South must be
represented by permanent members in the Security
Council. At the same time, account has to be taken of
Members that can and want to make a particularly
meaningful and sustainable contribution to maintaining
world peace and international security and to realizing
the purposes of the Organization. That twofold
approach would increase the Council’s efficiency and
its ability to act and to assert itself.
For 40 years, the composition of the Security
Council has remained unchanged. I believe it is high
time to adapt it to the new global reality. Half-baked or
interim solutions are neither necessary nor helpful.
Like Brazil, India and Japan, Germany too is ready to
take on the responsibility associated with a permanent
seat in the security Council. But it is especially
important to us that the African continent be
represented among the new permanent members.
A second aspect also has to be taken into account
in Security Council reform. All in all, a greater number
of Member States that are engaging themselves in the
work of the United Nations should be able to get more
involved in the work of the Security Council. For that
to happen, additional non-permanent seats also have to
be created. That would mean that the balance between
permanent and non-permanent members could be
retained.
As I said before, United Nations reform will be
the central and defining theme of this General
Assembly session. I thus call upon Member States: let
us use the fifty-ninth session, right up until the next
session in 2005, to launch the overdue reforms and
achieve tangible results. We, the Member States, have
to muster the political insight, the will and the
creativity to adapt the Organization to the global
reality. Germany is ready to make a committed
contribution.I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
election. We are pleased that a man of your ability, a
Francophone representative of a friendly country, is
directing our proceedings.
I also wish to warmly applaud our Secretary-
General. We have heard his message on respect for the
rule of law. And through the Secretary-General, I wish to
commend the entire staff of this institution, here and
everywhere in the world: their courage and commitment
are a credit to our ideals and to the organizations they
serve — sadly, sometimes at the cost of their own
lives.
How are we to meet the challenges facing the
world? That is the question we all keep asking
ourselves, one after another, from this rostrum. And
how are we to meet the world’s expectations unless we
all mobilize? More than ever, the United Nations
remains the one irreplaceable, legitimate framework
for harnessing that mobilization and translating it into
collective action.
We have much to do: conflicts remain unresolved,
while others are breaking out; poverty is declining all too
slowly; people are destroyed by wars; refugees are torn
from their land; and the threat of terrorism is not
fading. Yes, we have much to do. Yes, we have a duty
to act, and an obligation never to give up.
The United Nations is acting — on all fronts, on
the front line. To resolve conflicts and prevent them
from flaring up again, it is present everywhere, on all
continents, in Haiti, Kosovo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in Côte d’Ivoire, Afghanistan and many
other fronts, deploying over 50,000 Blue Helmets. It
provides assistance to 17 million people protected by
the High Commissioner for Refugees. Through the
World Food Programme, it feeds more than 100 million
individuals. And it helps, especially through the United
Nations Development Programme, 170 States or
territories to develop.
United Nations activities — our activities —
continue to expand. Thus, the Organization is called
upon to be at the centre of the counter-terrorism
measures that the international community is putting in
place. The threat of terrorism, now a global one,
calling for a global response. That is why France
committed itself here to the fight, and did so again
recently by supporting the strengthening of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The tragedy of 11 September, which I refer to
with feeling here in New York City, was an attack on
us all. Since then, terrorism has continued to strike: in
Europe, in Madrid, six months ago; and in Asia, in Bali
and Jakarta. Cowardly attacks are mounted against the
weakest. How can we not be appalled at the tragedy of
the school in Beslan where children — the symbol of
innocence — were violently massacred?
We are waging a merciless fight against
terrorism. Let us at the same time address its roots.
That means putting an end to situations that terrorists
exploit; giving the world’s excluded hope again;
restoring dignity to those peoples deprived of it; and
ensuring that dialogue and cooperation among
civilizations, cultures and religions prevail, rather than
conflict and intolerance.
Global threats require a strong, and always
collective, response. The threat of proliferation, which
29

could merge with that of terrorism, calls for resolute
and sustained action. The non-proliferation regime has
been seriously undermined by the combined action of
certain States and non-State actors. That is why
strengthening existing instruments is today essential.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) Review Conference in 2005 will be an
opportunity to do so.
A safer and freer world is, first, a more just
world. That is why we must act relentlessly to resolve
conflicts. I am, of course, thinking, first and foremost,
of the Middle East, where — in the wake of the hopes
raised by Madrid, Oslo, Camp David and Taba — the
absence of any prospect is today breeding despair,
extremism and violence of every kind. This central
crisis can be resolved only through a negotiated
settlement based on international law, enabling all the
peoples — I repeat, all the peoples — of the region to
live in dignity and security.
The road map, which the parties have accepted
and which the Security Council has endorsed, must be
implemented in full and in good faith. France hopes
that the withdrawal from Gaza is a first step in that
direction. It will make every effort to get the peace
process under way again. It will continue to act vis-à-
vis all the leaders — the elected and legitimate
leaders — of that region.
Let us make no mistake: building peace in the
Middle East is a historic responsibility for our
generation. Europe — the European Union — in
partnership with the United States, Russia and the
United Nations, is determined to play a political role in
order to stimulate this process.
In Iraq, violence is exploding. It seems to us that
only when the Iraqis themselves take control of their
future, and when the political process provided for by
the Security Council is pursued, will the country be
able to escape the chaos that is destabilizing the entire
region. France, as everyone knows, did not approve of
the conditions in which the conflict was unleashed.
Neither today nor tomorrow will it commit itself
militarily in Iraq. However, it reaffirms its willingness,
with its European partners, to assist the Iraqi people in
rebuilding their country and in restoring their
institutions.
Who can fail to see that, in the Middle East,
everything is fragile and everything is interconnected?
Who can fail to understand that the only path —
everywhere — is sovereignty and justice for peoples?
Only then will they make progress towards peace and
the economic and political modernization to which
they are entitled.
Africa, too, is where we will win or lose the battle
for justice. Without justice, there will be no peace.
Without peace, there will be no lasting development. The
future of the African continent, and its stability and
development, are a vital objective for us all.
Today, with the impetus of the United Nations,
longstanding crises have been, or will be, settled —
Mozambique, Sierra Leone and Liberia. Others,
however, have broken out, and together we must
prevent them from worsening or spreading: in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Central African Republic, and Darfur. The
Great Lakes region is slow to find the path to peace,
just as the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
slow to die, and the Somali question remains to be
resolved.
On that great continent, which is undergoing
profound change, facing real threats but also
considerable potential, political leaders are today
demonstrating a genuine determination to commit to
working to resolve conflicts and crises. That can be
seen from the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD); the resolute
commitment of the African Union on the political front
and in the field; and the growing role of regional
organizations. We resolutely support that commitment.
For development, but also for peace-building, we wish
to bring about the conditions for an effective and
coherent partnership between North and South.
Given the magnitude of the goals and needs of
the continent, I firmly believe in the importance of
pooling the efforts of the Europeans with those of our
African partners, under United Nations auspices,
whenever necessary. I am convinced that our
experience of European integration — without
attempting to teach any lessons — can simply be useful
to that continent, and that is the sense of the statement
made on our behalf by the representative of the
presidency of the European Union, Bernard Bot, before
the Assembly the day before yesterday.
France has long been involved in strengthening
African peacekeeping capacities. Today, the European
Union intends to make a commitment immediately and
with determination. Operation Artemis, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is proof of that
30

commitment. The creation of the European Peace
Facility now provides major support to African
organizations. We are willing, if the African Union so
wishes, to assist it in its action for peace, as in the
Sudan.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Justice and conflict prevention cannot be
dissociated from collective action to promote
development. The Millennium Goals — to which the
developing countries, donor States and multilateral
institutions are committed — are an overriding obligation
for us all, especially the wealthiest countries.
More than $50 billion a year is still needed to
achieve those objectives — a fact of which we all are
aware. On Monday, 100-odd countries endorsed the
New York Declaration on Action Against Hunger and
Poverty. Together they ask that additional resources be
provided for development, including through
innovative mechanisms. This is a powerful movement,
launched in this very forum of the United Nations,
aimed at generating the necessary resources for justice
and for development. It is an important milestone. My
country is proud to have contributed to it, through the
voice of the President of the Republic, and it will
continue to do so.
But France is also fighting for a more controlled,
and therefore most just, globalization that would give
everyone a chance. We advocate the establishment of a
political body, in which the United Nations must have
its due place — to improve coordination of multilateral
action in the economic, social and environmental fields
and to provide the necessary impetus. This is one of the
major issues that we must consider in coming months,
especially on the basis of the proposals that the Panel
on reform is expected to make.
Again, a more just world is a world that respects
human dignity and freedom. Fundamental human rights
are universal. Each man, woman and child has these
inherent rights, and it is up to us to see that they thrive
and are respected.
It is also up to us to fight firmly and
uncompromisingly against all manifestations of violence
and discrimination based on race, origin, gender or
religion. Our resolve in the area of human rights, as
elsewhere, must remain absolute and constant. I mean
that we need a genuine dialogue with the civil society
and with all non-governmental organizations. The time
has come, it seems to us, to conclude the negotiation of
a conventional instrument on forced disappearances, to
recognize the rights of indigenous peoples and to
mobilize against all forms of modern slavery.
Let us not rule out the use of force, in certain
cases and on the appeal of victims, to prevent massive
human rights violations and acts of violence against
civilians. The Security Council has the honour of
assuming this responsibility, in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.
Let us also continue putting in place mechanisms
to combat impunity, often the prerequisite for durable
peace and lasting reconciliation. The establishment of
the International Criminal Court specifically meets this
objective. We welcome the major milestone reached
with the entry into force of the Rome Statute.
The dignity of humankind and peoples also
requires due respect for cultures in their diversity. The
sense of loss of identity contributes to the frustrations
that breed a good many conflicts. The unity of the
international community, it goes without saying, cannot
be synonymous with uniformity.
The negotiation of a convention on cultural
diversity, which has just started at the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is,
therefore, in our view, a key objective. It must produce
a concrete result, as planned, before the 2005 general
conference.
Our planet is dangerous; it is also in danger. The
earth is showing signs of strain; we are not maintaining
it; in fact, we are plundering it; the climate is
deteriorating. And yet, we should remember, scarcity
of resources has at all times been a factor in conflict.
For the future of our children, we must act while there
is still time.
Is there among us, for that matter, one single issue
that more obviously ignores borders than ecology and
ecological security and requires coordinated action —
that is, multilateral action? International governance in
environmental matters is, it seems to us, inadequate
today. We must simplify and strengthen the existing
international regime on environmental issues, develop
monitoring, and early warning expertise, and increase
financing, especially for developing countries.
Let us be clear-sighted. For the environment, as
for so many other issues, prevention costs less than
31

cure. In this regard, we hope the establishment of a
United Nations organization for the environment will
be considered, based on the achievements of the United
Nations Environment Programme. We propose that this
great undertaking, which is one of the Millennium Goals,
be on the agenda of the September 2005 summit.
In a world — our world — where 800 million
people do not have enough to eat, where more financial
resources are devoted to weapons than to development,
where millions of men, women and children are forced
to leave their land to escape destitution or massacres, the
international community has a duty to act and to show
imagination. It is here at the United Nations where we
can meet to take initiatives, to fight misfortune and to
apportion the tasks, all of them urgent.
The United Nations system, which is unique and
more indispensable than ever, also has an obligation to
reform itself to meet new needs and new threats, and to
make the most of new technologies merely in order to
live in our times. The Secretary-General got down to
this problem at the start of his first mandate.
Considerable work has already been done. The
proposals of the high-level panel will be the basis for
the next, still more ambitious, stages. France has made
proposals on many issues, such as peacekeeping
operations, human rights and development financing.
We have also indicated, with Germany, how the
representativity and legitimacy of Security Council
action might be improved. We advocate enlargement in
both categories of members, permanent and non-
permanent; and we have expressed support for the
aspirations of Germany, Japan, Brazil and India, which
should be accompanied by a country from Africa.
In a complex and unpredictable world, it is our
joint responsibility to maintain and strengthen the one
institution where all nations can work together, where
they can unite to shape and control their common
destiny. Through its legitimacy and ever-increasing
effectiveness, the United Nations must be the
instrument of universal conscience for which it remains
the crucible.Mr. President, I
offer my congratulations and those of my country on
your election as President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session.
Eighteen months ago, the United Nations faced
divisions more serious than any since the Cuban
missile crisis of October 1962. We all worried whether
the strength and unity which we had built up since the
end of the cold war could survive.
Then last year we watched, as Secretary-General
Kofi Annan stood at his now famous fork in the road.
In the year since, almost instinctively, we have decided
to follow our Secretary-Generalís directions. This
Organization has not been plunged, as some predicted,
into paralysis; instead, I have felt a powerful if
unspoken determination to make the United Nations
work, and to work more effectively, to fulfil its central
task: to secure peace around the world.
Over the last 12 months we have dealt with new
crises such as that in Darfur in the Sudan, where we
have set clear tasks for both the Sudanese Government
and the rebel groups. We have tackled the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes; mobilized international support for the new
Iraq; and addressed a long list of hugely important
subjects which rarely receive the coverage they should
in the media ó Haiti, Georgia, Timor-Leste,
Bougainville and Western Sahara.
We have shown in those actions the unity of
purpose which is one of the strongest weapons in our
hands to defeat the evils which today affect the globe.
And the search for consensus has not been confined to
the Security Council.
I am proud that just a few months after the
difficult times of early last year, France, Germany and
the United Kingdom came together to work, as we
continue to do, on the Iran dossier before the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
I recognize, of course, the frustrations which all
of us feel, not least over the Israel-Palestine conflict,
where the clear path to peace set out in the road map
and endorsed by the Security Council remains elusive.
But all in all we have shown the will to make collective
action work, though we know, too, that we need to go
further.
In particular, we need to get better at tackling
threats which have changed dramatically since the
founding of the United Nations. Today the greatest
threats to our security often come not from other
functioning sovereign States, but from terrorist
organizations, from failing States and from man-made
shocks to our environment like climate change, which
can exacerbate State failure and breed internal
instability.
The High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change appointed by the Secretary-General is
preparing its recommendations on ways to address the
various challenges. We should remember in all this that
we have one great advantage. Though its institutions
and the founding text of the Charter has hardly
changed in 60 years, the United Nations is not an
organization set in stone, but a set of living institutions
based on a shared will to make collective security
work. The United Nations has adapted in the past -
with the development of peacekeeping, a greater focus
on individual rights and the setting of global targets for
34

development - and I am confident that it can adapt in
the future.
Of course, institutional change is part of that. At
the United Nations foundation, one eighth of its
members could expect to be elected members of the
Security Council at any one time. Today that
proportion is less than one eighteenth. The United
Kingdom has long supported the case for expanding
the Security Council to, say, 24 members, and for
including amongst the permanent members: Germany
and Japan, two countries which between them
contribute 28 per cent of the budget of the United
Nations; India, which represents one sixth of the entire
worldís population; and Brazil, which just missed
permanent membership back in 1945.
But we should not see an expansion of the
Security Council, or other institutional change, as a
panacea. The biggest need is to adapt our common
understanding - the United Nations jurisprudence, if
you like - and its operational effectiveness so that we
can respond more quickly and more thoroughly to
todayís new threats.
Let me highlight three areas which to me seem
particularly important: first, our approach must be
broader and must tackle threats to the most vulnerable,
including poverty, disease and environmental
degradation; secondly, we must build a new consensus by
expanding the scope of collective action; and, thirdly, we
must deal with the threat of terrorism, which menaces
us all and everything for which we stand.
Let me now take these three points in turn. First,
there is the need for a broader approach which
addresses the complex and interdependent nature of
security today. Here, we have to do more to meet the
Millennium Development Goals and to promote
sustainable development, especially in Africa. We
cannot have security without development or
development without security.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in his
speech this week, we have to do more to entrench the
rule of law and justice, especially in States recovering
from conflict. The United Kingdom will pursue work
on the Secretary-Generalís report during its Security
Council presidency next month.
We could also use the United Nations better, to
agree to monitor and help implement globally accepted
norms of good governance.
And we need to act together quickly on climate
change, perhaps the greatest long-term threat to our
world in terms of stability and security. We have to
implement Kyoto - and I greatly welcome what my
colleague, His Excellency Sergey Lavrov had to say on
that today - and agree to emission reductions beyond
2012.
My second point is the need to build a new
consensus on the scope of collective action. We all
represent independent, sovereign states. But even as we
founded the United Nations we recognized that
sovereignty was a trust in the hands of a nationís
government: there to be respected, not abused, from
either without or within.
The Charter set out arrangements so that an abuse
from without could be dealt with through the inherent
right of self-defence recognized in Article 51 of the
Charter. But it also said that an abuse from within
which threatens the peace could and should be dealt
with by the Security Council, under the powers
enshrined in the other articles of Chapter VII of the
Charter, and by the many conventions concluded
within the United Nations framework, including, for
example, the 1948 Geneva Convention. No longer -
we all said - could or should the world turn away
from unspeakable barbarities like that of the Holocaust.
But we have not always lived up to those high
expectations, as the tragedies of Rwanda and Bosnia
ten years ago reminded us. Today we must resolve to
do so and to engage in situations of humanitarian
catastrophe or grave violations of international
humanitarian law and to act in the face of other threats
to international peace and security.
The principle of non-interference has to be
qualified by a duty to protect, especially where
Governments are failing in that duty.
We therefore need, for example, to be ready to
support greater use by the Secretary-General of his
powers under Article 99 of the Charter, to bring threats
to peace to the Security Council's attention. We have to
act quickly in response, because prevention is far better
than cure. We should look to work more closely with
regional organizations, as we are doing with the
African Union in Darfur. We need more discussion on
the criteria as to when the international community
might have to intervene with military force in extreme
circumstances. We must get better at engaging for the
long term in countries recovering from conflict,
35

coordinating our efforts in response to locally agreed
priorities.
My third point is the urgent need to combat
global terrorism, a menace directed at us all. If we have
learned anything in the three years since 11 September
2001 it is that international terrorism is indiscriminate
in its targets and merciless in its hatred. Christian, Jew,
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, Muslim, people of no religion
or any religion, and of every or no shade of political
opinion, all have died through the terroristsí bullet or
bomb.
My friend Sergey Lavrov spoke eloquently a
moment ago about the tears still wet for the terrible,
unspeakable massacre of the young and innocent that
took place in Beslan. Sergey, your tears are my tears;
Russiaís tears are the worldís tears. We are all in the
fight against terrorism together.
Today in Iraq we are seeing again the depths to
which the terrorists plumb. The vast majority of the
victims of terrorism in Iraq are Iraqis. Our thoughts
and condolences are with the Government and people
of Iraq and with their families. But some of the victims
of terrorism in Iraq are foreigners who are helping
Iraqis to build a more stable and prosperous country.
One of them is Kenneth Bigley, a British engineer held
hostage by terrorists who have already barbarically
murdered his two American comrades. Our thoughts
and prayers are with their families. We continue to do
all we can to secure Mr. Bigleyís release.
I know - how could I forget - that opinions
have differed over the rightness of the military action
taken in Iraq 18 months ago. But I warrant that no
nation is in favour of the terrorist insurgency now
occurring there. For we all recognize that what is being
attempted by the terrorists in Iraq is an attack both on
the Iraqi people and on everything for which the
Organization stands: safety, security and human rights.
We have to come together to defeat the terrorists and
their despicable aims.
The threat of terrorism confronts democratic,
properly functioning States with an acute dilemma,
namely, how to fight those who recognize none of the
values for which we stand while remaining true to
those values. Our commitments under international
conventions express many of those values and the
importance that we attach to them. But equally, those
conventions cannot be allowed to shelter those
involved in terrorism. The conventions were designed
to protect citizens from abuse by States, not by
terrorists.
The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees protects those with a well-founded fear of
persecution. I am proud that the United Kingdom and so
many other nations have offered that protection when and
where it was required. But as the 1951 Convention
itself sets out, asylum is not an unqualified right. It does
not apply to anyone who has committed a war crime, a
crime against humanity or other serious crime; nor
does it apply to anyone who is guilty of acts contrary
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We must never stoop to the level of the terrorist ó
to torture, mistreatment or unjustified incarceration ó
nor will any country within the European Union be
party to the return of suspects to such conditions, nor
to face the death penalty. But we cannot let terrorists
exploit a protection designed for the persecuted, not
the persecutors. We in the United Kingdom shall
therefore be working closely with Russia on its
important draft Security Council resolution, to see how
best we can prevent those who commit, support and
finance terrorism from sheltering behind a refugee
status to which they are not entitled. Along with the
Russian Federation and other partners in the Security
Council, we also wish to look at ways to ensure the
speedier extradition of such individuals.
We, the United Nations, have over the last year
begun to show a new determination to come together
and to make collective action work. A year from now,
we will meet again here to review the
recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, as well as the Millennium
Development Goals, and to set the United Nations
agenda for the next decade. The United Kingdomís
chairmanship of the G-8 next year will focus on
tackling climate change and on Africa, on which the
Independent Commission for Africa will be producing
recommendations as to how best we can support the
radical agenda for change and development designed
by Africa itself through the New Partnership for
Africaís Development and the African Union. Our
presidency of the European Union will help us to lead
efforts for a successful outcome in the Doha
Development Round, and for building the European
Unionís crisis-management capabilities.
More than ever, global security is our shared
responsibility. In the year ahead, as we continue to
36

adapt to todayís threats and challenges, we must find
renewed determination and political will to make
collective security work. The United Kingdom is
determined to play its full part in that endeavour.Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your election as President of the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session. May I assure you of
India’s full support in ensuring its success.
As we gather here in the sixtieth year since the
United Nations was founded, we might perhaps pause
to reflect on the fate of the ideas and ideals of the
international community that inspired its creation. The
post-war generation had already become aware that the
world which had emerged from the ashes of a global
war could no longer be a peaceful world unless the
underlying forces of conflict were addressed
effectively by the entire community of nations as a
collectivity. Nations were therefore united to make the
world a safer and more peaceful place — a world in
which free peoples could pursue together a destiny of
shared prosperity.
The impulse behind the creation of global
institutions nearly 60 years ago has become an even
more pressing reality today. If we look around us, the
single most defining characteristic of our contemporary
world is the global, transnational character of the
challenges we confront, whether these are in the realm
of international security or in that of development.
Virtually every major issue that we face as nation-
States has both a domestic and a transnational
dimension. It is becoming increasingly apparent as
never before that, unless we fashion a global response
to those challenges based on a meaningful consensus,
we will not succeed in creating a world that truly
manifests the ideals of the United Nations.
Terrorism is one such challenge for which many
of us have paid an unacceptable price. We shall not
forget that, three years ago, it was this great city that
witnessed the single most horrendous terrorist act in
human history. Approximately three weeks ago, in
Russia, the world saw another brutal act of terror
which took the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians,
including a large number of young children.
Terrorism exploits the technologies spawned by
globalization, recruits its foot soldiers on ideologies of
bigotry and hatred, and directly targets democracies.
And yet, it is a sad reality that international networks
of terror appear to cooperate more effectively among
themselves than the democratic nations that they target.
We speak about cooperation, but we often seem
hesitant to commit ourselves to a truly global offensive
to root out terrorism with the pooling of resources, the
exchanging of information, the sharing of intelligence
and the unambiguous unity of purpose that is required.
That must change. We do have a global coalition
against terrorism; we must now give it substance and
credibility, avoiding selective approaches and political
expediency.
I now turn to other challenges that we face today,
such as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
There is an increasing reliance on restrictive regimes
and on the use of punitive action to confront this threat
to international peace and security. Although India is
firmly opposed to proliferation and has an impeccable
record in that respect, we believe that it is only a global
consensus of willing nations that will ultimately prove
to be truly effective in that regard.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is a good
model to follow with respect to other weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It is through
representative institutions, rather than through
exclusive clubs of privileged countries, that we can
address global threats posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. As far back as 1988, Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi outlined a series of specific steps in an action
plan, whose central proposition remains valid even
today — that progressive steps towards the elimination
14

of weapons of mass destruction must be based on a
balance of obligations between those who possess such
weapons and those who do not.
It is quite evident today that a global discourse is
required for evolving a more cooperative and
consensual international security order. India believes
that such consensus must differentiate between States
whose actions strengthen non-proliferation and those
that weaken the realization of its objectives.
Let me now turn to the central theme for the vast
majority of United Nations Members; the challenge of
development and the eradication of mass poverty.
Globalization has undoubtedly brought enhanced
effectiveness and efficiency in the functioning of our
economies. It has integrated marketplaces, higher
standards of living and a revolution in global
connectivity.
But there is also the phenomenon of widening
economic disparities, both within and among countries.
Connectivity also means that the people are painfully
aware — in real time — of how far and how fast they
are falling behind in their relative living conditions.
Development today is no longer a function of domestic
resources and national policies alone. It is a process
that is vitally linked to the international economic
environment that the developing countries face.
The international community must find ways to
contract those circles of exclusion. We need to find
innovative sources of financing and access to new
technologies that are necessary to assist those who are
on the margins of globalization. Just as prosperity
cannot be sustained by being walled in, poverty cannot
be banished to some invisible periphery. Development
must therefore return to the centre of the global
discourse. We must evolve equitable and rule-based
regimes to manage global trade, investment flows and
the movement of services.
Four years ago, at our Millennium Summit, we
adopted ambitious global development goals, but it is a
matter of concern that we have already fallen behind in
their implementation.
While globalization has generated new
challenges, it has also given us new technologies to
deal with those massive challenges. The world faces
ominous pandemics such as HIV/AIDS, but it today
also possesses remedies and skills that can rid the
world of that scourge. We face problems of
environmental degradation in many parts of our planet,
but we also have available safe and environment-
friendly technologies.
Many countries are beset by problems of hunger
and malnutrition, but we possess modern techniques of
food production and processing to make a hunger-free
world a credible and realistic dream. Although our
excessive dependence on hydrocarbons raises concerns
about the long-term availability of energy and about
the security of supplies, technology has made available
many environmentally sound alternative technologies.
What we lack, however, is a truly global agreement and
a mobilization of the international community to
overcome the massive challenges.
The experience of the decades since the inception
of the United Nations demonstrates the great
significance of democracy as an instrument for
achieving both peace and prosperity. While it is
gratifying that the frontiers of democracy have
expanded dramatically in the last decade and a half,
they still exclude significant numbers.
Only a few months ago, in India’s fourteenth
general election, our country went through the largest
exercise of popular will in the world. I can therefore
assert with confidence, the importance that national
articulations in global forums have in truly reflecting
the democratically expressed will of their people. We
choose to overlook the absence of democracy in too
many cases for reasons of political expediency.
Democracy’s representative nature validates the
commitments we take on as countries; it should also
determine the manner in which the architecture of
international institutions evolves. What is required for
the international community to successfully deal with
global challenges — whether they be security
challenges, economic challenges or challenges in the
sphere of the environment — is the existence of
international institutions and a culture of genuine
multilateralism.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
are the only instruments available for responding
effectively to the challenges we face collectively. But
what is missing is our sustained commitment to
democratizing the functioning of the United Nations.
It is common knowledge that the United Nations
is often unable to exert an effective influence on global
economic and political issues of critical importance.
15

That is due to what may be called its democracy
deficit, which stands in the way of an effective
multilateralism based on a democratically-evolved
global consensus.
Therefore, reform and restructuring of the United
Nations system can alone provide a crucial link in an
expanding chain of efforts to refashion international
structures, imbuing them with a greater degree of
participatory decision-making so as to make them more
representative of contemporary realities.
Our Millennium Declaration recognized the
urgency of the reform of the United Nations Security
Council. An overwhelming majority of the world’s
population cannot be excluded from an institution that
today legislates on an increasing number of issues,
with an ever-widening impact. The expansion of the
Security Council, in the categories of both permanent
and non-permanent members, and the inclusion of
countries like India as permanent Members would be a
first step in the process of making the United Nations a
truly representative body.
I would like to make brief references to two
countries with which India has had historically friendly
ties and whose early return to political normalcy is the
focus of the world’s attention.
The situation in Iraq causes us great concern. The
United Nations has a central role to play in erasing the
discord of the recent past and in ensuring that the Iraqi
people can soon exercise effective sovereignty,
preserving the country’s unity and territorial integrity.
An end to the suffering of the Iraqi people and
recognition of their aspirations should be the guiding
objectives. Consistent with our longstanding ties of
friendship with the Iraqi people, India will contribute
to Iraq’s humanitarian and economic reconstruction.
In the past three years, the international
community has assisted Afghanistan in pulling back
from the brink of chaos and chronic instability. We
sincerely hope that the upcoming presidential elections
and the subsequent parliamentary elections will allow
the Afghan people to express their will, free from
interference and intimidation. India’s assistance to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development will
continue.
Relations between India and Pakistan have been a
matter of attention for the international community. It
is known that in January this year India and Pakistan
initiated a composite dialogue to resolve all issues,
including that of Jammu and Kashmir. I reaffirm our
determination to carry forward that dialogue to a
purposeful and mutually acceptable conclusion.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm India’s
commitment to the principles that have brought us
together in this Organization. Those principles retain
their relevance and validity even while the global
economy and the international political order pose new
and very different challenges. All of us have to grow
out of the comfort of the predictable, discard
constraining habits of thought, and move forward with
confidence to meet the demands of the present and the
future. Each of us has to be prepared to take on new
obligations and larger responsibilities relevant to the
needs of our time.
I deem it a privilege to say unhesitatingly that
India is conscious of the responsibilities that lie ahead.
I speak of an India on the move — on the cutting edge
of economic, technological and developmental
transformations. This is an India endowed with
outstanding human resources, and we are putting in
place policies which will respond to emerging and
critical tasks. We have the capabilities and capacity to
take these on, and to participate in the restructuring of
a just and dynamic world order. We are confident that,
in the inextricably interdependent world we live in, our
commitment to the common good, which this
Organization embodies, will be resolute and full.
In this, we are inspired by the vision of
internationalism bequeathed to us by India’s first Prime
Minister, the great Jawaharlal Nehru — a vision of a
world order whose pillars are peace, harmony,
cooperation and development. That vision needs to
reanimate the collective wisdom of the world
community for a new partnership to meet the
unprecedented challenges we face.I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly
and to wish you much success.
The United Nations was established out of the
devastation of the Second World War in order to build
a world of unity and of peace. Today, 60 years after the
Organization came into being, we must ask ourselves:
What are we united for and what are we united against?
Are we united for peace and security? Are we united
for fairness and justice? Are we united against terror?
Are we united against tyranny?
Or are we, sadly, united only in cynical and
immoral majority votes that make a mockery of the
noble ideals on which this body was founded?
Tomorrow is Yom Kippur, the holiest day of the Jewish
calendar, when all Jews stand before God to account
for their actions. It is an appropriate time for all
19

nations, separately and together, to engage in such an
accounting.
I sense a change in the world. In the face of the
global campaign of terror which has left no country
free of its devastating impact, the world is beginning to
realize what we in Israel have long known: that
terrorism is a challenge to humanity as a whole, not
just to individual countries; that the response to that
global threat must also be global if it is to be effective;
that the threat of terrorism anywhere is a threat to
freedom everywhere; that fighting terror is crucial to
our ability to bring peace.
There was a time when the problems of terror,
Islamic fundamentalism and Iranian nuclear ambition
were seen as local problems — Israel’s problems —
not challenges which threatened the community of
nations as a whole. Today, however, our community of
nations is more united than ever in the battle against
terrorism, whose sole objective is to undermine
everything that we seek to build: peace, stability,
prosperity and opportunity for all.
Today we are also more united than ever in
opposition to the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The international community now realizes
that Iran — with missiles that can reach London, Paris,
Berlin and southern Russia — poses a threat not only
to the security of Israel, but to the security and stability
of the whole world. Indeed, Iran has replaced Saddam
Hussein as the world’s number-one exporter of terror,
hate and instability.
The international community now also realizes,
as reflected in Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), that Syria’s occupation of Lebanon and its
support for Palestinian terror must end if our collective
aspirations are to be fulfilled.
And the international community now realizes
that terror and tyranny are the twin enemies of the
individual freedoms and human rights — including the
right to life itself — which define our humanity.
Today, the community of nations knows that
securing freedom and democracy for all the peoples of the
world must be our collective goal. The pictures of human
flesh torn apart by the terrorists, from New York to
Beslan — and just yesterday, once again, in Jerusalem
— are waking us up to the challenge we face.
In that spirit of unity, and in the name of all those
in the world who suffer from terror and tyranny, I call
on the Assembly to refocus its aspirations and its
priorities. I call on the Assembly to end its obsession
with Israel and to ensure that United Nations resources
are allocated more equally and more effectively. Our
United Nations must provide solutions to the global
challenges of hunger and poverty, of disease and
weapons proliferation, of drug trafficking and
sustainable development. We must not let the
Palestinian desire to vilify Israel distract our global
community from the obligation to address the needs of
all peoples.
I call on the Assembly to address head-on the
active involvement of Iran and Syria in terrorism and
Syria’s continued occupation of Lebanon. There can be
no place in the community of nations for those who
promote the killing of children. I call on the Assembly
to promote practical measures to help nations cut off
all financial and political lifelines of terror.
I call on the Assembly to address the growth of
anti-Semitism and other forms of racism and
intolerance. I urge you, Mr. President, and the
Secretary-General, to convene a special session of the
Assembly on that crucial matter. We all share the
responsibility to educate our children to understanding
and tolerance rather than to hatred and incitement.
We must build a united and global coalition to
fight terrorism, racism and anti-Semitism. We must
build a united front against the cold-blooded murderers
of our children. In that battle, there is no middle
ground. There is no room for explanations or excuses.
There are no mitigating circumstances. Declarations
and condemnations are very important, but they are not
enough. Every nation, every Government, every leader
has the responsibility to act. Those who choose instead
to support and sponsor terror must be isolated and held
to account for their crimes.
When I speak of terror and its dangers to life and
freedom, I speak from bitter personal experience. My
own home town of Beersheva suffered a double suicide
bombing just three weeks ago. Sixteen innocent people
were killed when their commuter buses were blown up.
In the middle of an important meeting with visiting
officials, I rushed to call my mother and brother to
check that they were alive. Hamas, which operates
freely from Palestinian territory and receives support
and safe haven from the regimes in Damascus and
Tehran, proudly claimed responsibility for that horrific
attack.
20

Again yesterday, as I was meeting with the
Secretary-General to discuss peace in the Middle East,
I was passed a note informing me of a suicide atrocity,
in which two more Israelis were blown to pieces by a
Palestinian terrorist. And this morning, once again, yet
more Palestinian murderers took the lives of three
young Israelis in an attack on Morag.
In the last year alone, 150 Israelis have been
killed and thousands more injured in more than 40
separate suicide bombings and other cold-blooded
attacks. More than 200 additional suicide-bombing
attempts were blocked by our defensive measures.
No Israeli mother is free of the fear that her child
may be lost. No Israeli child is immune to the
terrorists’ plans. In the name of God above and all
humanity here on Earth, this killing must stop.
Palestinian terrorism is the key reason that the
dream of peace in the Middle East has not yet become
a reality. Combating this terror is crucial to the
prospects for peace in our region. No peace initiative
can survive if terrorists continue to enjoy a free hand to
undermine it.
The road map recognizes this, calling, in phase
one, for sustained Palestinian action against terror, the
dismantling of terrorist organizations and the end of
incitement in schools and the media. Sadly, the current
Palestinian leadership has refused to fulfil those
fundamental obligations, preferring to blame Israel for
all its failures. The Palestinian side spends more energy
fighting Israel here at the United Nations than it does
fighting the terrorists in its own territory.
In the post-11-September world, this is not
acceptable. The Palestinians are not exempt from the
imperatives of the global war on terror. On the
contrary, it is in their clear interest to join it. To stand
up against Hamas and Islamic Jihad is to stand up for
Palestinian rights, not against them.
We urge the international community to recognize
this reality and help the voices of reform and
moderation within Palestinian society to emerge. The
future of the Palestinian people will be determined by
the choices that the Palestinians and their leadership
make on the ground. The solutions — for the
Palestinians and Israelis as one — lie in Gaza and
Ramallah, not in The Hague or New York.
Israel is acting in both the diplomatic and the
security arenas to deal with the consequences of this
chronic failure of the Palestinian leadership. On the
diplomatic front, Israel accepted the road map in May
2003, and we remain committed to its realization. At
this time, however, we have no responsible Palestinian
partner ready to join us in this effort. Israel is now
planning to implement the disengagement plan as a
means of enhancing security and establishing a new,
more promising platform for a return to negotiations.
We are in constant contact with the donor community
and the World Bank in a joint effort to rebuild Gaza in
the wake of Israel’s withdrawal.
On the security front, Israel is building a security
fence to stop the unchecked wave of Palestinian
attacks. After 20,000 terrorist attacks, we deserve to
protect our people. No other country would act
otherwise after 20, let alone 20,000, terrorist attacks.
The fence does not take lives. It saves them. Where
there is a fence, there is no terror. Where there is no
fence, there is terror. The modified route of the fence
reflects the necessary balance between the security of
our citizens and the welfare of the Palestinian
population, as called for by Israel’s Supreme Court.
Most important, the fence is reversible. The lives taken
by terror are irreversible. By helping take terrorism out
of the equation, the fence contributes to the prospect of
a return to negotiations and the realization of the road
map’s vision of peace.
I call on the Assembly to acknowledge this truth
and to reject the continued Palestinian effort to have
delegations address Israel’s response to terrorism,
instead of addressing the terrorism itself.
Ultimately, we need real contact and dialogue,
based on mutual respect for the humanity of the other
if we are to resolve the conflict in the Middle East. The
Government of Israel is ready for such contact. We are
ready to talk to any leadership — from Syria, Lebanon
or the Palestinians — that comes to the table without
terror and with the genuine intention of finding
mutually acceptable solutions to our differences.
Tomorrow, Yom Kippur, is a day of prayer,
fasting and soul-searching for the Jews. In Beersheva,
in a synagogue named after my father, I will be praying
together with those who have recently buried their
murdered children. I will pray that our collective
aspiration for life and freedom will prevail over the
terrorists and those who sponsor them. I will pray that
God will deliver peace on earth, for all humanity. And
I will pray that mankind can unite — through the
21

United Nations — to help make this dream become a
reality.
And I would like to say in Hebrew, Happy New
Year.Fifty-nine years ago the
United Nations was established by nations determined
to work collectively to find alternatives to conflict as a
means of resolving disputes and to create a stable,
secure and more just and prosperous world. Devastated
and exhausted by world war for the second time within
25 years, nations put their faith in multilateralism and
in this body in order to avoid future wars. The name
'United Nations' evoked the unity of humankind, in
which our shared needs and common humanity were
more important than our differences.
It is obvious as we consider the world today that
we have achieved that vision only in part. Yes, world
wars have been avoided. International covenants have
set out universally agreed human rights standards
against which the performance of governments can be
measured. International law has been developed and
strengthened. As Kofi Annan emphasized this morning
(see ), putting the rule of law into effect at
home and internationally is essential to achieving a
fair, just and civilized world. Cooperation has achieved
advances in meeting social, economic and
environmental needs.
But much more remains to be done. War, more
often within than across the boundaries of States, has
taken the lives of tens of millions of people since 1945,
most of them civilians. Weapons of mass destruction
have accumulated and access to them has spread to
more countries. New diseases such as HIV/AIDS have
emerged, with devastating consequences. The gap
between rich and poor countries has widened, not
diminished.
This year the Secretary-General's High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change will put
forward proposals for reforming and strengthening the
United Nations, aimed at ensuring its relevance and
effectiveness in addressing these issues. It is critical
that we seize this unique opportunity to institute
positive reforms and not squander it by adopting
narrow, self-interested and inflexible responses. Nor
will a lowest-common-denominator approach achieve
what we all require.
Reform is long overdue. The composition of the
Security Council cannot go on reflecting the world as it
was in 1945. An expanded Security Council and reform
of outmoded electoral groupings is necessary for the
Council to be representative of the international
community as it is today. Those changes will
strengthen the Councilís mandate and enhance its
credibility as the pre-eminent organ of the United
Nations. No solution, of course, will satisfy the
viewpoint of every Member nation. A willingness to
compromise on a package of proposals will be
essential. But clearly, enhancing the representation of
areas such as Asia, Latin America and Africa must be
an objective, and account must be taken of the
significant contributions to the United Nations of
nations such as Japan.
While the High-Level Panel will focus on reform
of the United Nations and security considerations,
development goals to create a fairer world and promote
economic and social progress in the developing world
are further vital considerations for the United Nations
in the year ahead. For hundreds of millions of people,
starvation, disease and poverty are more immediate
threats than the concerns others of us have about
terrorism and security.
We are now at a turning point in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Improving the quality
and quantity of development assistance is crucial.
However, real and lasting progress to meet
development challenges is also dependent on building
a fairer, more open and equitable global trading
system. Countries of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) spend
$360 billion each year on subsidizing agricultural
47

production in a way that excludes opportunities for the
developing world to export - not only to OECD
countries, but to third markets as well. That sum
dwarfs the amount the OECD countries provide in
development assistance.
New Zealand welcomes the progress made at the
World Trade Organization General Council meeting in
Geneva in July, which put the Doha Development
Agenda back on track. Agriculture is at the heart of the
round; the European Union and United States
agreement to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies
is particularly welcome.
The United Nations must also adapt itself to the
changing nature of security and humanitarian concerns.
The concept of national sovereignty being paramount
and standing in the way of international intervention in
local conflicts cannot be sustained. As the Secretary-
General has challenged us,
'if humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an
unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should
we respond to a Rwanda, to a Srebrenica - to
gross and systematic violations of human rights
that offend every precept of our common
humanity?' (A/54/2000, para. 217)
The International Commission on Intervention
and State Sovereignty concluded two and a half years
ago that sovereign States have the responsibility to
protect their own citizens from avoidable catastrophe:
from mass murder and rape, from starvation. When
they are unwilling or unable to do so, that
responsibility must be borne by the broader community
of nations.
We are today witnessing a humanitarian and
human rights catastrophe in Darfur. The World Health
Organization reports that up to 10,000 people a month
are dying or being killed. The very young and the
elderly are most vulnerable.
A few days ago, by its resolution 1564 (2004), the
Security Council resolved to support an enlarged
African Union monitoring mission, demanded that all
parties cease all violence and human rights violations
and threatened further steps against the Government of
the Sudan if it fails to disarm the militias and protect
civilians.
Within the General Assembly, countries must
work together in a united and determined way to
enforce those provisions and prevent the tragedy that is
unfolding. History will not forgive those who stand in
the way of protecting 1.5 million refugees in that
region and allowing them to return safely to their
homes. It is also important that those responsible for
the mass murders and the abuse of human rights there
be held to account for their actions. There must be no
impunity for such crimes.
That is true in Darfur, and is also true of those
responsible for the destruction of East Timor and the
murder of people there in 1999. The ad hoc tribunals in
Indonesia have failed to bring to justice those who are
responsible. That failure can only encourage such
people to commit further atrocities, believing that they
will never be held responsible for their actions.
New Zealand welcomes the establishment of the
International Criminal Court and the role that it will
now play in dealing with genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It urges all countries which
have not yet done so to accede to the convention
establishing that body and to recognize its jurisdiction.
In the area of conflict resolution, we face today
two major challenges: in Afghanistan and in Iraq. New
Zealand has strongly supported efforts to bring security
and stability to Afghanistan. As a small country we
have contributed more than NZ$80 million in military
and development assistance. We welcome progress
towards presidential elections next month and the
essential democratic mandate that they will provide to
the Government.
Strong international support, however, will be
necessary to meet the challenges which lie ahead. That
includes ending the production and trading of drugs.
Afghanistan provides about 75 per cent of the world
trade in opiates. The money derived funds warlords
and organized crime and undermines the ability of the
legitimate Government to function.
New Zealand deplores the violence in Iraq, which
continues to harm or take the lives of so many people,
and the circumstances which have contributed to that
violence. We call on those responsible for taking the
lives of innocent people to end their violence. They
now have access to a political process which they
should use to promote their views and interests. A
credible election process is vital to creating an Iraqi
Government which has a popular mandate. The United
Nations has a key role to play in that process, but
adequate security and a safe environment are first
necessary for that to occur. New Zealand will continue
48

to support the interim Iraqi authority and the United
Nations in their efforts to restore security, peace and
prosperity to the Iraqi people, who have suffered for so
long.
In Iraq and elsewhere, close attention also needs
to be given to the protection of United Nations staff.
The General Assembly this year will consider an
integrated security strategy for the United Nations,
which will incorporate a system-wide review of the
United Nations security apparatus, accountability and
resources. The Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel must be
strengthened and supported by all States Members of
the United Nations.
New Zealand condemns all acts of terrorism and
will continue to contribute strongly to the campaign
against terrorism. In particular, we condemn the
inhumanity of terrorists in Beslan who sacrificed
children as pawns in pursuit of their political
objectives. However, attempts to suppress terrorism by
force will not by themselves be enough unless we also
address the causes which drive people to support,
finance or be recruited into terrorism.
In that regard, no action will be more important
to the undermining of terrorism today than finding a
just and sustainable solution to the conflict between
Israel and the Palestinian people. The international
community must work with those countries to
overcome the failure of leadership, the lack of resolve
and the cycle of violence and retaliation which stand in
the way of solving that conflict.
Finally, in the Pacific region, New Zealand's own
neighbourhood, we can celebrate the progress which
has been made in Bougainville and in the Solomon
Islands in ending conflict and re-establishing the rule
of law. In both cases, a concerted regional response
with the support of the United Nations has been
effective. In Bougainville, that response created peace
from a situation where a 10-year civil war had resulted
in widespread devastation and the loss of thousands of
lives.
In the Solomon Islands, the intervention of the
Regional Assistance Mission has restored the rule of
law by its elected Government in place of the anarchy
created by armed militias. More than 3,500 weapons
have been collected and destroyed, social services and
a credible budgetary progress restored and militiamen
and corrupt elements from the police and Government
arrested and charged.
Much however, remains to be done to meet the
wide-ranging challenges which confront the Pacific
region, including environmental threats, ethnic
conflict, poor law enforcement and governance and the
threat of disease. Regional solutions are being applied
by the Pacific Islands Forum through greater
collaboration and integration in addressing problems.
International cooperation through processes such as the
10-year Review of the Barbados Programme of Action
set to take place in Mauritius next year will also help.
In conclusion, 59 years from the end of the
Second World War and the establishment of the United
Nations, the world continues to face major challenges
to its security and well-being. The opportunity exists
this year for us to consider and improve the ways by
which the Assembly can address the problems faced by
humanity and make a difference. Success or failure to
do so will be the collective responsibility of all of us.I am addressing the Assembly today at a most
difficult time for our country, when tears are still being
shed by those who lost their children and loved ones
during the horrific terrorist attack in the Russian city of
Beslan. I would like from this rostrum to take this
opportunity to express once again my gratitude to all
those who have shown their solidarity with Russia in
these tragic days. Our special thanks go to the States and
international organizations that extended their helping
hand to the victims and the bereaved families ó to all
those who have suffered from this outrage.
I am also addressing the Assembly at a moment
of truth, when there cannot possibly be any doubt
whatever remaining as to the true nature of
international terrorism and the challenge it has flung
down before the world community. With their actions
throughout the world, the terrorists have once and for
all placed themselves in opposition to civilized
mankind. In fact, having made the mass murder of
people an end in itself, they have knowingly violated
all norms of human morality.
Russia has drawn harsh conclusions. They have
been set forth in the 4 and 13 September addresses by
the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir V.
Putin. We will not allow anyone to encroach on the
sovereignty of our State. We will resolutely strengthen
the unity of the country and its people in order to
counter terror and to guarantee a secure and decent life
for our citizens in freedom and democracy.
The measures announced by the Russian
President to achieve these objectives will be
implemented on the basis of our countryís
Constitution; and we will continue to defend our
legitimate interests throughout the world, not through
confrontation, but by means of equitable dialogue,
cooperation and partnership. Moreover, a readiness to
engage in honest cooperation in fighting terrorism
without double standards, is becoming one of the key
criteria in our relations with any and all States.
We must enter into a qualitatively new and critical
stage in the activities of the anti-terrorist coalition. The
meeting of the Security Council of 1 September
demonstrated the strong determination of the
international community to continue its fight against
terrorism in a consistent way. It is important now to
translate this commitment into practical actions as
quickly as possible.
In the three years that have passed since the
terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, a
lot has been done to develop effective partnership in
this sphere. However, compared to the scale of the
threat, far from enough has been done. It is important
to learn lessons from the experience gained and to
draw conclusions for the future.
First, the global nature of the terrorist threat testifies
to the fact that security in todayís world is indivisible.
Consequently, only collective responsibility can make
the world secure. The fight against terrorism should
unite States rather than pit them against each other. We
can deal with this evil only on a multilateral basis by
combining our efforts and acting in the spirit of solidarity.
As President Putin has declared, Russia considers the
objective of strengthening the anti-terrorist coalition to
be one of our most important tasks.
A special emphasis here should be placed on
intensifying the cooperation among our special services,
which, we are convinced, must now be raised to a
qualitatively new level of trust and coordinated action.
Secondly, a clear strategy and a generally
acceptable legal framework are the prerequisites for
success in combating terrorism. Such a framework is
enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001) and in other
decisions of the Security Council. But now, additional
efforts are needed. They include making necessary
amendments to national legislation, acceding to
international anti-terrorist conventions and finalizing
new international counter-terrorism legal instruments.
In circumstances where international terrorism
has declared war on our entire civilization, the
determination of States to use their right of self-
defence in conformity with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter is of particular importance. Of course
international law is clearly not an inalterable dogma.
The fight against terrorism calls for its development
and improvement.
Thirdly, the time has come to renounce double
standards once and for all when it comes to terror,
regardless of the slogans in which it may be cloaked.
31

Those who slaughtered children in Beslan and hijacked
aeroplanes to attack America are creatures of the same
ilk.
Harbouring terrorists, their henchmen and their
sponsors undermines unity and mutual trust among
those that form part of the anti-terrorist front, serves as
justification for the actions of terrorists and indeed
encourages them to commit similar crimes in other
countries. I would recall that United Nations decisions
require States granting political asylum to carefully
examine the personal records of each individual to
make sure that he or she has no links to terrorism.
Attempts to use the fight against terrorism in various
geopolitical games are even more counterproductive
and dangerous.
Fourth, the utter atrociousness of the recent
terrorist attacks proves there is the need for reliable
safeguards against terrorists gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction. Russia is prepared for the closest
kind of international partnership in that area. Our
country was one of the sponsors of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). It is a participant in the
Proliferation Security Initiative and a co-sponsor of the
Group of Eight (G-8) Action Plan on Non-
Proliferation. Those initiatives are complementary and
are designed to increase the effectiveness of the regime of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
something which is especially relevant on the eve of the
2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Fifth, drug trafficking is increasingly interwoven
with terrorism. The drug flow from Afghanistan has
acquired global significance. The implementation of a
set of social, economic and law-enforcement measures
both within and outside the borders of that country is
now more urgent than ever. One of the key elements of
that strategy lies in strengthening the existing anti-drug
security belts and creating new ones.
Russia is making an important contribution
towards resolving the drug problem, including through
the formulation of specific legal, political and
operational measures within the framework of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). We are ready to
coordinate actions with the Government of
Afghanistan, and with the multinational and coalition
forces operating in that country.
Sixth, international terrorists have neither
nationality nor religion. In fact, it is specifically
religion and national culture that, today as never
before, require protection from the devastating impact
of extremism of any kind. There is a need for
respectful dialogue among various religions and
civilizations. Russia, which is open both to the West
and to the East, is ready to play its part in that process,
which is intended to prevent a split in civilization.
Another pressing task today is the saving of
world spiritual and cultural monuments from attacks by
extremists. We deem it essential to establish
cooperation in that area between the United Nations
and its specialized agencies, primarily the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). Failing to act here ó as well
as standing by in silence at the desecration of
memorials to Second World War heroes and victims
and at attempts to rehabilitate fascists ó can only play
into the hands of those who wish to incite extremist
trends in society.
Seventh, Russia believes that the United Nations
must continue to play a pivotal role in uniting the
efforts of the international community in its fight
against terrorism. As Chair of the Security Councilís
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), our country
intends to actively contribute to speeding up the reform
of that Committee. We propose drafting a new Security
Council resolution that would ensure the most effective
possible functioning of the CTC, so as to identify, in a
timely manner, weak links in the anti-terrorism
network and increase practical cooperation between the
CTC and international and regional organizations,
including the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), the CSTO and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.
The CIS summit held recently in Astana,
Kazakhstan, reaffirmed the strong potential of CIS
regional structures in all areas, from anti-terrorist
activities and ensuring collective security to
intensifying economic integration.
Certainly, in an increasingly interdependent
world, the war on terrorism cannot be considered in
isolation from other pressing issues facing mankind.
This is especially relevant to the settlement of
conflicts, which for decades have been destabilizing
the situation at the regional and global levels. Through
its decisions, the General Assembly must promote a
32

Middle East settlement on the basis of commitments
made by the parties under the road map. Yesterday, the
Quartet of international mediators spoke out to that end.
The situation in Iraq is a source of serious
concern. Russia is ready to render all possible
assistance towards attaining a political settlement
aimed at preserving Iraqís territorial integrity and
ensuring its political sovereignty and a genuinely
democratic post-war recovery. The search for national
reconciliation within Iraq is of key significance; here,
the Iraqis could be assisted by the holding of an
international conference with the participation of all
major Iraqi political forces, friendly States, Security
Council members and the League of Arab States and
other organizations.
We must remain vigilant with regard to Kosovo,
which is a dangerous hotbed of tension. There is no
room for complacency. We must work to ensure that
universally recognized standards of human rights and
the rights of national minorities are applied in the
region. We also need to make full use of existing
mechanisms for conflict settlement within the CIS.
Consolidating the peacemaking capacity of the
international community is crucial to overcoming
regional crises. A collective response to humanitarian
crises, in particular those on the African continent, in
full compliance with the United Nations Charter and in
a spirit of partnership with regional structures, would
leave no doubt that the Charter remains a universal
basis for the effective solution of such problems.
The United Nations must continue to focus its
attention on other global threats to security and
sustainable development as well. Those include the
eradication of poverty and illiteracy as a breeding
ground for extremism. Annually, our country grants
1,000 scholarships to students from African countries.
Russia has contributed $7.5 million to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and has
provided bilateral humanitarian assistance to a number
of African countries.
Among the challenges and threats is that of
finding ways to bridge the gap between poor and rich
States. Russia has been making its contribution there;
between 1998 and 2002 it wrote off the debt of African
countries equivalent to $11.2 billion.
Another challenge is ensuring environmental
security. Here I would like to confirm that in
accordance with the decision of President Vladimir V.
Putin we are now engaged in serious consideration of
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
The challenges also include preventing the
transformation of outer space into a theatre of armed
confrontation. Together with China, we are calling for the
conclusion of a comprehensive agreement to that end. We
call upon all countries with space capability to join in that
initiative. There is also a growing need to elaborate a
United Nations convention on outer space law.
A further challenge is the fight against gross
violations of human rights, with a view to ensuring the
security and dignity of the individual. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and other
organizations should not remain passive spectators
when, in some countries, a considerable part of the
population is deprived of citizenship and consequently
of basic political, social and economic rights.
On Russiaís initiative, the General Assembly, at
its fifty-seventh and fifty-eighth sessions, adopted
resolutions 57/145 and 58/16 respectively, on
establishing, under the aegis of the United Nations, a
comprehensive approach to countering new threats and
challenges. The resolutions contain specific guidelines
for bringing the international community closer to a
new security model that would meet the global
challenges of the twenty-first century.
Those are the lines along which the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, established
by the Secretary-General, is organizing its work. We
hope that its recommendations will pave the way for a
genuine enhancement of the effectiveness of the United
Nations. At the same time, reform of the Organization,
and particularly of the Security Council, should be
based on the broadest possible agreement and should
not provoke the alienation of States.
The international community is undergoing a
complex period in its establishment of a new system of
international relations. It is already clear that this will
be a long-term process with an uncertain future and
one that, so far, is difficult to predict. At the same time,
there is an enormous increase in the number of new
unresolved problems and new dangerous challenges to
security and the development of mankind. We still lack
a collective strategy and universally applicable
mechanisms for responding to those challenges. In fact,
33

we have to constantly improvise and use makeshift
means to ensure world stability.
A question arises as to whether we could soon
find ourselves in a situation in which events start to go
out of control. Is it not time for the international
community to assume an active role in impacting upon
global processes and taking targeted actions to
establish a more secure and just world order? Russia is
fully determined, together with other countries, to
build such a world order and take its proper place
therein as a free and democratic State.
More than half a century ago, the civilized world
put aside all its disputes and differences and mobilized
its efforts to counter the deadly threat of Nazi
enslavement. The enemy that opposes us today is no
less dangerous and no less merciless. Russia sincerely
hopes that the forthcoming sixtieth anniversary of the
end of World War II and the establishment of the
United Nations will become a historic milestone on the
path to a world order in which the twenty-first century
sees the noble principles of peace, stability and
development enshrined in the United Nations Charter
hold sway.Thank you for the honour of
addressing the General Assembly. The American
people respect the idealism that gave life to this
Organization. And we respect the men and women of
the United Nations, who stand for peace and human
rights in every part of the world. Welcome to New
York City, and welcome to the United States of
America.
During the past three years, I have addressed the
General Assembly in a time of tragedy for my country,
and in times of decision for all of us. Now we gather at
a time of tremendous opportunity for the United
Nations and for all peaceful nations. For decades, the
circle of liberty, security and development has been
expanding in our world. This progress has brought
unity to Europe, self-government to Latin America and
Asia and new hope to Africa. Now we have the historic
8

chance to widen the circle even further, to fight
radicalism and terror with justice and dignity and to
achieve a true peace, founded on human freedom.
The United Nations and my country share the
deepest commitments. Both the American Declaration
of Independence and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights proclaim the equal value and dignity of
every human life. That dignity is honoured by the rule
of law, limits on the power of the State, respect for
women, protection of private property, free speech,
equal justice and religious tolerance. That dignity is
dishonoured by oppression, corruption, tyranny,
bigotry, terrorism and all violence against the innocent.
Both our founding documents affirm that this bright
line between justice and injustice — between right and
wrong — is the same in every age, every culture and
every nation.
Wise Governments also stand for these principles
for very practical and realistic reasons. We know that
dictators are quick to choose aggression, while free
nations strive to resolve differences in peace. We know
that oppressive Governments support terror, while free
Governments fight the terrorists in their midst. We
know that free peoples embrace progress and life,
instead of becoming the recruits for murderous
ideologies.
Every nation that wants peace will share the
benefits of a freer world. And every nation that seeks
peace has an obligation to help build that world.
Eventually there is no safe isolation from terror
networks, or failed States that shelter them, or outlaw
regimes or weapons of mass destruction. Eventually
there is no safety in looking away, seeking the quiet
life by ignoring the struggles and oppression of others.
In this young century our world needs a new
definition of security. Our security is not merely found
in spheres of influence or some balance of power. The
security of our world is found in the advancing rights
of mankind.
Those rights are advancing across the world. And
across the world, the enemies of human rights are
responding with violence. Terrorists and their allies
believe the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the United States Bill of Rights and every charter of
liberty ever written are lies to be burned and destroyed
and forgotten. They believe that dictators should
control every mind and tongue in the Middle East and
beyond. They believe that suicide and torture and
murder are fully justified to serve any goal they
declare. And they act on their beliefs.
In the last year alone terrorists have attacked
police stations and banks and commuter trains and
synagogues and a school filled with children. This
month in Beslan we saw once again how the terrorists
measure their success in the death of the innocent and
in the pain of grieving families. Svetlana Dzebisov was
held hostage along with her son and her nephew. Her
nephew did not survive. She recently visited the
cemetery and saw what she called the “little graves”.
She said, “I understand that there is evil in the world,
but what have these little creatures done?”
The Russian children did nothing to deserve such
awful suffering and fright and death. The people of
Madrid and Jerusalem and Istanbul and Baghdad have
done nothing to deserve sudden and random murder.
Those acts violate the standards of justice in all
cultures and the principles of all religions. All civilized
nations are in this struggle together and all must fight
the murderers.
We are determined to destroy terror networks
wherever they operate, and the United States is grateful
to every nation that is helping to seize terrorist assets,
track down their operatives and disrupt their plans. We
are determined to end the State sponsorship of terror,
and my nation is grateful to all that participated in the
liberation of Afghanistan. We are determined to
prevent proliferation and to enforce the demands of the
world, and my nation is grateful to the soldiers of many
nations who have helped to deliver the Iraqi people
from an outlaw dictator.
The dictator agreed in 1991, as a condition of a
ceasefire, to fully comply with all Security Council
resolutions, then ignored more than a decade of those
resolutions. Finally, the Security Council promised
serious consequences for his defiance. The
commitments we make must have meaning. When we
say “serious consequences”, for the sake of peace there
must be serious consequences. So a coalition of nations
enforced the just demands of the world.
Defending our ideals is vital, but it is not enough.
Our broader mission as United Nations Members is to
apply those ideals to the great issues of our time. Our
wider goal is to promote hope and progress as the
alternatives to hatred and violence. Our great purpose
is to build a better world beyond the war on terror.
9

Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have established a
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
In three years the contributing countries have funded
projects in more than 90 countries, and pledged a total
of $5.6 billion to those efforts. America has undertaken
a $15 billion effort to provide prevention and treatment
and humane care in nations afflicted by AIDS, placing
a special focus on 15 countries where the need is most
urgent. AIDS is the greatest health crisis of our time,
and our unprecedented commitment will bring new
hope to those who have walked too long in the shadow
of death.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have joined together to
confront the evil of trafficking in human beings. We
are supporting organizations that rescue the victims,
passing stronger anti-trafficking laws and warning
travellers that they will be held to account for
supporting this modern form of slavery. Women and
children should never be exploited for pleasure or
greed, anywhere on Earth.
Because we believe in human dignity, we should
take seriously the protection of life from exploitation
under any pretext. In this session, the General
Assembly will consider a draft resolution sponsored by
Costa Rica calling for a comprehensive ban on human
cloning. I support that draft resolution and urge all
Governments to affirm a basic ethical principle: no
human life should ever be produced or destroyed for
the benefit of another.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have changed the way
we fight poverty, curb corruption and provide aid. In
2002 we created the Monterrey Consensus, a bold
approach that links new aid from developed nations to
real reform in developing ones. And through the
Millennium Challenge Account, my nation is
increasing our aid to developing nations that expand
economic freedom and invest in the education and
health of their own people.
Because we believe in human dignity, the United
States and many other nations have acted to lift the
crushing burden of debt that limits the growth of
developing economies and holds millions of people in
poverty. Since those efforts began in 1996, poor
countries with the heaviest debt burdens have received
more than $30 billion of relief. And to prevent the
build-up of future debt, my country and other nations
have agreed that international financial institutions
should increasingly provide new aid in the form of
grants rather than loans.
Because we believe in human dignity, the world
must have more effective means to stabilize regions in
turmoil and to halt religious violence and ethnic
cleansing. We must create permanent capabilities to
respond to future crises.
The United States and Italy have proposed a
Global Peace Operations Initiative. Group of Eight
(G-8) countries will train 75,000 peacekeepers —
initially from Africa — so they can conduct operations
on that continent and elsewhere. The countries of the
G-8 will help that peacekeeping force with deployment
and logistical needs.
At this hour, the world is witnessing terrible
suffering and horrible crimes in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, crimes my Government has concluded are
genocide. The United States played a key role in efforts
to broker a ceasefire, and we are providing
humanitarian assistance to the Sudanese people.
Rwanda and Nigeria have deployed forces in the Sudan
to help improve security so that aid can be delivered.
The Security Council adopted a new resolution that
supports an expanded African Union force to help
prevent further bloodshed and that urges the
Government of the Sudan to stop flights by military
aircraft in Darfur. We congratulate the members of the
Council on this timely and necessary action. I call on
the Government of the Sudan to honour the ceasefire it
signed, and to stop the killing in Darfur.
Because we believe in human dignity, peaceful
nations must stand for the advance of democracy. No
other system of government has done more to protect
minorities, to secure the rights of labour, to raise the
status of women or to channel human energy to the
pursuits of peace. We have witnessed the rise of
democratic Governments in predominantly Hindu and
Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish and Christian cultures.
Democratic institutions have taken root in modern
societies and in traditional societies. When it comes to
the desire for liberty and justice, there is no clash of
civilizations. People everywhere are capable of
freedom and worthy of freedom.
Finding the full promise of representative
Government takes time, as America has found in two
centuries of debate and struggle. Nor is there only one
10

form of representative Government, because
democracies by definition take on the unique character
of the peoples that create them. Yet this much we know
with certainty: the desire for freedom resides in every
human heart, and that desire cannot be contained
forever by prison walls or martial laws or secret police.
Over time and across the Earth, freedom will find a
way.
Freedom is finding a way in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and we must continue to show our
commitment to democracies in those nations. The
liberty that many have won at a cost must be secured.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a stake
in the success of the world’s newest democracies. Not
long ago, outlaw regimes in Baghdad and Kabul
threatened the peace and sponsored terrorists. Those
regimes destabilized one of the world’s most vital and
most volatile regions. They brutalized their peoples in
defiance of all civilized norms.
Today, the Iraqi and Afghan peoples are on the
path to democracy and freedom. The Governments that
are rising will pose no threat to others. Instead of
harbouring terrorists, they are fighting terrorist groups.
And this progress is good for the long-term security of
all of us. The Afghan people are showing extraordinary
courage under difficult conditions. They are fighting to
defend their nation from Taliban hold-outs and helping
to strike against the terrorist killers. They are reviving
their economy. They have adopted a Constitution
that protects the rights of all, while honouring their
nation’s most cherished traditions. More than 10
million Afghan citizens — over four million of them
women — are now registered to vote in next month’s
presidential election. To any who still would question
whether Muslim societies can be democratic societies,
the Afghan people are giving their answer.
Since the last general debate of this General
Assembly, the people of Iraq have regained
sovereignty. Today, in this Hall, the Prime Minister of
Iraq and his delegation represent a country that has
rejoined the community of nations. The Government of
Prime Minister Allawi has earned the support of every
nation that believes in self-determination and desires
peace. And under Security Council resolutions 1511
(2003) and 1546 (2004), the world is providing that
support. The United Nations and its Member nations
must respond to Prime Minister Allawi’s request and
do more to help build an Iraq that is secure,
democratic, federal and free.
A democratic Iraq has ruthless enemies because
terrorists know the stakes in that country. They know
that a free Iraq in the heart of the Middle East will be a
decisive blow against their ambitions for that region.
So a terrorist group associated with Al Qaeda is now
one of the main groups killing the innocent in Iraq
today, conducting a campaign of bombings against
civilians and the beheadings of bound men. Coalition
forces now serving in Iraq are confronting the terrorists
and foreign fighters so that peaceful nations around the
world will never have to face them within our own
borders.
Our coalition is standing beside a growing Iraqi
security force. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization
is providing vital training to that force. More than 35
nations have contributed money and expertise to help
rebuild Iraq’s infrastructure and, as the Iraqi Interim
Government moves towards national elections,
officials from the United Nations are helping Iraqis
build the infrastructure of democracy. Those selfless
people are doing heroic work and are carrying on the
great legacy of Sergio Vieira de Mello.
As we have seen in other countries, one of the
main terrorist goals is to undermine, disrupt and
influence election outcomes. We can expect terrorist
attacks to escalate as Afghanistan and Iraq approach
national elections. The work ahead is demanding, but
those difficulties will not shake our conviction that the
future of Afghanistan and Iraq is a future of liberty.
The proper response to difficulty is not to retreat — it
is to prevail.
The advance of freedom always carries a cost,
paid by the bravest among us. America mourns the
losses to our nation and to many others, and today I
assure every friend of Afghanistan and Iraq, and every
enemy of liberty: We will stand with the people of
Afghanistan and Iraq until their hopes of freedom and
security are fulfilled.
These two nations will be a model for the broader
Middle East, a region where millions have been denied
basic human rights and simple justice. For too long,
many nations, including my own, tolerated and even
excused oppression in the Middle East in the name of
stability. Oppression became common, but stability
never arrived. We must take a different approach. We
must help the reformers of the Middle East as they
work for freedom and strive to build a community of
peaceful, democratic nations.
11

That commitment to democratic reform is
essential to resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. Peace
will not be achieved by Palestinian rulers who
intimidate opposition, tolerate corruption and maintain
ties to terrorist groups. The long-suffering Palestinian
people deserve better. They deserve true leaders
capable of creating and governing a free and peaceful
Palestinian State.
Even after the setbacks and frustrations of recent
months, good will and hard effort can achieve the
promise of the road map to peace. Those who would
lead a new Palestinian State should adopt peaceful
means to achieve the rights of their people and create
the reformed institutions of a stable democracy. Arab
States should end incitement in their own media, cut
off public and private funding for terrorism, and
establish normal relations with Israel. Israel should
impose a settlement freeze, dismantle unauthorized
outposts, end the daily humiliation of the Palestinian
people, and avoid any actions that prejudice final
negotiations. And world leaders should withdraw all
favour and support from any Palestinian ruler who fails
his people and betrays their cause.
The democratic hopes we see growing in the
Middle East are growing everywhere. In the words of
the Burmese democracy advocate Aung San Suu Kyi:
“We do not accept the notion that democracy is a
Western value. To the contrary, democracy simply
means good Government rooted in responsibility,
transparency and accountability.”
Here at the United Nations, Members know this to be
true. In recent years, this Organization has helped
create a new democracy in East Timor and the United
Nations has aided other nations in making the
transition to self-rule.
Because I believe that the advance of liberty is
the path to both a safer and better world, today I
propose establishing a democracy fund within the
United Nations. This is a great calling for this great
Organization. The fund would help countries lay the
foundations of democracy by instituting the rule of law,
independent courts, a free press, political parties and
trade unions. Money from the fund would also help set
up voter precincts and polling places and support the
work of election monitors. To show our commitment to
the new democracy fund, the United States will make
an initial contribution, and I urge all other nations to
contribute as well.
Today I have outlined a broad agenda to advance
human dignity and enhance the security of all of us.
The defeat of terror, the protection of human rights, the
spread of prosperity, the advance of democracy —
these causes, these ideals, call us to great work in the
world. Each of us alone can only do so much. Together
we can accomplish so much more.
History will honour the high ideals of this
Organization. The Charter states them with clarity: “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war ...
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights ... to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom”.
Let history also record that our generation of
leaders followed through on these ideals, even in
adversity. Let history show that in a decisive decade,
members of the United Nations did not grow weary in
our duties, or waver in meeting them. I am confident
that this young century will be liberty’s century. I
believe we will rise to this moment, because I know the
character of so many nations and leaders represented
here today. And I have faith in the transforming power
of freedom.
May God bless you.There are some matters on
which we all agree. One of these is that, later this year,
we will receive the important report that will be tabled
by the High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change, which was constituted by our Secretary-
General. The other is that, next year, we will mark the
tenth anniversaries of the Copenhagen World Summit
on Sustainable Development and the Beijing World
Conference on Women and discuss their outcomes. The
third matter on which we all agree is that, next year, we
will observe the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
historic Millennium Declaration.
We will also agree that we took all these
initiatives ó the convening of the social, womenís and
millennium summits and the constitution of the High-
Level Panel ó because we were of one mind that we
had a number of problems that needed to be solved. In
the Millennium Declaration, we used inspiring words
to sum up our response to these problems. We said:
ìWe have a collective responsibility to uphold the
principles of human dignity, equality and equity
at the global level. As leaders we have a duty
therefore to all the world's people, especially the
most vulnerable and, in particular, the children of
the world, to whom the future belongs.î
(resolution 55/2, para. 2)
We went on to say:
ìWe are determined to establish a just and lasting
peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.î (ibid.,
para. 4)
We also said that our efforts to make globalization
fully inclusive and equitable
'must include policies and measures, at the
global level, which correspond to the needs of
developing countries and economies in transition
and are formulated and implemented with their
effective participation'. (ibid., para. 5)
To this we added the commitment that
'We will spare no effort to free our fellow men,
women and children from the abject and
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty'.
'We are committed to making the right to
development a reality for everyone and to freeing
the entire human race from want.' (ibid.,
para. 11)
Naturally, we have no choice but to agree that we
did say all these things and would undoubtedly agree
that we meant what we said. I trust that this will not
mark the end of the range of issues over which we
would speak with one voice. I say this because, when I
have asked myself the question 'Have we achieved the
goals we set ourselves?', I have found it impossible
not to answer that we have failed. There may very well
be others among us who will take a different view and
say that a good beginning has been made and therefore
that it is too early to say we have failed.
But I am certain that if we say to those affected
by violence and war that we have made a good
beginning towards the establishment of a just and
11

lasting peace all over the world, they will not believe
us. I am equally certain that if we say to those who go
to bed hungry every day that we have made a good
beginning towards freeing the entire human race from
want, they will also not believe us.
I would make bold to say that the vision of
human dignity, equality and equity at the global level
that we enunciated in this imposing forum four years
ago resonates among the ordinary people who are
victims of hunger and war as a beautiful dream that
will inevitably be deferred.
Does this mean that, when we made the promises
we made, we deliberately intended to tell the billions
of ordinary people a lie? The answer to that question is
obviously ìnoî. Did we speak as we did simply
because talk is easy and cheap? Again, the answer to
that question is obviously 'no'. The question must
therefore arise as to why the grandeur of our words and
the vision they paint ó of a world of peace, free of
war, a world characterized by shared prosperity, free of
poverty - has not produced the grand results we
sincerely sought and seek.
It would seem to me that the answer to that
question lies in the fact that we have as yet not
seriously confronted the difficult issues that relate to
the uses and perhaps the abuses of power. Yesterday, in
his statement on his report on the work of the
Organization, our Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
spoke eloquently about the 3,000-year-old Code of
Hammurabi, and said: 'That code was a landmark in
mankindís struggle to build an order where, instead of
might making right, right would make might'
(). We took it that the Secretary-General was,
in his own elegant way, drawing our attention to the
central question of our day: the uses and abuses of
power.
Contemporary human society is characterized by
a gross and entrenched imbalance in the distribution of
power. That power is held and exercised by human
beings. As human beings, the powerful share many
things with the powerless. Together, the powerful and
the disempowered share the common human needs to
eat, to drink water, to be protected from the elements,
to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, and to live.
But life itself tells us that all of that describes
only what human beings share. The rest, the relations
among us as social beings, is defined by our varied
access to power and its exercise.
Without fear of contradiction, I have said that we
all agree that later this year we will receive the report
of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change. I am equally convinced that, depending on
where we stand relative to the power equation, we will
hold radically different views about what constitutes
humanity's most serious threats and challenges, and
therefore what must be changed to respond to that
perceived reality.
Both the powerful and the disempowered will
undoubtedly agree that terrorism and war represent a
serious threat to all humanity. They will agree that we
were right to make the commitment in the Millennium
Declaration to work for
'a just and lasting peace all over the world in
accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter' (resolution 55/2, para. 4).
Many of those who have already addressed the
Assembly have correctly drawn our attention to many
instances of terrorism and war, to which we are all
opposed. They have spoken of the bombings of the
United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania and of
the African and American lives those claimed; of the
heinous 11 September outrage in this city; and of the
acts of terrorism in Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Morocco,
Spain, Israel, Gatumba in Burundi, Beslan in the
Russian Federation, and elsewhere.
They have correctly drawn our attention to the
violent conflicts in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Burundi, the Sudan, Palestine, Israel, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Chechnya, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and
elsewhere, and to other unsolved problems, such as
self-determination for the people of Western Sahara,
that cry out for a solution.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront these situations and therefore
the threat and challenge of terrorism and war.
However, the powerful will also make the
additional determination that terrorism and war
constitute the central and principal threat and challenge
that human civilization faces. They will make that
determination because, almost by definition, the
terrorists target them simply because they are
powerful; they have no logical choice but to identify
terrorism as the central and principal threat and
challenge they face, and to which they must respond.
12

Because of their place in the power equation,
what they decide will necessarily represent the global
decision of what constitutes the central, principal and
most urgent threat and challenge to human society,
necessitating various changes in the global system of
governance. What they decide will translate into a set
of obligatory injunctions, issued by this Organization,
which all Member nations will have to accept and
implement.
Again, both the powerful and the disempowered
will undoubtedly also agree that poverty, want and
underdevelopment constitute serious problems that all
humanity must confront. Many of those who have
already addressed the Assembly have correctly drawn
our attention to the reality of poverty, which billions
across the globe continue to experience.
Among other things, they have correctly
reminded us of the fact that some countries are poorer
today than they were a decade ago. They have pointed
to the virtual certainty that we will fail to meet the
Millennium Development Goals we set ourselves four
years ago.
Both the powerful and the disempowered agree
that the international community must act together
successfully to confront this situation, and therefore
the threat and challenge of poverty and
underdevelopment. However, the disempowered, who
are also the poor of the world, will also make the
additional determination that poverty and
underdevelopment constitute the central and principal
threat and challenge that human civilization faces.
They will make the determination that, because
they are the daily victims of deprivation and want,
which claim the lives of millions every year ó
translating into cold statistics about shortened life
expectancy - deprivation and want represent the
central and principal threat and challenge that
humanity faces, necessitating changes in the global
system of governance in order effectively to respond to
that reality.
But because they are powerless, those billions -
the overwhelming majority of the same humanity that
needs to eat, to drink water, to be protected from the
elements, to dream, to love, to laugh, to play, to live -
will have no possibility of persuading this
Organization, laughably described in the Millennium
Declaration as 'the most universal and most
representative Organization in the world', to translate
what they have concluded into obligatory injunctions,
issued by this Organization, which all Member nations
will have to accept and implement.
If, for a moment, we resist the temptation to
speak in parables or in tongues, for fear that we might
be punished for telling the truth, we must say that this
stark and simple reality reflects the distribution of
power and wealth in contemporary human society.
The wealthy and powerful feel, correctly,
mortally threatened by the fanatical rage of the
terrorists. They have the power to respond to this
present and immediate danger with all their might, and,
because they are mighty, they can determine for all
humanity that the principal threat to them is the
principal threat that all humanity faces.
The poor and powerless feel threatened by a
permanent hurricane of poverty, which is devastating
their communities as horrendously as hurricane Ivan
destroyed the Caribbean island State of Grenada.
But, tragically, because they are poor, they do not
have the means to respond to this present and
immediate danger. Neither do they have the power to
determine for all humanity that what they decide is the
principal threat they confront, is also the principal
threat that all humanity, including the rich and
powerful, faces.
In the Millennium Declaration, we spoke of the
need to implement
'policies and measures, at the global level, which
correspond to the needs of developing countries
and economies in transition and are formulated
and implemented with their effective
participation' (ibid., para. 5).
Perhaps the mistake we made was to assume that
the contemporary distribution of power in human
society would permit this outcome, and that, regardless
of this fundamental consideration, it would be possible
for the concerns of the poor to take precedence on the
global agenda and the global programme of action.
We comforted, or perhaps deluded, ourselves
with the thought that this Organization is 'the most
universal and most representative organization in the
world' - afraid to ask the question, is it?
Every year many of us who have spoken, and will
speak, from this rostrum make an annual pilgrimage to
this great and vibrant city to plead the cause of the
13

poor of the world, hopeful that this time our voices will
be heard. Every year, after a few days, we pack up our
bags to return to the reality of our societies, whose
squalor stands out in sharp contrast to the splendour of
New York and this majestic precinct that constitutes
the headquarters of the United Nations.
In the aftermath, resolutions are passed. Again
and again our permanent representatives, with their
extraordinary and plenipotentiary powers, report that
those resolutions oblige us to act to thwart the deadly
plans of murderous terrorist gangs. Again and again
they report that yet another appeal has been made to
the mighty and the lowly alike, voluntarily to respond
to the cries of the wretched of the earth.
We are truly proud and inspired to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over the proceedings of the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, because we
know that you will discharge your obligations as a son
of the poor of the world should. We are moved by the
fact that you had as your predecessor President Julian
Hunte, who also understood intimately what must be
done to ensure that the United Nations can become, in
reality, the indispensable common house of the entire
human family.
As an Israeli said to us at our headquarters in
Pretoria a fortnight ago, it is perhaps time that we, the
poor and powerless, abandon our wheelchairs and
begin to walk unaided. Perhaps that will help to build
the social order of which Hammurabi - and Kofi
Annan - spoke, in which right makes might and not
might, right.