May I begin by extending my congratulations on your
election as the President of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session. I am confident that under your
guidance this session will achieve fruitful results. I also
wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere
respects to Mr. Jean Ping, President at the previous
session, and to the Secretary-General.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
end of the world war against fascism and the founding
of the United Nations. Just a few days ago in this Hall,
world leaders solemnly adopted the outcome document
of the High-level Plenary Meeting (resolution 60/1).
Now, it falls to us to fulfil the important and pressing
task of working towards a harmonious world of lasting
peace and common prosperity by translating that
document into action and turning fine words into
reality. This session should serve to promote peace,
harmony and common development.
We want peaceful development. Progress of
mankind needs a peaceful environment. Stability and
security of one country cannot be built on the
turbulence or crisis of another. Only a new security
concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality
and coordination will enable us to develop in peace and
safeguard peace through development.
We want harmonious development. To build a
better future is the long-cherished dream of mankind.
Any development strategy should be guided by a long-
term and holistic perspective instead of immediate and
sectoral benefits. Therefore, we should work together
for more democratic and law-based international
relations and a harmonious environment in which
countries respect one another, treat one another as
equals, and in which different cultures can emulate and
interchange with each other.
18

We want common development. No model of
development that benefits only a few countries or a
small group of people is acceptable or sustainable.
Countries should cooperate with each other more
closely so that economic globalization may yield
successful results, benefit-sharing and common
prosperity.
This session should serve to push forward
reforms of the United Nations and strengthen its role.
Having weathered 60 years of vicissitudes, the United
Nations needs multifaceted and multidimensional
reforms so as to be able to make a greater contribution
to mankind’s noble cause of peace and development.
The position of the United Nations as the core of
the world collective security mechanism must be
strengthened so that it can perform its duty of
safeguarding peace in a more effective way. China
supports the efforts to enhance the Organization’s
capacity on conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices. We also favour a greater role by the Secretary-
General in this respect and the fostering of a preventive
culture.
We support the efforts to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly with
regard to rapid deployment capacity and strategic
preparedness, as well as the capacity to fully mobilize
regional organizations and their resources under the
leadership of the Security Council.
China supports the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission to more effectively
coordinate United Nations efforts in the areas of
peacekeeping, post-conflict rehabilitation and
development. In that respect, the Economic and Social
Council and other development assistance agencies
should have an important role to play in the
Commission.
It has been our consistent position to oppose the
use or threat of force in international relations. We do
not support the reinterpretation or revision of the
provisions in the Charter of the United Nations related
to the right of self-defence. Should an occasion arise
that calls for the use of force, it is the Security Council
that should make sound judgements and take prudent
decisions as to the merits of the situation.
The international community should continue to
press ahead with the international process on arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation; safeguard
and enhance the authority and effectiveness of existing
multilateral treaties; give full scope to the role of the
United Nations and other international organizations in
the area of non-proliferation; and seek solutions to
related issues by political and diplomatic means.
The United Nations should be able to cope more
effectively with non-traditional security threats. We
welcome the comprehensive strategy on counter-
terrorism proposed by the Secretary-General, and we
hope to see the early conclusion of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, taking full
account of the concerns of various parties, particularly
developing countries.
In the effort to reduce and prevent large-scale
humanitarian crises, the international community
should strictly observe the United Nations Charter,
respect the opinions of the countries or organizations
concerned and, with the Security Council’s
authorization, explore, to the greatest extent possible,
peaceful settlement within the United Nations
framework. We oppose any rash intervention carried
out on the basis of the claim that a nation is unable or
unwilling to protect its own citizens.
Development should be a main focus of United
Nations reform. Although China is a low-income
developing country, it is prepared to contribute as
much as it can to international cooperation for
development. As President Hu Jintao announced at the
summit, China will take substantive steps in five areas.
We will join hands with all Members to advance
reforms in the area of development so as to facilitate
the resolution of development issues. The United
Nations should put in place a fair and rational
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) review
framework to assess progress made in various
countries and to monitor follow-up of international
cooperation and aid commitments. We support the
coordinating role of the Economic and Social Council
in development-related areas.
The Doha Round should embody development in
its focus, paying more attention and taking actions to
address the concerns of developing countries,
particularly with regard to agricultural produce and
special and differential treatment. China has decided to
grant zero-tariff treatment to some commodities from
39 least developed countries, which will cover the
majority of China’s imports from those countries.
19

China is in favour of incorporating the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS and the building of the
public health sector into the development programmes
and activities of various countries and of the United
Nations. We will be submitting at the current session a
draft resolution on strengthening global capacity-
building in the area of public health. In the next three
years, we plan to provide more aid and medicine to
developing countries for preventing and treating
malaria and other communicable diseases and to help
them establish and reform their public health systems
and train medical personnel.
The international community — particularly
developed countries — should take substantive steps to
help developing countries break the vicious circle of
debt. Such steps include substantial debt reduction and
the streamlining of debt relief procedures and
requirements. In the next two years, China will write
off or otherwise cancel the overdue portions, as of the
end of 2004, of interest-free or low-interest
Government loans owed by all heavily indebted poor
countries having diplomatic relations with China.
We call on the United Nations to give priority to
helping developing countries to strengthen their
capacity-building. China will help developing
countries train 30,000 people for various professions in
the next three years.
My country also favours setting a timetable for
developed countries to allocate 0.7 per cent of their
gross national income to official development
assistance. New fund-raising methods should be
explored so as to put more funds into development.
China pledges $10 billion in concessional loans
to developing countries in the next three years within
the framework of South-South cooperation.
The Charter of the United Nations grants the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
highly efficient, responsible and representative Council
serves the long-term interests of the United Nations
and the common interests of all its Member States.
China supports reform of the Security Council
aimed at strengthening its authority and efficiency and
improving its working methods. The representation of
developing countries, particularly African countries,
should be increased so that small and medium-sized
countries would have more say in the Council’s
decision-making. No reform proposal can work that
addresses only the concerns of a few countries,
disregarding the interests of the majority of countries,
and treats developing countries in Africa and in other
parts of the world unfairly.
China supports the principle of cooperation based
on democratic consultation. As reform will affect the
future of the United Nations and the interests of
various parties, there should be no artificial timeframes
or attempts to force decisions through a vote. Instead,
Member States should seek consensus through dialogue
and consultation and in accordance with the principle
of democratic international relations.
China embraces the spirit of unity and
cooperation. The United Nations family has 191
Members. Unity is the source of strength. We want
unity, not division. As long as Member States respect
one another’s interests, accommodate one another’s
concerns and show pragmatism and flexibility, we will
be able to find a reform path that is acceptable to all.
The current session should focus on Africa.
African countries make up a quarter of the United
Nations membership, and their populations account for
13 per cent of the world’s total population. If there is
no stability in Africa, the world will have no peace. If
Africa remains poor, there will be no development for
the world. The outcome document of the summit calls
for efforts to meet the special needs of Africa. I believe
that that is correct and necessary.
Despite the gratifying progress made in Africa in
recent years, conflicts in some of its regions have
persisted. The Security Council should pay special
attention to African problems and give them priority on
its agenda. That means not only devoting more Council
meetings to African issues, but also, and more
important, taking concrete actions to heed Africa’s
voice, respect its views and accommodate its concerns.
China applauds the mediation and good offices of
the African Union and other regional organizations
aimed at conflict settlement in Africa. We support
close cooperation between the Security Council and
those organizations by providing them with funds,
logistics and technical assistance to strengthen their
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
capacities.
African countries face difficulties in the area of
development, particularly in attaining the MDGs. More
20

than 300 million people are still living under the
poverty line. One third of all children are
malnourished. More than 30 million people are
suffering from HIV/AIDS. With less than 2 per cent of
the world’s economic aggregate, Africa is weighed
down by debts amounting to $300 billion. All of that
poses a challenge to the conscience of mankind.
The international community should reach a
global consensus on African development and help the
continent to achieve the MDGs on schedule by
implementing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Those who provide assistance must do
so in all sincerity and respect the right of African
countries to make their own decisions. Assistance must
also have a clear aim: to meet the basic and long-term
needs of the African people. Assistance is by no means
charity or a gift; it is a response to the call for mutual
benefit and common development. Furthermore, it is
our moral duty to help the needy and redress injustices.
In the twentieth century, Africa shook off
colonial rule and achieved national liberation. That was
an epoch-making event. The twenty-first century will
bring peace and development to Africa — it is
historically inevitable. The Chinese people will
continue to stand beside their African brothers and
sisters on that journey of historic significance.
The recently concluded Six-Party Talks in Beijing
on the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue have reached an
important consensus and issued a joint declaration,
marking an important step forward in the Talks and a
crystallization of the political will and diligence of the
parties concerned. It also reflects the common
aspiration of the international community. Because it
was so hard-won, this result needs to be especially
prized. We hope that the parties will continue to work
together to promote further progress in the Six-Party
Talks, resolve the nuclear issue on the Peninsula
through dialogue and by peaceful means, ensure lasting
peace and stability in the region and realize its
common goals for development and prosperity. The
Chinese Government will continue to make a positive
contribution in that regard.Please accept
my congratulations, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of this historic sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. I wish you every success. I would
also like to express my sincere thanks to the outgoing
President for his dedicated work at the fifty-ninth
session. I endorse the statement of the European Union
(EU) presidency.
The debate at last week’s summit highlighted one
important point, namely, that peace, development,
security and human rights are inseparably linked. One
cannot address human rights and security without also
addressing development. All of those issues are at the
very heart of our policies.
People are waiting for our solutions to the
pressing problems of development. We must achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. Of that we are
acutely aware, both in Germany and in Europe. The EU
plan to reach the 0.7 per cent official development
assistance goal by 2015, and the Group of Eight (G-8)
commitments made at Gleneagles, substantially
strengthen the financial basis of our work.
We are also willing to forge new paths by making
use of innovative financing mechanisms.
At the same time, frameworks establishing fair
conditions for international trade are a prerequisite if
poorer States are to share the benefits of globalization.
The EU is leading the way with its “Everything But
Arms” initiative, which grants the least developed
countries duty-free and quota-free market access. In
that context, we must do all we can to make the
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, to be held in Hong Kong in December, a
success. Only in that way can we bring the Doha round
negotiations to a successful conclusion.
We also know that excessive indebtedness curbs
growth and development. The realignment of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt
Initiative after 1999 has considerably reduced the
indebtedness of some 27 States. Germany has to date
forgiven €6.5 billion of debt and has earmarked a
further €4 billion for the continuation of the HIPC
initiative.
Debt relief is, however, dependent on all creditors
spreading the burden fairly among themselves. We are
alarmed by the fact that commercial and State creditors
outside the Paris Club are doing less and less to live up
to their responsibilities. I would like to seize this
opportunity to call for your support at the forthcoming
annual meeting of the Bretton Woods institutions, for
the G-8 proposal and for an extensive cancellation of
debts — including multilateral debts — for the
countries concerned.
All of the foregoing emphasizes the great
importance we attach to the global partnership for
33

development. That partnership is not, however, a one-
way street. It also requires a commitment by partner
States to put in place the conditions for
development — that is, democracy, good governance,
respect for human rights and anti-corruption measures.
Climate protection and development are also
closely intertwined. Of course, everyone must have
access to energy. Nevertheless, all States must do their
part to prevent the ominous advance of climate change.
In late November the parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Kyoto Protocol will meet in Montreal. There, we will
have the opportunity to adopt effective mechanisms to
reduce emissions of greenhouse gases beyond 2012.
That is precisely the policy pursued by the Kyoto
Protocol, and it is a policy we will adhere to.
This year two natural catastrophes — the tsunami
in the Indian Ocean and Hurricane Katrina in the
United States of America — have clearly demonstrated
just how vulnerable our societies are to natural
disasters. We have all learned just how important
disaster prevention is. As host to the Third
International Conference on Early Warning, which will
be held in Bonn in March 2006, Germany hopes to
contribute to making better use of and improving early
warning mechanisms and thereby limiting the scale of
the damage caused by such disasters. Here I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our invitation to all
Member States to join us in making the Bonn
Conference a success.
For years, United Nations engagement has been
hailed all over the world as a welcome sign of
protection and assistance, of peace and reconstruction.
Last Sunday saw the first free parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan under the new Constitution. The
Government of Afghanistan, with a full complement of
democratically legitimated institutions, is now
prepared to assume responsibility for the further
reconstruction of the country. By going to the polls,
millions of women and men in Afghanistan have
proved that they have opted for democracy. Our thanks
go to the United Nations, which worked hard to make
those elections possible.
In his latest report on Afghanistan (A/60/224) the
Secretary-General announced that the United Nations
will remain committed to assisting the country after the
elections. I heartily endorse that commitment; such
help is indispensable. For even if the Bonn process,
launched four years ago, has now been brought to a
successful conclusion, the international community
will still need to stand by Afghanistan. Germany, too,
will continue to do its utmost to support the country.
The President returned to the Chair.
Ten years after the conclusion of the Dayton
Agreement, and six years after the end of the Kosovo
conflict, the situation in the Western Balkans has
improved tangibly. Nonetheless, major progress is still
required in the political, legal and economic fields. The
people of that region must genuinely come to terms
with their past, and the parties to the conflict must be
reconciled. In that connection, we call for full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
The Middle East still faces great challenges. As
its neighbours, we in Europe have a strategic interest in
peace and stability in the region. We are convinced that
only through reform, the strengthening of democracy
and the rule of law can lasting stability be guaranteed.
The free and fair parliamentary elections in Palestine
and Lebanon are encouraging signs of change.
The Middle East peace process has also gained
new momentum over past months. We emphatically
welcome the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip
and the northern part of the West Bank. Now it is vital
that Israelis, Palestinians and the international
community do all they can to lay the foundations for
political and economic stability in the Gaza Strip.
Efforts should be focused on a two-State solution based
on the road map. The objective remains a viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders.
The international community is united in its
determination to help Iraq establish democracy and the
rule of law. We want all Iraqis to be able to live free
from fear and material hardship. The forces of terror
and violence must not and shall not be permitted to win
the upper hand. The Middle East needs a stable,
prosperous Iraq.
Here, too, the United Nations is making its
contribution towards the process of political transition
and reconstruction. That is why we have provided
considerable financial assistance for the protection
force whose presence allows the United Nations to
work in Iraq. It is also why Germany has, at Iraq’s
request, advised that country on constitutional issues.
34

The Iranian nuclear programme continues to be a
major cause of concern. Past violations of international
obligations, a lack of transparency in its actions, and
insufficient cooperation with subsequent investigations
have destroyed any confidence that the programme is
for exclusively peaceful purposes. With support from
the EU High Representative, Germany, France and the
United Kingdom have worked with Iran on finding a
way to restore confidence. Those efforts have received
broad support from the international community.
Tehran’s continued disregard of International Atomic
Energy Agency decisions, however, is further
weakening that confidence and the gains made to date
are being put at risk for no good reason. We should
emphasize that our concerns do not relate to Iran’s
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
This has never been and will not be put in
question. Our concerns do not relate to Iran’s right to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That has
never been and will not be called into question.
We remain prepared to work on solutions which
include objective guarantees that the Iranian nuclear
programme can serve only peaceful ends. I appeal to
Iran to refrain from taking unilateral measures and to
return to the negotiating table.
There is general agreement that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is now more than ever
a life-threatening risk to us all. It is thus all the more
regrettable that no consensus could be reached on the
inclusion in the outcome document of a chapter on
non-proliferation and disarmament. If we want to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular of nuclear weapons, all States
must fulfil their obligations. At the same time, new
momentum must be brought to the process of nuclear
disarmament.
In that context, I welcome the latest progress made
by the six-party talks towards resolving the nuclear
crisis on the Korean peninsula. It is a vital first step.
Africa is in many ways a touchstone for and an
example of an effective multilateral system. The close
cooperation of the United Nations with the African
Union, as well as with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), has had a beneficial
impact in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and,
recently, in Burundi. The United Nations is also
playing an equally important role in efforts to stabilize
the Great Lakes region.
Following the death of John Garang, the peace
process in the Sudan requires an even greater
commitment by all parties to implement the historic
Nairobi peace agreement. The United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), to which Germany has
contributed personnel, is making a major contribution.
However, we must not neglect other crisis areas, in
particular Darfur. The African Union mission in Darfur
has helped to stabilize the security situation in the area
where it is stationed.
The variety of problems facing us — poverty, social
polarization, global population growth, inadequate water
supplies and global climate change, to name only the
most pressing — serves to highlight the need for
concerted action. We must prepare the United Nations
for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Over the past 12 months, reform of the United
Nations has been intensively debated. Member States,
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General himself
have provided valuable input. Some of their proposals
are contained in the outcome document adopted at last
week’s world summit.
However, only when we have managed to
implement those proposals will we be able to speak of
true achievement. To be a success, the process requires
the active participation of all Member States.
The tasks that the summit has set the General
Assembly must be tackled with speed and focus. At
this session, the General Assembly must make a
breakthrough towards the adoption of the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It must also work on the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission.
Sustainable peace requires more than merely
restoring security. The post-conflict peacebuilding
phase is particularly crucial. The sooner reconstruction
can begin, and the better coordinated the peacemaking
and post-conflict recovery efforts are, the better the
chances of lasting stabilization. The summit took a
vital step in that direction by deciding to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission by the end of the year.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report
entitled “In larger freedom”, states that:
“No security agenda and no drive for
development will be successful unless they are
based on … respect for human dignity”.
(A/59/2005, para. 128)
35

If we wish to lend greater weight to the
protection and promotion of human rights, we must
also strengthen the relevant United Nations bodies and
mechanisms.
Germany therefore welcomes the decision taken
by the summit to create a Human Rights Council which
will replace the Commission on Human Rights. The
General Assembly must now move fast to define the
mandate and structures of the Human Rights Council.
It must ensure that the new body enjoys greater
legitimacy than its predecessor and that its working
methods are more effective, especially when it comes
to responding to acute crises.
Allow me a last word. A glance at the trouble
spots around the world makes it clear that we, the
international community, face far more conflicts in the
South than we do in the North. Key decisions on
settling those conflicts are taken in the Security
Council which, under the Charter of the United
Nations, has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace. Its composition, however, still reflects the
world of 1945 and not that of the twenty-first century.
Adjusting and expanding the membership of the
Security Council by adding both permanent and non-
permanent members thus remains essential. Any reform
of the United Nations that does not include reform of the
Security Council is not worthy of the name.
The Security Council is in danger of losing its
authority and legitimacy as long as entire continents
and major contributors are not adequately represented.
Germany and its partners Brazil, India and Japan
therefore have submitted a proposal on reform of the
Council. It is the only proposal that includes a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council and its
working methods. We are convinced that it is the only
proposal capable of obtaining the necessary two-thirds
majority in the General Assembly.
Reform of the Security Council is an
indispensable part of the overhaul of the United
Nations. In last week’s summit document, we all
pledged to swiftly advance those reforms. We do not
need only progress; we need results. The time is ripe
for radical reform. Let us use this session of the
General Assembly to finally resolve this issue, which is
so vital to the future of the United Nations.Speaking for the first time from this rostrum, I wish to
reaffirm here the importance France attaches to the
multilateral system. Our common future cannot be
envisaged without strengthening it.
The declaration adopted the day before yesterday
is a milestone in that direction, even if it does not meet
all our expectations. Indeed, the text makes some
significant advances. I am thinking in particular of
innovative financing for development. I am also
thinking of the decision to establish a peacebuilding
commission within the Security Council. Finally, I am
thinking of the establishment of a Human Rights
Council and the endorsement of the principle of the
responsibility to protect. Now it is up to us to put those
new concepts into practice.
In that connection, I wish to pay tribute here to
the remarkable work that has been done under the
stewardship of Mr. Jean Ping.
But let us not underestimate the extent of the task
that still remains to be accomplished, be it in the areas
of counter-terrorism, non-proliferation, Security
Council reform or development assistance.
The United Nations is founded on the rule of law
and the promotion of universal standards. Those reflect
our common values and our conviction that there can
be no security and development without scrupulous
respect for human rights. This is not a moral question
but one of respect for the identity of every individual.
It is not a matter of passing judgement but of enabling
all people to live in greater freedom and in dignity.
Let us reject the impressment of children in
armed conflicts, the systematic use of sexual violence
against women and girls as a weapon of war, the
recourse to threats, arbitrary detention and torture of
opponents, journalists, labour leaders and defenders of
human rights. And, let us conclude the negotiations on
a convention against forced disappearances. To that
end, let us strengthen the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and promptly
establish the Human Rights Council.
France particularly welcomes the fact that the
international community now has the necessary
legitimacy to exercise effectively its responsibility to
protect populations threatened by ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and genocide. France also
welcomes the progress of the international criminal
justice system, in particular through the action of the
Security Council. Those who believe they can count on
the international community not to act when they
commit their crimes should make no mistake: they will
be held accountable.
Sixty years after the founding of the United
Nations, terrorism is now at the top of the list of human
rights violations. Nothing — no cause, religion or
moral order — can justify attacks on the lives of
innocents, the lives of civilians. We must define acts of
terrorism once and for all so that we can better combat
that barbaric practice which sets humankind back.
17

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes another major threat for the planet, against
which we must remain united and determined.
France, together with its British and German
partners, has proposed to Iran a constructive approach
paving the way for a new relationship between that
great country and the international community. That
relationship is currently compromised by concerns over
Iran’s nuclear programme. We ask Iran to build trust by
providing objective guarantees on the exclusively
peaceful nature of its programme. Iran’s statements
from this rostrum compel the international community
to meet its responsibilities, as referral of the matter to
the Security Council is on the agenda in order to
strengthen the authority of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The very integrity of the non-
proliferation regime is at stake.
But let us also work to reduce the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, which fuel so many very
deadly conflicts.
To better serve peace and ensure the security of
populations, the Security Council has expanded its
field of action to the trafficking that finances conflicts
and the impunity that protects traffickers, using, in
particular, sanctions and embargoes. The United
Nations is resolutely engaged on the ground, at the
very heart of conflicts. More than 70,000 blue
helmeted soldiers and police officers are now serving
in 18 peacekeeping operations, and thousands of others
are operating under Security Council mandates.
The results can be seen, for example, in Timor-
Leste, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. But as countries emerge from
crisis, it is essential that they continue to benefit from
our full attention and support. The United Nations has
the duty to take a central role in the transition phase
through the Peacebuilding Commission.
Other situations demand great vigilance and a
high level of mobilization. Thus, in Haiti, the presence
of strong contingents of United Nations soldiers and
police must lead to the strengthening of the political
process by involving all peaceful forces without
exception. Preparations for elections must be
accelerated. Like all peoples, the Haitian people, who
have suffered for too long, are entitled to respect and
freedom.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the presence of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
appointment of a High Representative of the Secretary-
General for the elections should also help strengthen
implementation of the process set out at Marcoussis
and Pretoria.
But in Côte d’Ivoire, as in Haiti, the determined
action of the united international community will not
produce results unless all parties cooperate in good
faith and demonstrate their sense of responsibility. In
Abidjan as in Bouaké, all must respect their pledged
commitments so that free and transparent elections can
be held throughout the country. No other solution is
possible. That is why it is essential to resolutely
support the electoral process that has begun, as well as
the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programmes. All Ivorian parties must understand that
they will not block the peace efforts with impunity if
they take an obstructive stance, make hate speeches or
challenge democratic rules. The Security Council will
meet its responsibilities.
The situation in Lebanon demonstrates what can
be accomplished by a determined international
mobilization, supported by the courageous will of the
people. Most Syrian forces have now left Lebanon.
Elections have been held. A representative Government
has been formed. Our Organization must continue to
support the Lebanese Government’s efforts to recover
full sovereignty and exercise its authority over the
whole of its territory. At the same time, we must
continue to support the work of the commission of
inquiry into the assassination of Rafik Hariri. We are
determined to see justice done.
Also with respect to the Middle East, a dynamic
of hope, which could touch all States of the region, is
emerging following Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza.
France, together with its European partners, stands
with the Palestinians to rebuild and develop that
territory so that its inhabitants can move around freely
and have access to jobs and, quite simply, to decent
living conditions.
But we must not stop there. It is important to
restore political prospects for relaunching
implementation of the road map by, on the one hand,
encouraging the Palestinians to redouble their efforts
on security and, on the other, encouraging the Israelis
to take the measures necessary to stop settlement
activity and to comply with international law in their
18

struggle for security. Peace can come only with the
existence of two peaceful and democratic States living
side by side in peace and security.
Finally, with respect to Iraq, France remains
engaged so that, with the assistance of the United
Nations in particular, the Iraqi people can acquire
democratic institutions with which all Iraqis can feel
identified. It is clear that a policy focused exclusively
on security leads to the retrenchment of a community,
thus jeopardizing the cohesion of Iraqi society and the
country’s unity. In Iraq, too, the political process must
not exclude any representative, peaceful force, and the
political process must offer Iraq the prospect of the
restoration of its complete sovereignty.
In all those crises, the Security Council has
gradually imposed the authority of the United Nations
in the service of international peace and security. Its
action is legitimate, and its authority will be further
strengthened when we reach agreement on an
enlargement of the Council that reflects the emergence
of new Powers and which gives an equitable place to
all continents.
At the same time, it is important to carry out the
thorough management reforms that our Organization
requires. In his report entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General proposed elements
of an action plan and initiated the first reforms. I pay
tribute to his resoluteness and reaffirm France’s
determination to support him in his approach.
We all know that security and development
cannot be separated. Five years after the Millennium
Summit, heads of State or Government have just issued
a troubling assessment of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals.
The outcome document they adopted (resolution
60/1) clearly sets out the priorities on which we must
take action. The first of those sadly remains food
security, because, as underlined by the Declaration on
Action Against Hunger and Poverty, adopted in 2004
on the initiative of President Lula and President
Chirac, hunger remains the worst weapon of mass
destruction. It continues to kill several hundred million
men, women and children around the planet. We can
see it happening right now in the Sahel and southern
Africa. That scourge belonging to another age can and
must be fought.
Of course, emergency humanitarian aid must be
provided to people in distress. That implies
strengthening the coordination of United Nations
interventions and, in particular, the establishment of an
international humanitarian force, as proposed on
several occasions by France.
But beyond that, it is important to provide all
areas at risk with the technical resources for prevention
and early warning. Above all, it is essential to create
the conditions for sustainable development to the
benefit of all. That is the aim of the Millennium
Development Goals, whose attainment requires
substantial long-term financing. Official development
assistance will continue to be primary for much time to
come. The summit’s outcome document recalls the
international commitments made in that regard, which
France and the European Union will respect. It is
urgent that the other developed countries make the
same commitments. But we know well that this will
not be sufficient. Additional long-term resources have
to be found through innovative financing mechanisms.
France endorses the establishment of
international solidarity contributions. Over 66
countries have given their support to the pilot project
to levy a tax on airline tickets, and we welcome this. In
February, France will host a ministerial conference on
this initiative so that it can be implemented specifically
and promptly.
By devoting three of the eight Goals to health, the
Millennium Declaration has put public health back at
the centre of sustainable development. In terms of its
scope and socio-economic impact, the HIV/AIDS
pandemic is of concern to us all. Only by working
together will we be able to deal with it, through an
approach that integrates prevention, treatment, care and
the medical and social vulnerability of infected
persons. France wants to carry out this integrated
approach with its European partners and with the
World Health Organization, the Joint United Nations
Program on HIV/AIDS and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. We must do
everything possible to achieve universal access to
treatment by 2010, if need be promoting greater
flexibility of intellectual property rights as provided for
in the Doha international trade agreements.
The fight against AIDS requires us all to mobilize
our efforts. For its part, France has pledged to double
its contribution to the Global Fund, increasing the
19

amount to 300 million euros by 2007. At the same
time, international cooperation must take into account
the particular challenges faced by certain categories of
individuals: victims of abject poverty who are
excluded, young women denied the right to sexual and
reproductive health, those with disabilities
marginalized by society.
From the Indian Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico,
from Japan to Antarctica, man is confronted today with
an unprecedented rise in environmental threats that he
himself has caused. Scientific proof of the reality of
climate change and its human origins are irrefutable.
All initiatives must be compatible with the Kyoto
Protocol; prospects must be charted for the future of
the multilateral climate regime after 2012. France
would hope to see more robust commitments,
especially regarding the transfer of technologies to
emerging countries. To respond to the threat and more
effectively mobilize energies and resources, France and
Europe have proposed the establishment of a
specialized agency, based on the United Nations
Environment Programme, for the purpose of
coordinating international action. This idea is
mentioned in the summit’s outcome document; it must
now be translated into reality.
The United Nations is commemorating its sixtieth
anniversary this year. The world has changed
profoundly since 1945. Millions of men and women
have gained freedom and have emerged from
underdevelopment. Technological progress has been
staggering and has radically changed the life of society
and relations among States. Challenges and threats
have changed; they are now worldwide and jeopardize
humanity itself.
Yet, we must remain optimistic. It is not too late,
given that we understand what is at stake and that we
mobilize collectively. The United Nations is
rediscovering the way charted for it by the founding
fathers: helping in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
building international cooperation for development and
promoting human rights.
We need the United Nations more than ever; it is
the sole framework for universal comprehensive action
which is legitimate and recognized as such by all
States. Let us give it our full support. France for its
part makes this commitment.Let me begin, Sir,
by paying tribute to your predecessor, Jean Ping, for
his extraordinary work — above all on the world
summit, but also throughout his year as President —
and by offering my congratulations to you on
beginning your year in office.
I should also like to express, on behalf of the
European Union and all its member States, our deepest
sympathy and solidarity to the people of the United
27

States, particularly those in the Gulf states, in their
hour of need.
In early July, my first duty in the presidency of
the European Union was to go to Srebrenica to mark
the tenth anniversary of the massacre there, the worst
in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
More than 8,000 people, mainly Muslim, were taken
away and killed as the international community just
stood to one side. To be sure, we had shown the right
convictions in words, but shamefully, we had failed to
act. The lesson of that massacre — and of the even
greater horror of Rwanda a year before — was that we
all needed better means to turn our collective will into
decisive action. I think that we in the European Union
have learned in the intervening period. Today, the
Union is on the ground as a military, police or civilian
presence in Bosnia, in Aceh, in Iraq, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, with the African Union, in
Darfur.
I also think that the United Nations has learned
the lessons of the past decade. At the summit this
week, we agreed on the further steps that we need to
take for the Organization to be even more effective. Of
all that was agreed at the summit, I believe it will be
the agreement on our “responsibility to protect” that
will be seen in the future as having the greatest
significance of all. If we follow through on the
responsibility to protect, then never again will
genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity be allowed to take place under our noses
with nothing done.
The responsibility to protect is, of course, a
reflection of our common morality. But it is also a
recognition that the world in which we now live is too
small for us to be unaffected by, or indifferent to, the
innocent victims of murder and oppression. This
shrinking of the world has been as sudden as it has
been profound. When the Berlin wall fell, a generation
of ideological certainties was swept away. People could
suddenly see partners where before they had only
glimpsed adversaries. And as that very visible barrier
was noisily being breached, a revolution in information
technology was quietly erasing the barriers of distance
and time. Continents and cultures are now cabled
together and bound by trade and services in a way that
was unimaginable even a decade ago.
In this new world, we can no longer safely
tolerate the general threat that can come from a
particular human tragedy, wherever it takes place. To a
greater extent than ever before, we share the same
world: the same threats and responsibilities, the same
opportunities and interests. And precisely because the
boundaries of our world have contracted, the
horizons — the ambitions — of many people around
the globe have infinitely expanded. For the first time in
our history, mankind has the ability to realize the
potential of individuals in societies of all kinds and in
every region through an open exchange of goods,
investment, technology and, above all, ideas.
Not least in all of this, it is the rise of India and
of China that is reordering the world economy.
Hundreds of millions there and elsewhere have been
lifted out of poverty. A new global market has been
created that ignores the divide — which seemed so
fundamental for so many decades — between East and
West.
Currently, not everyone has the chance to share in
all of that. Much of sub-Saharan Africa remains
blighted by poverty, disease and conflict. The
European Union has now set a clear timetable to
achieve the 0.7 per cent target for aid. Debt relief, trade
reform and development aid are all vital, but none of
them can work alone. Fundamental to making poverty
history are the Governments of the developing world
themselves. And where Governments fail, their own
peoples are the victims, as United Nations Special
Envoy Anna Tibaijuka’s damning assessment of the
situation in Zimbabwe only too graphically shows.
Sub-Saharan Africa is not alone in having yet to
achieve its potential. The American author Thomas
Friedman, in his recent book The World Is Flat,
highlights an extraordinary anomaly: it was the Arab
peoples whose forebears devised algebra and the
algorithms upon which our entire digital age is based,
but those peoples are now right at the rear of today’s
technological revolution, with, for example, fewer than
2 per cent of those populations having Internet access.
Three United Nations Development Programme Arab
Human Development Reports have now set out clearly
how limited economic prospects and stunted political
freedoms have led young and talented people towards
alienation and disillusionment.
The answer, however, does not lie in easy
stereotypes about some clash of civilizations. It is only
the terrorists and the preachers of hate who want us to
believe that Islam and the West are fundamentally
28

different. Theirs is a philosophy of mistrust and
despair, and we reject it utterly. Indonesia and
Turkey — to name just two — are both striking
examples of how countries with predominantly Muslim
populations can embrace democracy and modernity.
We in the European Union have seen the vibrant
Muslim communities in our own countries, and from
that experience have seen how Islamic and Western
cultures can be partners in a global society.
Everyone knows that the Arab peoples want
prosperity, freedom and democracy every bit as much
as anyone in Europe or America. So the fact that the
Arab world has the lowest scores in regional
measurements of democratic practices, civil freedoms
and good governance is not some cultural inevitability,
but a temporary failure of human will. In that regard,
the international community has a clear responsibility
to encourage regionally led political, social and
economic reform. The European Union strongly
supports such reform and will continue to do so.
Equally, it has been our active foreign policy that has
placed us in the lead with regard to Iran, especially on
the nuclear dossier.
With our High Representative Javier Solana and
my French and German Foreign Minister colleagues,
we have made detailed proposals for the relationship
between the European Union and Iran to be based on
cooperation and respect for international norms and
treaties.
Our proposals envisage a high-level, long-term
political and security framework between the European
Union and Iran, in which we would work together in
political, economic, scientific and technological areas,
including the civil nuclear field, in return for Iran
providing guarantees about its intentions and
capabilities concerning nuclear weapons. So, we will
listen very carefully to and reflect on this afternoon’s
speech by the new President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
On Iraq, the European Union now has a
comprehensive programme of engagement and has put
behind it divisions over the military action two and a
half years ago. We are supporting the goal of a
peaceful, prosperous, democratic and stable nation.
We are also giving very active support to the
Quartet’s efforts to secure a just and lasting peace
between Israel and the Palestinians, with two States
living side by side. We salute Prime Minister Sharon’s
brave decision to withdraw from the Gaza Strip, and
we salute President Mahmoud Abbas’s work to build
the first stage of an effective, viable State of Palestine.
In July, the European Union again suffered the
horror of a major terrorist atrocity. This time the target
was my country, the United Kingdom: its capital,
London. But none of us is safe from the threat of terror.
International terrorism requires an international
response; otherwise, we all pay the price for each
other’s vulnerabilities. The ratification of a
comprehensive treaty on terrorism is, therefore, at the
highest priority.
But the threat from terrorists and the political
instability they bring is made worse by the easy
availability of weapons in what has become an
anarchic, unregulated international trade. These same
weapons fuelled the killings in Rwanda and in Bosnia a
decade ago and are fuelling the conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur today.
We already have international instruments to regulate
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. We in the
European Union have a comprehensive arms control
regime. But I suggest to the General Assembly that the
time has now come for this Organization to embrace
the idea of an international arms trade treaty, which
would build on and strengthen existing initiatives.
It was in the killing fields of Europe, in two
successive wars, that the twin ideas of the United
Nations and of the European Union became imperative.
Today, the European Union’s commitment to the
United Nations is profound; it has never been stronger.
And it is reflected in what we give in voluntary
donations and to the regular budget and peacekeeping
operations.
The fundamental purpose of the United Nations
remains today what it was at its foundation: to remove
the scourge of war, to reaffirm the worth of the human
person and to promote social progress and better
standards of life. In this changed and changing world,
it is the responsibility of us all to ensure that this
Organization has the powers and the resources to
achieve all these aims.Your election, Sir, as
President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session comes at a significant moment in the history of
the United Nations. The outcome document adopted by
our heads of State or Government shortly after the
beginning of the session represents the culmination of
a long process. It started with the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. It
continued with the Secretary-General’s “In larger
freedom” report, and the efforts of your distinguished
predecessor to synthesize those ideas for the
consideration of Member States. We thank all of those
involved for their dedicated efforts.
We are united in our commitment to
multilateralism; that is a good foundation for our
further efforts. All countries, especially those from the
developing world, played a significant role in the
negotiations on the outcome document. Much was
achieved; much has been left out. There are
foundations on which we have to build, but there are
also shortcomings which we need to correct in the
process of implementation. A notable omission is the
theme of disarmament. Our struggle for multilaterally
negotiated, universal and verifiable nuclear
disarmament, in a time-bound manner, must continue
with vigour. The outcome document must serve as a
road map, with its main elements acting as signposts in
our discussions over the coming months under your
stewardship, Mr. President.
26

You, Sir, have suggested a very appropriate theme
for the general debate: “For a stronger and more
effective United Nations: follow-up to and
implementation of the High-Level Meeting in
September 2005”. We believe that that captures the
spirit and essence of all that we, co-partners in the
United Nations, wish to achieve.
India is the world’s largest democracy. There is
no historical precedent for a democracy of over 1
billion people. It is a tremendous undertaking. It is also
an exciting and inspiring one. We are breaking new
ground. The fact that Indian democracy works is a
political miracle. The credit goes to the Indian voters.
They ensure that India remains secular, democratic and
pluralistic.
We also believe that we need to do much more to
inculcate respect for and acceptance of pluralism. I am
reminded of what Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our
nation, said:
“I do not want my house to be walled in on all
sides and my windows to be stuffed. I want the
cultures of all the lands to be blown about my
house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be
blown off my feet by any.”
Humankind is now learning, to some extent, to
cope with the menace of terrorism. We all know that
that evil is increasingly directed at innocent civilians.
It invites the strongest condemnation. We all agree that
there can be no justification for terrorism in any form.
Whether we are considering terrorism or non-
proliferation, unless there is a non-selective, uniform
and sustained approach, the objectives of the
international community cannot be achieved. The
outcome document reflects the joint resolve of the
international community to fight terrorism. In our
judgement, there is no institutional setting that is more
capable than the United Nations of providing cohesion
and vigour to those efforts.
As a victim of terrorism over the past two
decades, India understands, and is fully supportive of,
the need for United Nations action on counter-
terrorism. A key aspect of the implementation of the
outcome document will be the development and
adoption by the General Assembly of a strong counter-
terrorism agenda to supplement the existing General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on that
issue. As an initiator of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, India welcomes,
and is fully committed to, the decision taken by heads
of State or Government to conclude negotiations on the
convention during this session of the General
Assembly.
The main purpose of the summit last week was to
review the implementation of the Millennium
Declaration. Unfortunately, most developing countries
will not be able to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, given current growth rates and
levels of international support. We must strengthen
efforts at both the national and the international levels
to take us closer to the development targets set out in
the Millennium document.
The Millennium Development Goals embody a
quantifiable vision of human dignity and solidarity, as
well as of important economic and social rights. Yet,
important objectives, such as employment, critical for
developing countries, are excluded. India’s use of
innovative financial instruments for rural
infrastructural investment, as well as our Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill — recently passed in
Parliament — I believe may be of interest to other
developing countries.
Most of us had much higher expectations of the
summit in the area of development, particularly in
agreeing on a definite timetable for the achievement of
the 0.7 per cent target for official development
assistance. Unfortunately, that has not been achieved,
and we have gone down to 0.5 per cent. That is equally
true of innovative sources of financing because
developing countries cannot break out of the cycle of
poverty without enhanced resource flows and the
application of science and technology to meet their
developmental challenges.
As India’s own economy develops — at about 8
per cent per year — and its technological advancement
comes of age, we are expanding our economic and
technical cooperation with the developing countries,
reinforcing our political solidarity. We have extensive
programmes in Africa and elsewhere in the developing
world. We are also happy to have contributed to the
South Fund for Development and Humanitarian
Assistance. The India-Brazil-South Africa Facility for
Alleviation of Poverty and Hunger is a good example
of South-South cooperation.
India has written off the debts of all the highly
indebted poor countries. Given India’s long-term
association with and commitment to Africa, we
27

welcome the recognition given by the High-level
Plenary Meeting to the need to urgently address the
special needs of our African brothers and sisters. On its
part, India has undertaken several initiatives in
partnership with Africa. The Techno-Economic
Approach for Africa-India Movement initiative is
designed to promote technology transfer to West
Africa. The pivotal role of scientific knowledge and
technology for economic development cannot be
overstated. India stands ready to share its experience
with the developing countries of Africa and elsewhere.
To bridge the digital divide within a country
itself, which sometimes becomes as problematic as it is
at the international level, wireless local loop
technology developed in India, which eliminates
expensive equipment and copper lines, has already
been used in several countries in Africa. India has put
together a connectivity mission in Africa, using fiber
optics and dedicated satellite. It will support tele-
education, telemedicine, e-commerce and e-
governance, infotainment, resource mapping and
meteorological services. India is also earmarking $1.5
billion for lines of credit to assist developing countries,
in particular those in Africa, in fighting HIV/AIDS and
other pandemics.
The international community needs to address
intellectual property regimes that seek to deny
technologies rather than facilitating their transfer to the
developing countries, including in the areas of
environment and public health.
Although both the Millennium Declaration and
the outcome document have spoken of exploiting the
beneficial aspects of globalization, we are yet to agree
on and implement the modalities for such a process.
Making the process of globalization fairer and more
equitable remains one of the main challenges of our
time. At present, the accumulation of wealth is
accompanied by the accumulation of poverty. Ruskin,
the nineteenth century British author, in his book Unto
this Last — a favourite of Mahatma Gandhi —
described such wealth as “the gilded index of a far-
reaching ruin, a wrecker’s pile of coin gleaned from a
beach to which he has beguiled an argosy.” Poverty is
sometimes attributed to lack of entrepreneurship. The
poor of the world prove their entrepreneurship every
day by ensuring their families’ physical survival.
Regrettably, the summit has not given a clear and
comprehensive direction to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) Doha Round of trade
negotiations. Formulas are not an end in themselves;
the end has to be a decrease in poverty and an increase
in employment. Therefore, equal treatment cannot be
forced on unequal partners. Special and differential
treatment remains an integral component of all trade
negotiations, including agriculture and non-agricultural
market access. India, as a member of the G-20, will
continue to promote in the WTO and elsewhere the
interests of all developing countries, including the
small island developing States, the least developed, the
landlocked and the highly indebted poor countries.
An achievement of the developing countries in
the Group of 77 is their hard-fought and reasonably
successful struggle for progress on systemic issues
critical to good international economic governance. We
have to build on that to ensure the reform of Bretton
Woods institutions and the restoration of the central
role of the United Nations in setting the international
economic agenda.
A change in the composition of the Security
Council is an imperative. The G-4 framework
resolution has made United Nations reform a central
issue that can no longer be ignored or disregarded.
There is a democracy deficit, as the Secretary-General
also said in July, in the governance of the United
Nations. There is not much point in speaking of
inclusiveness, transparency and democracy and leaving
the Security Council as a glaring exception to those
principles. Measures taken so far to revitalize the
General Assembly are simply not enough. Only by
electing permanent members committed to rendering
unto the General Assembly what is the General
Assembly’s can that be done. That is essential for a
world order in which decisions are optimal and
therefore acceptable, and the use of force minimal.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime Minister,
aptly stated: “Above all, we have to participate in the
growing structure of a world order. We cannot rely on
others to do it on our behalf.” One cannot argue in
favour of democracy in the rest of the world and leave
the Security Council undemocratic. Effectiveness is a
function of right decisions with broad support.
Negotiations on the outcome document and many
subsequent statements have demonstrated that, if more
could not be achieved on the development aspects of
trade in the document, it is because the Security
Council has not been made representative. If
institutional reform has been faltering and many are
28

doubtful of securing a just solution, it is because the
Security Council does not reflect the world of today. It
reflects the world of 1945.
The unsatisfactory progress on other issues shows
that critics of Security Council expansion in both the
categories were profoundly mistaken. Security Council
reform, far from hindering progress, was actually
helping it. In its absence, fears of intervention have
prevented agreement on a human rights council and
other issues. Therefore, Security Council reform
remains more necessary than ever and should
preferably, as the Secretary-General has said, be
completed by the end of the year. That should be our
main priority; I doubt if it is. Security Council reform
is not about any country’s prestige or power, but about
transforming the balance of power in the world. Our
experience in India from the freedom movement to
present times shows that diversity is a source of
strength and effectiveness. The same would be true of a
reformed Security Council. We would continue also to
engage actively in the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council, the restructuring of the Secretariat
and the setting-up of peacebuilding commission.
As we observe the sixtieth anniversary of the
United Nations, I am reminded once again of the words
of India’s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, who
said at this very forum 45 years ago:
“During these past fifteen years the United
Nations has often been criticized for its structure
and for some of its activities. These criticisms
have had some justification behind them, but
looking at the broad picture I think that we can
definitely say that the United Nations has amply
justified its existence and repeatedly prevented
our recurrent crises from developing into war. It
has played a great role, and it is a little difficult
now to think of this troubled world without the
United Nations.” (A/PV.882, para. 110)
In the life of individuals as well as of institutions,
the completion of 60 years is a significant moment for
stocktaking — certainly in my part of the world. Even
as we reflect upon the functioning of this institution
since its inception in 1945, all of us gathered here look
forward to the realization of new hopes, aspirations
and, indeed, to a rejuvenated United Nations which is
fully geared to meet the myriad challenges of our times
and effectively contribute to the well-being and
development of humanity at large and to manage
change.
The vision which we have for a better world is
best described in the words of a great son of India, the
great poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was the first
Asian to be awarded the Nobel Prize in literature. I
shall end my statement by quoting a very famous text
of his:
“Where the mind is without fear and the head is
held high
Where knowledge is free
Where the world has not been broken up into
fragments by narrow domestic walls
Where words come out from the depth of truth
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its
way
Into the dreary desert sand of dead habit
Where the mind is led forward by thee
Into ever-widening thought and action
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my
country awake.”It is my unique pleasure to
praise His Excellency Ambassador Dan Gillerman, my
emissary to the United Nations, who is in the Chair at
present, upon his election to the post of Vice-President
at this session of the General Assembly, and to wish
him much success.
These are optimistic times in the Middle East.
The iron wall that has defined Israel's relations with
most of the Arab and Muslim world for generations, is
coming down. Israel's contacts with Arab and Muslim
States are growing at a rate never seen before.
Countries like Pakistan and others that in the past
refused to acknowledge our shared humanity, today
extend their hands in friendship and recognition.
Relations with key Muslim States, such as Turkey, are
flourishing, while our peaceful ties with both Egypt
and Jordan are constantly improving.
Here in New York this week, I have had the
honour of meeting with more than 10 of my colleagues
from the Arab and Muslim world - a number
unthinkable just two years ago. Those meetings have
been friendly, as is only fitting for countries that are
not in conflict - either territorially, or economically.
Israel welcomes this new readiness for contact, and we
encourage our neighbours to build on the foundations
that we are now laying. Contacts between Israel and its
Arab and Muslim neighbours are good for the region,
and good for peace.
We all share a common interest in building a
region of tolerance and cooperation - a region where
the moderates have the initiative, not the extremists,
whose violence has set the agenda for so long. Indeed,
those who genuinely wish to help the Palestinians and
to bring them the benefits of peace and prosperity must
realize that building contacts and cooperation with
Israel is a crucial element in that process.
Possibilities for cooperation abound. In fields as
diverse as agriculture, health, the environment,
transportation and electricity, the potential benefits of
Middle East regional cooperation are immense. Such
cooperation can bring tangible and immediate
economic benefits, as Israel's improving relations with
Jordan and Egypt have shown.
Unfortunately, many of our ties with the Arab and
Muslim world are still deep in the shadows, hidden
from the public eye. Today, I call on my Arab and
Muslim colleagues to bring our contacts out into the
light of day, so that our peoples may understand our
8

shared desire to work with each other to bring peace
and prosperity to our region. I call on the leaders of the
Arab and Muslim world, to join us in speaking to our
populations of peace rather than conflict, of reasons to
cooperate, rather than reasons to boycott.
In November of this year, I will sit alongside my
Arab and Muslim colleagues at two international
gatherings: the World Summit on the Information
Society, in Tunisia; and the summit of the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership, in Barcelona. I call upon
the international community and my Arab and Muslim
counterparts to work together with us to ensure that
those meetings result in concrete projects that will help
reinforce our peace efforts on the ground.
This is also the time for the international
community to renew its investment in the future of the
Middle East by reviving the multilateral track of the
Middle East peace talks.
Just one week ago, Israel completed the
evacuation of all Israeli communities in the Gaza Strip.
Entire families - many of whom had lived and tilled
those lands for three generations - were called upon
by their Government to leave and to begin their lives
anew. Today, there are no more Israelis in Gaza. Israeli
military rule is now over. Responsibility for the affairs
of Gaza and its residents is now in Palestinian hands.
Israel's actions have opened the door to a new future,
and we invite our neighbours to walk with us together
through that door.
We are committed to the road map, and we wish
to get back to its full implementation. To do that, we
need a partner. A partner who is committed, as we are,
to the peaceful resolution of our differences, and to the
democratic and universal principles on which peace is
founded.
Israel attaches great importance to the Palestinian
assumption of responsibility. In it lies the key to
progress towards peace. The transfer of responsibility
for Gaza provides the Palestinian side with the chance
to take their fate into their own hands; an opportunity
not just to say that they want to govern, but to show
that they are ready and able to do so. Gaza, we hope, will
serve as a model for how the Palestinian Authority can
build a functioning, democratic and peaceful society.
Recognizing the significance of this moment,
Israel is taking great pains to ensure that Palestinian
leader Mahmoud Abbas is given every opportunity to
establish his authority. We want to promote conditions
that will benefit ordinary Palestinians, without posing a
security threat to Israel.
Israel has expressed its strong support for
international aid and assistance for the social and
economic development of Gaza, and we are committed
to facilitating those efforts. Constructive international
engagement is crucial to the Palestinian Authority's
success. The international community's priority now
must be ensuring that the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions can deliver the services and outcomes their
people and ours expect and deserve.
Economic reconstruction, of course, is not
enough. The Palestinian Authority must also deliver on
its commitment to end the campaign of terror against
Israel. For Israel, security is an issue on which we will
never compromise. We insist on the end of terror and
the dismantlement of its infrastructure, for the safety of
our citizens, and so that our peace efforts can succeed.
Turning Gaza into a model of success requires
that the Palestinian Authority act to promote and
protect democracy from its enemies. Here, as with
security, there is no room for discounts. Simply
holding elections is no guarantee of moderation and
responsible government.
Two days ago in Gaza, the terrorist organization
Hamas held a rally of 10,000 armed men dedicated to a
holy war against Israel. Like Al-Qaida and the other
organizations in the global network of terror, Hamas
seeks to destroy everything that the international
community and the moderates in our region seek to
build: tolerance, democracy and peace. Hamas is
responsible for the deliberate murder of hundreds of
Israeli civilians, amongst them scores of women and
children. Israel cannot and will not grant legitimacy to
such an organization. We will not cooperate with its
desire to participate in the forthcoming Palestinian
elections. And we call on the international community
to make clear its own opposition to the inclusion of
such terrorists in the democratic process. If Gaza is
indeed to be the positive model we all wish to see, then
it is those who promote dialogue, not violence, who
must be empowered.
The central threat to global security and to
renewed momentum towards dialogue and peace in the
Middle East today is Iran and its nuclear ambitions. As
the speech before this Assembly by the newly elected
president of Iran so clearly demonstrated, Iran's fanatic
regime remains determined to proceed with its nuclear
weapons programme. Israel welcomes the efforts of the
international community - in particular France, Britain
and Germany, backed by the United States - to deny Iran
the ability to terrorize the world with nuclear weapons.
The Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency is meeting at this very moment
in Vienna to discuss this urgent matter. I call on them
to stop this evil regime from acquiring nuclear
weapons. The security and stability of the entire globe
is at stake. This is why it is essential and urgent that
the Security Council take action. The international
community must rally as one and use all the means at
its disposal to stop Iran before it goes nuclear. We must
not allow the fate of mankind to rest in the hands of the
tyrants of Tehran.
In January of this year, this Assembly convened
in special session to commemorate the Holocaust and
pay tribute to the brave soldiers and nations who freed
European Jewry and the world from the calamity of
that darkest nightmare. Israel commends the
community of nations for standing up in unison on this
anniversary in commitment to the cry "never again".
We commend the Secretary-General's and this
Assembly's recognition that Holocaust remembrance
must be a universal commitment. Ultimately, it is only
the determined defence of the universal values of
tolerance and the sanctity of each human life that will
protect us from tyranny and extremism.
In this spirit, Israel calls on the General
Assembly to adopt a resolution initiated by Israel and
other like-minded countries commemorating the
Holocaust and calling for global educational efforts to
ensure that its lessons are learnt. Especially today, the
day the world's greatest Nazi-hunter, Simon
Wiesenthal, has passed away, we are reminded that the
Holocaust is passing from human memory to history.
As the generation of survivors leaves us, who will tell
their story, if not us?
The special session to commemorate the
Holocaust is only one example, of the welcome shift in
the attitude of this institution towards Israel. Our recent
election as Vice-President of this Assembly is another.
I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
unique contribution to this positive trend. Israel's
relations with the United Nations are better today than
they have ever been. Nevertheless, they are still far
from what they should be.
I call on all the States gathered here to examine
how they too can contribute to promoting a more
balanced and constructive United Nations approach to
Israel. The United Nations cannot be true to its own
lofty and universal principles, if it continues to waste
scarce resources and serve as a forum of hostility and
prejudice against one of its own.
The United Nations was born of the noble vision
to bring the ideals of peace, security and human rights
to all peoples. Sadly, reality of the United Nations
remains far removed from the United Nations ideal.
Major reform is urgent and crucial. Israel joins our
fellow Member States and their peoples in the desire to
see the United Nations fulfil the vision of its founders;
to see the United Nations serving as a force for good in
meeting the many challenges of our age.
Israel seeks to take its rightful place as a country
with full and equal rights in this institution. We seek to
realize our full potential to contribute to the global
agenda. This is why I have decided to present for the
first time Israel's candidacy for membership on the
Security Council.
It was the wisest leader of ancient Israel, King
Solomon, who wrote, in the book of Ecclesiastes, "For
everything there is a season: a time to weep and a time
to laugh; ... a time to love and a time to hate; a time
for war and a time for peace." This is a time for peace.
A time for the leaders of the world to work together to
bring the blessings of opportunity, peace and prosperity
to all humanity.
As the Jewish New Year dawns upon us, I extend
on behalf of the Jewish people greetings of peace and
brotherhood to our Muslim and Arab neighbours and to
all nations.Sixty years ago,
Prime Minister Peter Fraser of New Zealand told
representatives to the San Francisco Conference that its
sole aim should be
“the setting up of a world organization that will
really work, and that will be the background for
an orderly progress towards security, prosperity
and happiness for all the people of all nations”.
The new organization would only work, he said, if its
members were determined to stand by their
commitments and principles.
Today the essential concept of the United Nations
remains robust. We can be justly proud of its
achievements in many areas including humanitarian
assistance, development and peacekeeping. But we
have collectively underperformed in others, sometimes
with tragic results.
Our task this sixtieth anniversary is twofold: first,
to recommit ourselves as Member States to the
enduring vision and values of the Charter and,
19

secondly, to retool the United Nations machinery to
meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) provides
the blueprint for the way forward. New Zealand would
have liked more progress in a number of areas, such as
more detailed agreement on the establishment of the
Human Rights Council and more authority to the
Secretary-General to manage resources in return for
greater accountability. We deeply regret the failure to
endorse further disarmament and non-proliferation
measures.
But we are encouraged by the many significant
advances, including recognition of the need for more
and better aid, establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, a doubling of resources for the Office of
the Commissioner for Human Rights and the
recognition of our shared “responsibility to protect”.
We have as our theme for the General Assembly
implementation of our summit undertakings. We share
accountability for getting the job done. I shall confine
my comments here to the results of the summit.
New Zealand is pleased with the Summit
Outcome as it relates to development. It represents a
shared commitment by all Member States to the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
recognizes the important partnership between
developed and developing countries in the effective use
of aid.
This year New Zealand has increased its
development assistance by 23 per cent. Our official
development assistance (ODA) programme has a focus
on poverty elimination, with a core, but not exclusive,
focus on the Pacific. We strive to address aid
effectiveness, the particular problems faced by small
island developing States, HIV/AIDS, the empowerment
of women, sexual and reproductive health and rights,
education for all, sustainable development and trade
access.
On trade, we look forward to an ambitious
outcome across all aspects of the Doha Development
Agenda, including in agriculture, improved market
access, the elimination of export subsidies and
substantial reductions in trade distorting domestic
support. Improving the coherence of trade policies and
development initiatives remains a critical element in
achieving the MDGs.
New Zealand welcomes the decision to establish
a Peacebuilding Commission to help break the cycle of
conflict by better coordinating long-term international
recovery efforts and ensuring sustained political
attention to those who need it. We must now move
swiftly to get the Commission up and running by
December this year. We look to the General Assembly
President to take a lead in holding consultations to
achieve this. The core elements of the framework have
already been discussed at length and in detail. With
good will and determination, we can surely arrive at
agreement within the next few weeks on a package.
This should ensure balanced membership and flexible
reporting arrangements. We would caution against
raising the bar for assistance too high, and we hope
that all States in need of help will be able to approach
the Commission.
Our leaders have spoken with one voice and
unequivocally to condemn all forms of terrorism. We
must build on this and honour our undertaking to
conclude negotiations on the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism at this session.
New Zealand will continue to work closely with our
friends in the Pacific region to improve our collective
abilities to identify, prevent or respond to terrorist
threats. Consolidating reporting requirements created
by Security Council resolutions would, we believe, be
one step towards enhancing the counter-terrorism
programme of the United Nations. We think it very
important that Member States should now support the
Secretary-General’s counter-terrorism strategy.
One of the most far-reaching achievements of the
summit, as many countries have acknowledged, is our
collective acceptance that there is a responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. We must now
all be prepared to assist the United Nations in
establishing the early warning capability referred to in
our outcome document. It is vital that, when the need
arises, we give effect to our resolve and follow the
principles we have agreed upon.
In this context, New Zealand wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to ending impunity for those
responsible for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community. Adoption of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court was an
historic moment for the United Nations and one that
demonstrated the breadth and depth of political will to
end impunity and to secure the rule of law.
20

The absence of any reference to a commitment to
end impunity or of any acknowledgement of the
International Criminal Court’s central contribution to
this goal is one of several telling silences in our
summit outcome.
We are particularly pleased that leaders have
recognized the need to conclude, during this session,
negotiations on the draft protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
This will be a major priority for New Zealand. We call
on all Member States to contribute constructively to
this process, so that we can reach agreement on a
protocol and demonstrate our full support for the work
of United Nations personnel in the field.
New Zealand welcomes the emphasis on human
rights in the outcome document. That the budget of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is
to be doubled and her Office strengthened is an
overdue recognition of the gap between expectations of
delivery and resourcing.
While progress has been made through the
summit decision to establish a Human Rights Council,
we regret that the opportunity was lost to reach
agreement on details of the Council’s mandate and
operation, despite the support of a great majority of
Members for such a package. A small minority cannot
be allowed to veto the establishment of the Council.
Over the next weeks we must redouble our efforts
to translate that broad support into specifics on what
the Council will look like and on its mandate. We shall
look to the President to set a work programme that will
aim for agreement on the details.
Our second human rights priority for the sixtieth
session is to see negotiations completed on the draft
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities.
The constructive and collegial spirit of delegations in
the Ad Hoc Committee on the rights of persons with
disabilities has been extraordinary. New Zealand is
confident that it will be possible to conclude the
negotiations in 2006 if the Ad Hoc Committee is
enabled to meet for three weeks next January.
Our ability to strengthen the United Nations
across the board in development, security and human
rights will be enhanced by implementing summit
undertakings on Secretariat and management reform.
We need particularly to improve the managerial
effectiveness and accountability of the Secretary-
General. He should be given, as he has requested, the
tools that he needs to manage the Secretariat.
We strongly support the review of all budgetary
and human resource rules and regulations and the
review of mandates. We support also the increased
focus on ensuring ethical conduct on the part of all
United Nations personnel. We believe a system-wide
code of ethics and an independent ethics office would
facilitate that. New Zealand also welcomes the
commitment to strengthening the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services.
The outcome document calls for early reform of
the Security Council, and the General Assembly is to
review progress on this issue by the end of the year.
New Zealand continues to believe that the Security
Council needs to be more effective and more
representative for the twenty-first century, although we
have no illusions about the difficulties of reaching
agreement on this.
We should in the meantime renew our efforts to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
For those many Member States who rarely, if ever,
occupy a non-permanent seat on the Council, there
should be other ways to participate in Council
decisions and contribute to discussions.
We, as Member States, have shown in finalizing
the summit outcome a mixture of courage and
creativity on the one hand and of stubbornness and
hesitation on the other. The implementation period
ahead gives us a second chance to make good on those
moments when we allowed agreements to slip through
our fingers. We put our trust in our President to set up
the structures for ongoing work and to be the catalyst
to motivate and energize us.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the much
valued contribution that former President Ping made
over the last year, and we thank him.In no way can today’s discussion be called
routine. We are faced with summing up the preliminary
results of the large-scale United Nations reforms that
have been launched and designating the main thrust for
the work of the entire system of United Nations
institutions in implementing the outcome document of
the 2005 world summit. We propose to structure the
work of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly in
such a manner as to facilitate the broadest possible
agreement on a number of conceptual issues related to
strengthening the United Nations that will, to a large
degree, determine our ability to enhance the
manageability of international trends in an era of
globalization, and better respond to its new
accompanying threats and challenges.
An analysis of the experience of the United
Nations over the sixty years of its existence, with all
the vagaries of the post-war, cold war and post-cold
war world order, gives us much food for thought and
many conclusions. I would like to share some of that
with you from the viewpoint of the Russian Federation.
As the most representative international
institution with a universal mandate, the United
Nations has been and remains a major integration
factor in global politics. The success of the United
Nations is our success and its failures are our failures.
But ultimately the balance of its work is, we believe,
definitely positive. It is primarily due to this
Organization that we have managed to avoid a new
threat of  world war and a nuclear disaster and have
been able to prevent and settle dozens of military
conflicts. At present, the United Nations mechanisms
continue to be a means of constructive cooperation
touching upon all spheres of human activity.
The greater interdependence of the modern world
has not made it more secure. The standoff between
East and West has been replaced by numerous crises
and conflicts that until recently had remained latent,
left on the periphery of the interests of the two super-
Powers. Some of those conflicts are becoming real or
potential sources of international terrorism, feeding
transborder crime and drug trafficking, which are
closely related to it. Humanity faces the threat of the
uncontrolled spread of weapons of mass destruction
and the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. Again the world is witnessing genocide and
humanitarian disasters. All of this presents immediate
danger to each and every one of us.
11

In that context, the enormous potential of the
United Nations is in greater demand, primarily in
ensuring peace and security on a collective and, more
importantly, on a legitimate legal basis. The
Organization has at its disposal an entire arsenal of
resources enabling it to coordinate the actions of the
international community, to combine political efforts
with those in the social, economic and humanitarian
areas, as well as in the field of protection of human
rights and the environment and other spheres. We
should develop these assets through the concerted
efforts of all States. Russia considers this task to be a
strategic core element of its foreign policy.
The events of the first years of the new
millennium reaffirm the validity of the conclusions
drawn by the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change and the Secretary-General, that is, that a
stronger United Nations and a better use of its
multilateral advantages are an essential instrument to
build a balanced, safe international system, based on
respect for the unique features of every country, their
sovereign equality and collective responsibility. There
is no reasonable alternative to this.
Multilateral mechanisms should also play a key
role in resolving the issues of disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
based on strict compliance with the relevant
international agreements. United Nations achievements
include Security Council resolution 1540 (2004),
initiated by Russia, and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
which establishes the legal basis for preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of terrorists.
It is now crucial to prevent an arms race in outer
space. I remind the Assembly that Russia has assumed
the obligation not to be the first to launch any type of
new weapon into space and has called upon other
countries possessing space capabilities to join in this
measure to keep outer space peaceful. It is time to take
steps to enhance transparency and build confidence in
this area.
The legal basis for countering new threats,
primarily terrorism, is being reinforced. The adoption
at the recent Security Council summit of resolution
1624 (2005), initiated by the United Kingdom, is a
new, important step forward. It places outside the law
not only the terrorists, their accomplices and those who
finance them, but also the individuals inciting terrorist
acts. This Security Council decision should put an end
to attempts to engage the mass media to propagandize
and justify terrorism.
We anticipate that the General Assembly will also
contribute to the fight against terrorism and will
promote completion of the negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
as soon as possible. The fight against terrorism must be
continued most decisively. Each of us should critically
assess his or her efforts in this area.
The realities are that while the sanctions against
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities are still in force, the supplying of arms and
material and other kinds of assistance to the fighters
continues. The geographical scope of their activities is
expanding. For many countries, including Russia, this
is tangible on their own soil. Extremists who are not
directly linked to Al-Qaida  are also stepping up their
activities in various parts of the world. This requires
strengthening of cooperation between States and the
1267 sanctions Committee, the 1540 Committee and,
of course, the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Furthermore, we believe that the
compilation of a consolidated list of all terrorists and
terrorist organizations, whether they are associated in
any way with Al-Qaida or not, cannot be postponed.
The development of criteria for the use of force
in accordance with the United Nations Charter is
another pressing issue. Such criteria, when agreed
upon, could be useful if they become a kind of
benchmark for consideration by the Security Council
of various crisis situations. At the same time, it is clear
that these criteria cannot be applied automatically. The
Security Council would authorize the use of force on a
case-by-case basis, as called for in the Charter.
Another equally important topic is that of States,
in exercising their Charter right to individual and
collective self-defense, to include self-defense in case
of an external terrorist attack or the imminent threat of
such attack. Russia, like other States that have become
targets of terrorist attacks originating beyond their
borders, has no right to err in the eyes of its citizens,
who have entrusted their security to us. We anticipate
that those critical issues will be given due attention at
this session of the General Assembly.
Above all, force should not be used to oppose
law. It can be an effective tool to ensure the rule of law
12

in crisis situations. It is a tool to be used in
extraordinary cases in which vital, legally protected
values and interests of the entire international
community, or certain of its members, are in jeopardy.
Unfortunately, in the preparations for the 2005
world summit, insufficient attention was given to
seeking solutions to those and other important issues
and to finding a way to common understanding. Thus,
that task must remain a top priority of our agenda.
Much remains to be done in terms of
development and the eradication of poverty, epidemics,
famine and illiteracy. Such action would be the
strongest way to ensure global stability and eliminate
the breeding grounds of extremism of all kinds. Russia
endorses all initiatives aimed at attaining the
Millennium Goals and will enhance its contribution to
resolving those urgent issues. The success of our
concerted efforts to support development greatly
depends on the efficacy of the Peacebuilding
Commission to be established. The Commission will
achieve the required results if it is more than just
another debating society and if it can be a mechanism
facilitating the greater coordination of the programmes
and the projects of all the participants in development
assistance, including the World Bank Group, the
International Monetary Fund, regional development
banks, other multilateral and bilateral donors and, of
course, recipient countries.
The dramatic events of the last six months have
revealed the sensitivity of the issue of Security Council
reform for the majority of Member States. Guided
above all by its interest in ensuring the Security
Council’s effectiveness, Russia continues to support
possible modifications of that key organ on the basis of
well-conceived and mutually acceptable decisions.
United Nations Members have made the wise decision
to continue negotiations, rather than pushing for a vote
that might split the Organization.
I recall the striking words: the United Nations
was created not to make heaven on Earth but to save
the Earth from hell. Indeed, the United Nations is not
an ideal body, but the best that humanity was able to
create on the ashes of two world wars. With the help of
the United Nations, we are able to effectively counter
threats to peace and security in the context of evolving
geopolitical realities.
Today, mankind is facing the challenges of
globalization. It is not a question of whether we should
accept those challenges or not, but of how we should
respond to them, and on the basis of what principles.
The 2005 world summit decisions outline the general
direction for our efforts. As a permanent member of the
Security Council and the next President of the Group
of Eight, Russia, together with other States, will
continue to strive to strengthen the collective
underpinnings of global politics and to enhance
mechanisms for multilateral cooperation. On behalf
of President Bush and all of the American people,
welcome to New York City.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, my fellow
citizens have experienced the compassion of the United
Nations. I want to thank Secretary-General Annan for
mobilizing the support of this institution. I also want to
thank the representatives of the 126 countries that have
offered assistance in our relief efforts. The United
States will never forget their generosity in our time of
need.
In moments of tumultuous historical change,
leaders must become architects of a better world. We
must survey the new international landscape, lay firm
foundations of moral principle and build institutions
8

that reflect our unique moment in history. It is those
institutions that enable citizens of conviction to lead us
ever closer to the ideals of justice that stir every soul:
the universal desire for security, prosperity, liberty and
dignity.
Sixty years ago was just such a time of
transformation. After one of the greatest cataclysms in
world history, the United States joined with visionary
builders from over 50 countries to create the United
Nations. We placed the enduring principles of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the foundation of
the United Nations Charter. We built an institution that
has helped to support a peaceful world order for six
decades. Today, however, with the end of the cold war
and the rise of globalization and the emergence of new
threats, the very terrain of international politics has
shifted beneath our feet. In this new world we must
again embrace the challenge of building for the future.
The time to reform the United Nations is now. We
must seize this opportunity together. Chapter I, Article
1, of the Charter of the United Nations proclaims the
four purposes of the United Nations, great aspirations
that have stood the test of time. But consider what
different forms they take today, in 2005, as opposed to
1945, when they were first declared.
The first purpose of the United Nations is to help
maintain international peace and security. In 1945 the
most serious threats to peace and security emerged
between States, and were largely defined by their
borders. Today, however, the greatest threats we face
emerge within States, and melt through their borders:
transnational threats like terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons, pandemic disease and trafficking in human
beings.
The second purpose of this institution, as written
in the United Nations Charter, is to develop friendly
relations among nations, based on equal rights and the
self-determination of all peoples. In 1945, a life of
liberty and dignity was more an aspiration than a
reality for a majority of the world’s people. Today,
however, more nations than ever have enshrined the
principles of democracy and human rights — a true
moral triumph that will be complete only when all
individuals are secure in their basic freedoms.
The third purpose of the United Nations is to
achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems. In 1945, the fear was that
strong, aggressive States, eager and able to expand
their frontiers with force, would be the primary cause
of international problems. Today, however, it is clear
that weak and poorly governed States, unwilling or
incapable of ruling their countries with justice, are the
principal source of global crises, from civil war and
genocide to extreme poverty and humanitarian disaster.
The final purpose of the United Nations, as the
Charter states, is to be a centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations in the attainment of common ends.
In 1945, the world’s leaders joined together to build an
institutional partnership that could address the shared
challenges of their time. Today, faced with the realities
of a new world, we must transform the United Nations
to meet the shared challenges of our time.
The Members of this body must work together to
strengthen security in a world threatened by stateless
extremists. Today, I call on the nations of the world to
ratify the comprehensive convention on terrorism. No
cause, no movement and no grievance can justify the
intentional killing of innocent civilians and non-
combatants. That is unacceptable by any moral
standard. It is time for every Member of the United
Nations to outlaw acts of international terrorism.
We must also work together to promote
prosperity and development in a world of great
potential. The United States is committed to the
Millennium Development Goals. And at the Monterrey
Conference three years ago all nations agreed that
development must be a two-way street. Donor
countries have a responsibility to increase their
assistance to developing nations. And developing
nations have a responsibility to govern justly, advance
economic liberty and invest in their people. The
Monterrey Consensus is working.
Now is not the time to revert to old, failed
thinking about development. Countries representing
three quarters of the developing world’s population are
on a pace to meet the targets of the Millennium
Declaration by 2015.
And, as President Bush said on Wednesday, the
United States is prepared to take new action to
accelerate this progress: we will eliminate all tariffs
and subsidies that distort free trade — as other nations
do the same.
Members of the United Nations must work
together as well to support democracy in a world of
expanding liberty. To advance this common purpose, in
9

2004 President Bush proposed the creation of a
democracy fund. With the broad support of this body,
we have made it a reality. The Fund is now receiving
donations in cash and in kind from countries large and
small that wish to help other nations lay the
foundations of democracy. Showing its leadership as
the world’s largest democracy, India made the generous
opening pledge of $10 million.
Now, to be sure, when speaking about democracy,
the United States has every reason for humility. After
all, it was only in my lifetime that America guaranteed
the right to vote for all its citizens. Obviously, the path
to democracy is long and imperfect and different for
every nation. But the principles of democracy are
universal, as is the desire for them. And the United
Nations must support every country that embraces the
challenge of self-government. In Afghanistan, Iraq,
Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and throughout the
world, peoples who want to build democracy deserve
our help.
The many goals we share are great indeed. And
the United Nations has a major role to play in their
achievement. But for this institution to become an
engine of change in the twenty-first century, it must
now change itself. The United Nations must launch a
lasting revolution of reform.
The United Nations summit declaration
(resolution 60/1), which every head of State endorsed
this week, expresses a global consensus on the fact that
reform is imperative. I want to thank former General
Assembly President Ping for his tireless hard work.
Our challenge now, under President Eliasson’s
leadership, is to enact the vital reforms that will make
the United Nations more accountable to its Members,
more suited to new challenges and more faithful to its
founding purposes.
The United States welcomes the commitment of
all leaders to establish a new Peacebuilding
Commission. Now, we must embrace the difficult task
of implementing that vision. A Peacebuilding
Commission should plan for post-conflict missions
before crises erupt. And it must help to coordinate
reconstruction efforts after the fighting stops. In a
world threatened by civil strife, the United Nations
needs to be better prepared to help countries rebuild in
the aftermath of conflict.
We are also pleased that the world’s leaders have
recognized the importance of establishing a new
Human Rights Council. But it will take a lot of hard
work in the coming months to realize that goal. The
Human Rights Council must have fewer members, less
politics and more credibility. And it should never,
never, empower brutal dictatorships to sit in judgement
of responsible democracies. The Human Rights
Council must have the moral authority to condemn all
violators of human rights, even those that sit among us
in this Hall.
Finally, we welcome the promise of the world’s
leaders to make the United Nations a more effective
and a more principled institution. As President Bush
said on Wednesday (see A/60/PV.2), the United
Nations must stand for integrity and live by the high
standards it sets for others. For the United Nations to
champion democracy more legitimately, we must
increase the transparency and the accountability of this
institution. For the United Nations to promote
prosperity more credibly, tougher ethics rules and
greater internal oversight are needed to ensure the
highest professional standards. And to make the United
Nations relevant to the challenges of today, the purpose
and the performance of all United Nations programmes
must be reviewed thoroughly, consistently and
comprehensively.
Our fellow citizens deserve a United Nations that
commands their respect and is worthy of their hard-
earned tax dollars. In a democracy, leaders must be
able to justify that their people’s money is indeed being
well spent.
Real progress on those fundamental reforms will
prove that the United Nations can address greater
issues of change, in particular the reform of the
Security Council. We want that important body to
reflect the world as it is in 2005, not as it was in 1945.
The United States is open to expanding the Security
Council. We have long supported a permanent seat for
Japan. And we believe that developing countries
deserve greater representation on that body. All this
would make for a more effective Security Council.
And the Security Council must be effective. It
must be able to deal with great challenges such as
terrorism and nuclear proliferation, especially when it
faces real threats and when countries such as Iran
threaten the effectiveness of the global non-
proliferation regime. When diplomacy has been
10

exhausted, the Security Council must become involved.
Questions about Iran’s nuclear activities remain
unanswered, despite repeated efforts by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. And after
agreeing to negotiate with Europe, Iran unilaterally
walked away from the talks and restarted its nuclear
programmes. Iran should return to the negotiations
with the European Union three and abandon forever its
plans for a nuclear-weapons capability.
The experience of recent years has reinforced the
universal truth that international institutions are only as
strong and effective and relevant as their members
choose to make them. The United Nations is no
different.
The United States believes in a United Nations
that is strong and effective. And we have ambitious
hopes for its future.
So in this year, as the United Nations marks its
sixtieth anniversary, let us recommit ourselves to
principled action. Let us embrace the same spirit of
creation that moved the builders and leaders of 1945.
And let us reform this great institution to meet the
challenges of a new era.First, I would like to salute
Mr. Jean Ping, the outgoing President of the General
Assembly, for the work he did to guide the General
Assembly as the nations of the world considered the
immensely important matters that led to the elaboration
of the outcome document that was adopted last night.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to preside over the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. We are confident that you will lead
the Assembly well as it confronts the challenge of
implementing the decisions taken during the
millennium review summit and remains seized of other
important matters that were not adequately addressed
in the outcome document.
Shortly before we convened here for the
millennium review summit, an important meeting of
Christian leaders took place in Washington, D.C. Those
leaders issued a communique entitled ìA Call to
Partnershipî, directed at our summit meeting. In part
the call says,
"At the urgent call of church leaders in the
southern hemisphere, we came together at the
Washington National Cathedral as Christian
leaders from diverse traditions and places, both
rich and poor, in the South and the North, united
in a common concern for those of us living in
poverty. We see their faces; we hear their voices;
they are a part of us, and we are a part of them."
As the United Nations reaches its sixtieth
anniversary, we give thanks for its work in
peacemaking and global reconciliation,
particularly the historic commitment to eradicate
poverty in the Millennium Declaration of 2000.
10

Five years have passed, and, despite the triumph
of principle, there has been a failure in practice.
In this communique, we offer our partnership to
the leaders gathered at the World Summit at the
United Nations in building a global movement to
make real the promises of the Millennium
Development Goals as a crucial step towards a
more just world for all God's children.
We believe that God calls us to place
people struggling with poverty at the centre of
our concern. Globalization has brought
unprecedented economic growth. At the same
time, one sixth of the world's people still fight
daily for survival under the crushing burden of
extreme poverty. The increasing concentration of
wealth in our world, while so many suffer, is a
scandal that impoverishes us all.
"We believe that the spirit of partnership
between rich and poor, exemplified in the MDGs,
is a way the world can address poverty in all its
dimensions. In particular, we support the goal of
a global partnership for development, and believe
that the Churches can make a unique contribution
to that partnership."
If nothing else, the fact that the religious leaders
who issued that call gathered from many parts of the
world to agree on a message to our summit Meeting
must remind us that the masses - the people who
elected us - entertain high expectations about the
United Nations. They see this Organization as their
pre-eminent partner in the continuing struggle to build
a better and humane world.
They challenge those of us who have the
privilege to represent our States in the United Nations
to build, strengthen and direct this world Organization
so that it can, indeed, play its role as a pre-eminent
partner of the peoples of the world in constructing a
better and more humane world.
Accordingly, I believe that we must view with the
greatest seriousness their conclusion that five years
have passed since we adopted the Millennium
Declaration and that, 'despite this triumph of principle,
there has been a failure in practice'.
Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the
destructive fury of the Second World War and the
villainous genocide committed during that war, the
United Nations was formed, in the words of the
Charter, "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind".
Responding to the universal demand for human
and peoples' rights, the founders declared that they
were forming the United Nations "to reaffirm faith in
the fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small" and to
"promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom".
As we gather here, in part to celebrate the sixtieth
anniversary of an international Organization
established to bring hope to the peoples of the world,
we cannot avoid asking some hard questions. That is
necessary if we are to live up to our obligation to
ensure that the United Nations discharges its
responsibilities, described by the religious leaders who
met at the Washington National Cathedral as
peacemaking, global reconciliation and the eradication
of poverty.
We must ask ourselves how well prepared the
United Nations is today, 60 years after it was
established, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; to protect and advance the fundamental
human rights of all; to protect and advance the dignity
and worth of each human person; to ensure equal rights
between men and women; to ensure equal rights
between nations large and small; and to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
We must ask - and answer honestly - whether
what we do as the United Nations is properly described
as a triumph of principle but a failure in practice, as the
religious leaders put it.
The reality is that, 60 years after the United
Nations was formed as a response to the appalling and
ghastly results of the crime of racism, we are still
confronted by the cancer of racism. Although the
United Nations has adopted important decisions on that
matter, and convened the necessary conferences to
unite the peoples of the world against racism, those
who continue to fall victim to that crime against
humanity would find it difficult to cite the instances
when the United Nations came to their aid.
Sixty years after the United Nations was formed,
the indecencies of war and violent conflict continue to
afflict innocent people, evidently because we, the
11

United Nations, lack the will to live up to the
commitment that was made when this Organization
was established.
Africans, who have been exposed to many violent
conflicts since the United Nations was formed, are
particularly keen for this Organization to live up to its
obligation to save succeeding African generations from
the scourge of war. Even as we speak, the United
Nations is faced with the urgent task of taking the
necessary action in CÙte díIvoire to help to bring a
lasting peace to that important African country,
opening the way to its reunification, the holding of
democratic elections and the promotion of social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
to use the words of the Charter.
A similar challenge faces this Organization with
regard to the restoration of lasting peace in Darfur in
the Sudan, building on the historic conclusion and
implementation of the Sudanese Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, signed in Nairobi, Kenya, earlier this year.
Only 11 years ago, we experienced a terrible
genocide in Rwanda, and thousands were killed in the
internecine conflict that took place in the Balkans.
Those who were exposed to the savagery would be
fully justified in concluding that the United Nations
had betrayed its commitment to the peoples of the
world.
I am certain that all of us are impatient to see an
end to the conflicts in the Middle East, including Iraq,
and in particular the restoration of the rights of the
people of Palestine, in the context of the successful
implementation of the road map.
While we welcome recent positive developments
in this regard, we must accept the reality that every day
that passes without the full implementation of the road
map only serves to point an accusing finger at us, the
United Nations, accusing us of not having done
everything we could to help secure the just and lasting
peace that is the right of the Palestinian, the Israeli and
the Arab peoples.
We have all recognized the serious and urgent
threat posed by international terrorism to all our
nations. We have all accepted the reality that we need a
multilateral response to that common threat. Yet we
have still not succeeded in arriving at a common
definition of that threat or identified its fundamental
causes.
The issues of non-proliferation and the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction are
matters of critical concern to all nations, both large and
small. Yet we failed to address those matters in the
outcome document adopted at the review summit last
night, even as the issue of nuclear weapons and their
non-proliferation is among the most prominent items in
world news and on the international agenda. None of
us could justly claim that our failure as the United
Nations to take specific decisions on these matters
served to enhance global security in the face of the
threat of weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the issue of Iran, we firmly believe
that negotiations should resume and that the matter be
settled within the framework of the provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and with the full participation of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
The gap between the rich and the poor is
becoming worse within and between countries, as
observed by the United Nations Development
Programmeís 2005 Human Development Report, which
states that the gap between the average citizen in the
richest and in the poorest countries is wide and is
getting wider. It states that in 1990 the average
American was 38 times richer than the average
Tanzanian, while today the average American is 61
times richer.
The same report states, on page 3,
"In 2003, 18 countries with a combined
population of 460 million people registered lower
scores on the human development index (HDI)
than in 1990 - an unprecedented reversal. In the
midst of an increasingly prosperous global
economy, 10.7 million children every year do not
live to see their fifth birthday, and more than 1
billion people survive in abject poverty on less
than a $1 a day."
Accordingly, if we pause and scan the road
travelled to judge whether we have succeeded in saving
the world from the scourge of war; whether we have
built a world that has reaffirmed faith in fundamental
human rights; whether we have created a world that
has restored the dignity and worth of the human
person - a world that has entrenched equal rights for
men and women and for nations, large and small - the
answer from the majority of the people of the world
may very well be a resounding "No".
12

The United Nations has adopted many decisions
intended to help address the various global challenges
that have persisted over the 60 years of its existence.
Accordingly, we have the necessary policies to address
the social, economic, political and other problems
facing humanity. We have also adopted comprehensive
and clear programmes to give effect to those policies
and have identified the resources required for their
implementation.
The questions we must answer are: why have we
not implemented these programmes, and what must be
done to correct the situation?
The process of globalization means that our
common world is more integrated today than it was
when the United Nations was formed 60 years ago.
Similarly, the interconnectedness of the issues of
peace, security, development and human rights has
never been more pronounced than it is today. All this
means that the imperatives that made it necessary and
correct to establish the United Nations as part of a
desirable system of global governance are that much
more compelling today, and that the necessary reform
of the Organization must take place to ensure that it
reflects the new global realities since it was formed
and that it is empowered to respond effectively to the
urgent challenges that face all humanity.
And yet, the painful paradox we face is that it
seems obvious that, over the years, there has been a
continuous erosion of the authority and prestige of the
United Nations and a sustained drift towards its
marginalization in terms of playing its rightful role, as
so clearly defined in the United Nations Charter. At its
sixtieth session, the General Assembly has the heavy
responsibility to reassert the critical need for the
United Nations to discharge its responsibilities as
spelled out in that Charter. Experience over the last 60
years has shown that, to address the criticism levelled
against the Organization by religious leaders ó that
there has been a triumph of principle and a failure in
practice ó we must be ready to engage in a sustained
struggle to ensure that the vision contained in the
United Nations Charter is actually translated into
reality.
As we engage in this struggle, we should say, as
did the religious leaders who met at the Washington
National Cathedral, that we are united in a common
concern for those of us living in poverty: "We see their
faces; we hear their voices; they are a part of us, and
we are a part of them."
Let me close by reiterating our deepest
sympathies and condolences to the Government and the
people of the United States in the wake of the death
and destruction wreaked by Hurricane Katrina.May I begin by extending my congratulations on your
election as the President of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session. I am confident that under your
guidance this session will achieve fruitful results. I also
wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere
respects to Mr. Jean Ping, President at the previous
session, and to the Secretary-General.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
end of the world war against fascism and the founding
of the United Nations. Just a few days ago in this Hall,
world leaders solemnly adopted the outcome document
of the High-level Plenary Meeting (resolution 60/1).
Now, it falls to us to fulfil the important and pressing
task of working towards a harmonious world of lasting
peace and common prosperity by translating that
document into action and turning fine words into
reality. This session should serve to promote peace,
harmony and common development.
We want peaceful development. Progress of
mankind needs a peaceful environment. Stability and
security of one country cannot be built on the
turbulence or crisis of another. Only a new security
concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality
and coordination will enable us to develop in peace and
safeguard peace through development.
We want harmonious development. To build a
better future is the long-cherished dream of mankind.
Any development strategy should be guided by a long-
term and holistic perspective instead of immediate and
sectoral benefits. Therefore, we should work together
for more democratic and law-based international
relations and a harmonious environment in which
countries respect one another, treat one another as
equals, and in which different cultures can emulate and
interchange with each other.
18

We want common development. No model of
development that benefits only a few countries or a
small group of people is acceptable or sustainable.
Countries should cooperate with each other more
closely so that economic globalization may yield
successful results, benefit-sharing and common
prosperity.
This session should serve to push forward
reforms of the United Nations and strengthen its role.
Having weathered 60 years of vicissitudes, the United
Nations needs multifaceted and multidimensional
reforms so as to be able to make a greater contribution
to mankind’s noble cause of peace and development.
The position of the United Nations as the core of
the world collective security mechanism must be
strengthened so that it can perform its duty of
safeguarding peace in a more effective way. China
supports the efforts to enhance the Organization’s
capacity on conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices. We also favour a greater role by the Secretary-
General in this respect and the fostering of a preventive
culture.
We support the efforts to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly with
regard to rapid deployment capacity and strategic
preparedness, as well as the capacity to fully mobilize
regional organizations and their resources under the
leadership of the Security Council.
China supports the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission to more effectively
coordinate United Nations efforts in the areas of
peacekeeping, post-conflict rehabilitation and
development. In that respect, the Economic and Social
Council and other development assistance agencies
should have an important role to play in the
Commission.
It has been our consistent position to oppose the
use or threat of force in international relations. We do
not support the reinterpretation or revision of the
provisions in the Charter of the United Nations related
to the right of self-defence. Should an occasion arise
that calls for the use of force, it is the Security Council
that should make sound judgements and take prudent
decisions as to the merits of the situation.
The international community should continue to
press ahead with the international process on arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation; safeguard
and enhance the authority and effectiveness of existing
multilateral treaties; give full scope to the role of the
United Nations and other international organizations in
the area of non-proliferation; and seek solutions to
related issues by political and diplomatic means.
The United Nations should be able to cope more
effectively with non-traditional security threats. We
welcome the comprehensive strategy on counter-
terrorism proposed by the Secretary-General, and we
hope to see the early conclusion of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, taking full
account of the concerns of various parties, particularly
developing countries.
In the effort to reduce and prevent large-scale
humanitarian crises, the international community
should strictly observe the United Nations Charter,
respect the opinions of the countries or organizations
concerned and, with the Security Council’s
authorization, explore, to the greatest extent possible,
peaceful settlement within the United Nations
framework. We oppose any rash intervention carried
out on the basis of the claim that a nation is unable or
unwilling to protect its own citizens.
Development should be a main focus of United
Nations reform. Although China is a low-income
developing country, it is prepared to contribute as
much as it can to international cooperation for
development. As President Hu Jintao announced at the
summit, China will take substantive steps in five areas.
We will join hands with all Members to advance
reforms in the area of development so as to facilitate
the resolution of development issues. The United
Nations should put in place a fair and rational
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) review
framework to assess progress made in various
countries and to monitor follow-up of international
cooperation and aid commitments. We support the
coordinating role of the Economic and Social Council
in development-related areas.
The Doha Round should embody development in
its focus, paying more attention and taking actions to
address the concerns of developing countries,
particularly with regard to agricultural produce and
special and differential treatment. China has decided to
grant zero-tariff treatment to some commodities from
39 least developed countries, which will cover the
majority of China’s imports from those countries.
19

China is in favour of incorporating the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS and the building of the
public health sector into the development programmes
and activities of various countries and of the United
Nations. We will be submitting at the current session a
draft resolution on strengthening global capacity-
building in the area of public health. In the next three
years, we plan to provide more aid and medicine to
developing countries for preventing and treating
malaria and other communicable diseases and to help
them establish and reform their public health systems
and train medical personnel.
The international community — particularly
developed countries — should take substantive steps to
help developing countries break the vicious circle of
debt. Such steps include substantial debt reduction and
the streamlining of debt relief procedures and
requirements. In the next two years, China will write
off or otherwise cancel the overdue portions, as of the
end of 2004, of interest-free or low-interest
Government loans owed by all heavily indebted poor
countries having diplomatic relations with China.
We call on the United Nations to give priority to
helping developing countries to strengthen their
capacity-building. China will help developing
countries train 30,000 people for various professions in
the next three years.
My country also favours setting a timetable for
developed countries to allocate 0.7 per cent of their
gross national income to official development
assistance. New fund-raising methods should be
explored so as to put more funds into development.
China pledges $10 billion in concessional loans
to developing countries in the next three years within
the framework of South-South cooperation.
The Charter of the United Nations grants the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
highly efficient, responsible and representative Council
serves the long-term interests of the United Nations
and the common interests of all its Member States.
China supports reform of the Security Council
aimed at strengthening its authority and efficiency and
improving its working methods. The representation of
developing countries, particularly African countries,
should be increased so that small and medium-sized
countries would have more say in the Council’s
decision-making. No reform proposal can work that
addresses only the concerns of a few countries,
disregarding the interests of the majority of countries,
and treats developing countries in Africa and in other
parts of the world unfairly.
China supports the principle of cooperation based
on democratic consultation. As reform will affect the
future of the United Nations and the interests of
various parties, there should be no artificial timeframes
or attempts to force decisions through a vote. Instead,
Member States should seek consensus through dialogue
and consultation and in accordance with the principle
of democratic international relations.
China embraces the spirit of unity and
cooperation. The United Nations family has 191
Members. Unity is the source of strength. We want
unity, not division. As long as Member States respect
one another’s interests, accommodate one another’s
concerns and show pragmatism and flexibility, we will
be able to find a reform path that is acceptable to all.
The current session should focus on Africa.
African countries make up a quarter of the United
Nations membership, and their populations account for
13 per cent of the world’s total population. If there is
no stability in Africa, the world will have no peace. If
Africa remains poor, there will be no development for
the world. The outcome document of the summit calls
for efforts to meet the special needs of Africa. I believe
that that is correct and necessary.
Despite the gratifying progress made in Africa in
recent years, conflicts in some of its regions have
persisted. The Security Council should pay special
attention to African problems and give them priority on
its agenda. That means not only devoting more Council
meetings to African issues, but also, and more
important, taking concrete actions to heed Africa’s
voice, respect its views and accommodate its concerns.
China applauds the mediation and good offices of
the African Union and other regional organizations
aimed at conflict settlement in Africa. We support
close cooperation between the Security Council and
those organizations by providing them with funds,
logistics and technical assistance to strengthen their
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
capacities.
African countries face difficulties in the area of
development, particularly in attaining the MDGs. More
20

than 300 million people are still living under the
poverty line. One third of all children are
malnourished. More than 30 million people are
suffering from HIV/AIDS. With less than 2 per cent of
the world’s economic aggregate, Africa is weighed
down by debts amounting to $300 billion. All of that
poses a challenge to the conscience of mankind.
The international community should reach a
global consensus on African development and help the
continent to achieve the MDGs on schedule by
implementing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Those who provide assistance must do
so in all sincerity and respect the right of African
countries to make their own decisions. Assistance must
also have a clear aim: to meet the basic and long-term
needs of the African people. Assistance is by no means
charity or a gift; it is a response to the call for mutual
benefit and common development. Furthermore, it is
our moral duty to help the needy and redress injustices.
In the twentieth century, Africa shook off
colonial rule and achieved national liberation. That was
an epoch-making event. The twenty-first century will
bring peace and development to Africa — it is
historically inevitable. The Chinese people will
continue to stand beside their African brothers and
sisters on that journey of historic significance.
The recently concluded Six-Party Talks in Beijing
on the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue have reached an
important consensus and issued a joint declaration,
marking an important step forward in the Talks and a
crystallization of the political will and diligence of the
parties concerned. It also reflects the common
aspiration of the international community. Because it
was so hard-won, this result needs to be especially
prized. We hope that the parties will continue to work
together to promote further progress in the Six-Party
Talks, resolve the nuclear issue on the Peninsula
through dialogue and by peaceful means, ensure lasting
peace and stability in the region and realize its
common goals for development and prosperity. The
Chinese Government will continue to make a positive
contribution in that regard.Please accept
my congratulations, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of this historic sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. I wish you every success. I would
also like to express my sincere thanks to the outgoing
President for his dedicated work at the fifty-ninth
session. I endorse the statement of the European Union
(EU) presidency.
The debate at last week’s summit highlighted one
important point, namely, that peace, development,
security and human rights are inseparably linked. One
cannot address human rights and security without also
addressing development. All of those issues are at the
very heart of our policies.
People are waiting for our solutions to the
pressing problems of development. We must achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. Of that we are
acutely aware, both in Germany and in Europe. The EU
plan to reach the 0.7 per cent official development
assistance goal by 2015, and the Group of Eight (G-8)
commitments made at Gleneagles, substantially
strengthen the financial basis of our work.
We are also willing to forge new paths by making
use of innovative financing mechanisms.
At the same time, frameworks establishing fair
conditions for international trade are a prerequisite if
poorer States are to share the benefits of globalization.
The EU is leading the way with its “Everything But
Arms” initiative, which grants the least developed
countries duty-free and quota-free market access. In
that context, we must do all we can to make the
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, to be held in Hong Kong in December, a
success. Only in that way can we bring the Doha round
negotiations to a successful conclusion.
We also know that excessive indebtedness curbs
growth and development. The realignment of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt
Initiative after 1999 has considerably reduced the
indebtedness of some 27 States. Germany has to date
forgiven €6.5 billion of debt and has earmarked a
further €4 billion for the continuation of the HIPC
initiative.
Debt relief is, however, dependent on all creditors
spreading the burden fairly among themselves. We are
alarmed by the fact that commercial and State creditors
outside the Paris Club are doing less and less to live up
to their responsibilities. I would like to seize this
opportunity to call for your support at the forthcoming
annual meeting of the Bretton Woods institutions, for
the G-8 proposal and for an extensive cancellation of
debts — including multilateral debts — for the
countries concerned.
All of the foregoing emphasizes the great
importance we attach to the global partnership for
33

development. That partnership is not, however, a one-
way street. It also requires a commitment by partner
States to put in place the conditions for
development — that is, democracy, good governance,
respect for human rights and anti-corruption measures.
Climate protection and development are also
closely intertwined. Of course, everyone must have
access to energy. Nevertheless, all States must do their
part to prevent the ominous advance of climate change.
In late November the parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Kyoto Protocol will meet in Montreal. There, we will
have the opportunity to adopt effective mechanisms to
reduce emissions of greenhouse gases beyond 2012.
That is precisely the policy pursued by the Kyoto
Protocol, and it is a policy we will adhere to.
This year two natural catastrophes — the tsunami
in the Indian Ocean and Hurricane Katrina in the
United States of America — have clearly demonstrated
just how vulnerable our societies are to natural
disasters. We have all learned just how important
disaster prevention is. As host to the Third
International Conference on Early Warning, which will
be held in Bonn in March 2006, Germany hopes to
contribute to making better use of and improving early
warning mechanisms and thereby limiting the scale of
the damage caused by such disasters. Here I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our invitation to all
Member States to join us in making the Bonn
Conference a success.
For years, United Nations engagement has been
hailed all over the world as a welcome sign of
protection and assistance, of peace and reconstruction.
Last Sunday saw the first free parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan under the new Constitution. The
Government of Afghanistan, with a full complement of
democratically legitimated institutions, is now
prepared to assume responsibility for the further
reconstruction of the country. By going to the polls,
millions of women and men in Afghanistan have
proved that they have opted for democracy. Our thanks
go to the United Nations, which worked hard to make
those elections possible.
In his latest report on Afghanistan (A/60/224) the
Secretary-General announced that the United Nations
will remain committed to assisting the country after the
elections. I heartily endorse that commitment; such
help is indispensable. For even if the Bonn process,
launched four years ago, has now been brought to a
successful conclusion, the international community
will still need to stand by Afghanistan. Germany, too,
will continue to do its utmost to support the country.
The President returned to the Chair.
Ten years after the conclusion of the Dayton
Agreement, and six years after the end of the Kosovo
conflict, the situation in the Western Balkans has
improved tangibly. Nonetheless, major progress is still
required in the political, legal and economic fields. The
people of that region must genuinely come to terms
with their past, and the parties to the conflict must be
reconciled. In that connection, we call for full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
The Middle East still faces great challenges. As
its neighbours, we in Europe have a strategic interest in
peace and stability in the region. We are convinced that
only through reform, the strengthening of democracy
and the rule of law can lasting stability be guaranteed.
The free and fair parliamentary elections in Palestine
and Lebanon are encouraging signs of change.
The Middle East peace process has also gained
new momentum over past months. We emphatically
welcome the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip
and the northern part of the West Bank. Now it is vital
that Israelis, Palestinians and the international
community do all they can to lay the foundations for
political and economic stability in the Gaza Strip.
Efforts should be focused on a two-State solution based
on the road map. The objective remains a viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders.
The international community is united in its
determination to help Iraq establish democracy and the
rule of law. We want all Iraqis to be able to live free
from fear and material hardship. The forces of terror
and violence must not and shall not be permitted to win
the upper hand. The Middle East needs a stable,
prosperous Iraq.
Here, too, the United Nations is making its
contribution towards the process of political transition
and reconstruction. That is why we have provided
considerable financial assistance for the protection
force whose presence allows the United Nations to
work in Iraq. It is also why Germany has, at Iraq’s
request, advised that country on constitutional issues.
34

The Iranian nuclear programme continues to be a
major cause of concern. Past violations of international
obligations, a lack of transparency in its actions, and
insufficient cooperation with subsequent investigations
have destroyed any confidence that the programme is
for exclusively peaceful purposes. With support from
the EU High Representative, Germany, France and the
United Kingdom have worked with Iran on finding a
way to restore confidence. Those efforts have received
broad support from the international community.
Tehran’s continued disregard of International Atomic
Energy Agency decisions, however, is further
weakening that confidence and the gains made to date
are being put at risk for no good reason. We should
emphasize that our concerns do not relate to Iran’s
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
This has never been and will not be put in
question. Our concerns do not relate to Iran’s right to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That has
never been and will not be called into question.
We remain prepared to work on solutions which
include objective guarantees that the Iranian nuclear
programme can serve only peaceful ends. I appeal to
Iran to refrain from taking unilateral measures and to
return to the negotiating table.
There is general agreement that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is now more than ever
a life-threatening risk to us all. It is thus all the more
regrettable that no consensus could be reached on the
inclusion in the outcome document of a chapter on
non-proliferation and disarmament. If we want to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular of nuclear weapons, all States
must fulfil their obligations. At the same time, new
momentum must be brought to the process of nuclear
disarmament.
In that context, I welcome the latest progress made
by the six-party talks towards resolving the nuclear
crisis on the Korean peninsula. It is a vital first step.
Africa is in many ways a touchstone for and an
example of an effective multilateral system. The close
cooperation of the United Nations with the African
Union, as well as with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), has had a beneficial
impact in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and,
recently, in Burundi. The United Nations is also
playing an equally important role in efforts to stabilize
the Great Lakes region.
Following the death of John Garang, the peace
process in the Sudan requires an even greater
commitment by all parties to implement the historic
Nairobi peace agreement. The United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), to which Germany has
contributed personnel, is making a major contribution.
However, we must not neglect other crisis areas, in
particular Darfur. The African Union mission in Darfur
has helped to stabilize the security situation in the area
where it is stationed.
The variety of problems facing us — poverty, social
polarization, global population growth, inadequate water
supplies and global climate change, to name only the
most pressing — serves to highlight the need for
concerted action. We must prepare the United Nations
for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Over the past 12 months, reform of the United
Nations has been intensively debated. Member States,
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General himself
have provided valuable input. Some of their proposals
are contained in the outcome document adopted at last
week’s world summit.
However, only when we have managed to
implement those proposals will we be able to speak of
true achievement. To be a success, the process requires
the active participation of all Member States.
The tasks that the summit has set the General
Assembly must be tackled with speed and focus. At
this session, the General Assembly must make a
breakthrough towards the adoption of the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It must also work on the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission.
Sustainable peace requires more than merely
restoring security. The post-conflict peacebuilding
phase is particularly crucial. The sooner reconstruction
can begin, and the better coordinated the peacemaking
and post-conflict recovery efforts are, the better the
chances of lasting stabilization. The summit took a
vital step in that direction by deciding to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission by the end of the year.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report
entitled “In larger freedom”, states that:
“No security agenda and no drive for
development will be successful unless they are
based on … respect for human dignity”.
(A/59/2005, para. 128)
35

If we wish to lend greater weight to the
protection and promotion of human rights, we must
also strengthen the relevant United Nations bodies and
mechanisms.
Germany therefore welcomes the decision taken
by the summit to create a Human Rights Council which
will replace the Commission on Human Rights. The
General Assembly must now move fast to define the
mandate and structures of the Human Rights Council.
It must ensure that the new body enjoys greater
legitimacy than its predecessor and that its working
methods are more effective, especially when it comes
to responding to acute crises.
Allow me a last word. A glance at the trouble
spots around the world makes it clear that we, the
international community, face far more conflicts in the
South than we do in the North. Key decisions on
settling those conflicts are taken in the Security
Council which, under the Charter of the United
Nations, has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace. Its composition, however, still reflects the
world of 1945 and not that of the twenty-first century.
Adjusting and expanding the membership of the
Security Council by adding both permanent and non-
permanent members thus remains essential. Any reform
of the United Nations that does not include reform of the
Security Council is not worthy of the name.
The Security Council is in danger of losing its
authority and legitimacy as long as entire continents
and major contributors are not adequately represented.
Germany and its partners Brazil, India and Japan
therefore have submitted a proposal on reform of the
Council. It is the only proposal that includes a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council and its
working methods. We are convinced that it is the only
proposal capable of obtaining the necessary two-thirds
majority in the General Assembly.
Reform of the Security Council is an
indispensable part of the overhaul of the United
Nations. In last week’s summit document, we all
pledged to swiftly advance those reforms. We do not
need only progress; we need results. The time is ripe
for radical reform. Let us use this session of the
General Assembly to finally resolve this issue, which is
so vital to the future of the United Nations.Speaking for the first time from this rostrum, I wish to
reaffirm here the importance France attaches to the
multilateral system. Our common future cannot be
envisaged without strengthening it.
The declaration adopted the day before yesterday
is a milestone in that direction, even if it does not meet
all our expectations. Indeed, the text makes some
significant advances. I am thinking in particular of
innovative financing for development. I am also
thinking of the decision to establish a peacebuilding
commission within the Security Council. Finally, I am
thinking of the establishment of a Human Rights
Council and the endorsement of the principle of the
responsibility to protect. Now it is up to us to put those
new concepts into practice.
In that connection, I wish to pay tribute here to
the remarkable work that has been done under the
stewardship of Mr. Jean Ping.
But let us not underestimate the extent of the task
that still remains to be accomplished, be it in the areas
of counter-terrorism, non-proliferation, Security
Council reform or development assistance.
The United Nations is founded on the rule of law
and the promotion of universal standards. Those reflect
our common values and our conviction that there can
be no security and development without scrupulous
respect for human rights. This is not a moral question
but one of respect for the identity of every individual.
It is not a matter of passing judgement but of enabling
all people to live in greater freedom and in dignity.
Let us reject the impressment of children in
armed conflicts, the systematic use of sexual violence
against women and girls as a weapon of war, the
recourse to threats, arbitrary detention and torture of
opponents, journalists, labour leaders and defenders of
human rights. And, let us conclude the negotiations on
a convention against forced disappearances. To that
end, let us strengthen the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and promptly
establish the Human Rights Council.
France particularly welcomes the fact that the
international community now has the necessary
legitimacy to exercise effectively its responsibility to
protect populations threatened by ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and genocide. France also
welcomes the progress of the international criminal
justice system, in particular through the action of the
Security Council. Those who believe they can count on
the international community not to act when they
commit their crimes should make no mistake: they will
be held accountable.
Sixty years after the founding of the United
Nations, terrorism is now at the top of the list of human
rights violations. Nothing — no cause, religion or
moral order — can justify attacks on the lives of
innocents, the lives of civilians. We must define acts of
terrorism once and for all so that we can better combat
that barbaric practice which sets humankind back.
17

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes another major threat for the planet, against
which we must remain united and determined.
France, together with its British and German
partners, has proposed to Iran a constructive approach
paving the way for a new relationship between that
great country and the international community. That
relationship is currently compromised by concerns over
Iran’s nuclear programme. We ask Iran to build trust by
providing objective guarantees on the exclusively
peaceful nature of its programme. Iran’s statements
from this rostrum compel the international community
to meet its responsibilities, as referral of the matter to
the Security Council is on the agenda in order to
strengthen the authority of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The very integrity of the non-
proliferation regime is at stake.
But let us also work to reduce the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, which fuel so many very
deadly conflicts.
To better serve peace and ensure the security of
populations, the Security Council has expanded its
field of action to the trafficking that finances conflicts
and the impunity that protects traffickers, using, in
particular, sanctions and embargoes. The United
Nations is resolutely engaged on the ground, at the
very heart of conflicts. More than 70,000 blue
helmeted soldiers and police officers are now serving
in 18 peacekeeping operations, and thousands of others
are operating under Security Council mandates.
The results can be seen, for example, in Timor-
Leste, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. But as countries emerge from
crisis, it is essential that they continue to benefit from
our full attention and support. The United Nations has
the duty to take a central role in the transition phase
through the Peacebuilding Commission.
Other situations demand great vigilance and a
high level of mobilization. Thus, in Haiti, the presence
of strong contingents of United Nations soldiers and
police must lead to the strengthening of the political
process by involving all peaceful forces without
exception. Preparations for elections must be
accelerated. Like all peoples, the Haitian people, who
have suffered for too long, are entitled to respect and
freedom.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the presence of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
appointment of a High Representative of the Secretary-
General for the elections should also help strengthen
implementation of the process set out at Marcoussis
and Pretoria.
But in Côte d’Ivoire, as in Haiti, the determined
action of the united international community will not
produce results unless all parties cooperate in good
faith and demonstrate their sense of responsibility. In
Abidjan as in Bouaké, all must respect their pledged
commitments so that free and transparent elections can
be held throughout the country. No other solution is
possible. That is why it is essential to resolutely
support the electoral process that has begun, as well as
the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programmes. All Ivorian parties must understand that
they will not block the peace efforts with impunity if
they take an obstructive stance, make hate speeches or
challenge democratic rules. The Security Council will
meet its responsibilities.
The situation in Lebanon demonstrates what can
be accomplished by a determined international
mobilization, supported by the courageous will of the
people. Most Syrian forces have now left Lebanon.
Elections have been held. A representative Government
has been formed. Our Organization must continue to
support the Lebanese Government’s efforts to recover
full sovereignty and exercise its authority over the
whole of its territory. At the same time, we must
continue to support the work of the commission of
inquiry into the assassination of Rafik Hariri. We are
determined to see justice done.
Also with respect to the Middle East, a dynamic
of hope, which could touch all States of the region, is
emerging following Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza.
France, together with its European partners, stands
with the Palestinians to rebuild and develop that
territory so that its inhabitants can move around freely
and have access to jobs and, quite simply, to decent
living conditions.
But we must not stop there. It is important to
restore political prospects for relaunching
implementation of the road map by, on the one hand,
encouraging the Palestinians to redouble their efforts
on security and, on the other, encouraging the Israelis
to take the measures necessary to stop settlement
activity and to comply with international law in their
18

struggle for security. Peace can come only with the
existence of two peaceful and democratic States living
side by side in peace and security.
Finally, with respect to Iraq, France remains
engaged so that, with the assistance of the United
Nations in particular, the Iraqi people can acquire
democratic institutions with which all Iraqis can feel
identified. It is clear that a policy focused exclusively
on security leads to the retrenchment of a community,
thus jeopardizing the cohesion of Iraqi society and the
country’s unity. In Iraq, too, the political process must
not exclude any representative, peaceful force, and the
political process must offer Iraq the prospect of the
restoration of its complete sovereignty.
In all those crises, the Security Council has
gradually imposed the authority of the United Nations
in the service of international peace and security. Its
action is legitimate, and its authority will be further
strengthened when we reach agreement on an
enlargement of the Council that reflects the emergence
of new Powers and which gives an equitable place to
all continents.
At the same time, it is important to carry out the
thorough management reforms that our Organization
requires. In his report entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General proposed elements
of an action plan and initiated the first reforms. I pay
tribute to his resoluteness and reaffirm France’s
determination to support him in his approach.
We all know that security and development
cannot be separated. Five years after the Millennium
Summit, heads of State or Government have just issued
a troubling assessment of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals.
The outcome document they adopted (resolution
60/1) clearly sets out the priorities on which we must
take action. The first of those sadly remains food
security, because, as underlined by the Declaration on
Action Against Hunger and Poverty, adopted in 2004
on the initiative of President Lula and President
Chirac, hunger remains the worst weapon of mass
destruction. It continues to kill several hundred million
men, women and children around the planet. We can
see it happening right now in the Sahel and southern
Africa. That scourge belonging to another age can and
must be fought.
Of course, emergency humanitarian aid must be
provided to people in distress. That implies
strengthening the coordination of United Nations
interventions and, in particular, the establishment of an
international humanitarian force, as proposed on
several occasions by France.
But beyond that, it is important to provide all
areas at risk with the technical resources for prevention
and early warning. Above all, it is essential to create
the conditions for sustainable development to the
benefit of all. That is the aim of the Millennium
Development Goals, whose attainment requires
substantial long-term financing. Official development
assistance will continue to be primary for much time to
come. The summit’s outcome document recalls the
international commitments made in that regard, which
France and the European Union will respect. It is
urgent that the other developed countries make the
same commitments. But we know well that this will
not be sufficient. Additional long-term resources have
to be found through innovative financing mechanisms.
France endorses the establishment of
international solidarity contributions. Over 66
countries have given their support to the pilot project
to levy a tax on airline tickets, and we welcome this. In
February, France will host a ministerial conference on
this initiative so that it can be implemented specifically
and promptly.
By devoting three of the eight Goals to health, the
Millennium Declaration has put public health back at
the centre of sustainable development. In terms of its
scope and socio-economic impact, the HIV/AIDS
pandemic is of concern to us all. Only by working
together will we be able to deal with it, through an
approach that integrates prevention, treatment, care and
the medical and social vulnerability of infected
persons. France wants to carry out this integrated
approach with its European partners and with the
World Health Organization, the Joint United Nations
Program on HIV/AIDS and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. We must do
everything possible to achieve universal access to
treatment by 2010, if need be promoting greater
flexibility of intellectual property rights as provided for
in the Doha international trade agreements.
The fight against AIDS requires us all to mobilize
our efforts. For its part, France has pledged to double
its contribution to the Global Fund, increasing the
19

amount to 300 million euros by 2007. At the same
time, international cooperation must take into account
the particular challenges faced by certain categories of
individuals: victims of abject poverty who are
excluded, young women denied the right to sexual and
reproductive health, those with disabilities
marginalized by society.
From the Indian Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico,
from Japan to Antarctica, man is confronted today with
an unprecedented rise in environmental threats that he
himself has caused. Scientific proof of the reality of
climate change and its human origins are irrefutable.
All initiatives must be compatible with the Kyoto
Protocol; prospects must be charted for the future of
the multilateral climate regime after 2012. France
would hope to see more robust commitments,
especially regarding the transfer of technologies to
emerging countries. To respond to the threat and more
effectively mobilize energies and resources, France and
Europe have proposed the establishment of a
specialized agency, based on the United Nations
Environment Programme, for the purpose of
coordinating international action. This idea is
mentioned in the summit’s outcome document; it must
now be translated into reality.
The United Nations is commemorating its sixtieth
anniversary this year. The world has changed
profoundly since 1945. Millions of men and women
have gained freedom and have emerged from
underdevelopment. Technological progress has been
staggering and has radically changed the life of society
and relations among States. Challenges and threats
have changed; they are now worldwide and jeopardize
humanity itself.
Yet, we must remain optimistic. It is not too late,
given that we understand what is at stake and that we
mobilize collectively. The United Nations is
rediscovering the way charted for it by the founding
fathers: helping in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
building international cooperation for development and
promoting human rights.
We need the United Nations more than ever; it is
the sole framework for universal comprehensive action
which is legitimate and recognized as such by all
States. Let us give it our full support. France for its
part makes this commitment.Let me begin, Sir,
by paying tribute to your predecessor, Jean Ping, for
his extraordinary work — above all on the world
summit, but also throughout his year as President —
and by offering my congratulations to you on
beginning your year in office.
I should also like to express, on behalf of the
European Union and all its member States, our deepest
sympathy and solidarity to the people of the United
27

States, particularly those in the Gulf states, in their
hour of need.
In early July, my first duty in the presidency of
the European Union was to go to Srebrenica to mark
the tenth anniversary of the massacre there, the worst
in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
More than 8,000 people, mainly Muslim, were taken
away and killed as the international community just
stood to one side. To be sure, we had shown the right
convictions in words, but shamefully, we had failed to
act. The lesson of that massacre — and of the even
greater horror of Rwanda a year before — was that we
all needed better means to turn our collective will into
decisive action. I think that we in the European Union
have learned in the intervening period. Today, the
Union is on the ground as a military, police or civilian
presence in Bosnia, in Aceh, in Iraq, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, with the African Union, in
Darfur.
I also think that the United Nations has learned
the lessons of the past decade. At the summit this
week, we agreed on the further steps that we need to
take for the Organization to be even more effective. Of
all that was agreed at the summit, I believe it will be
the agreement on our “responsibility to protect” that
will be seen in the future as having the greatest
significance of all. If we follow through on the
responsibility to protect, then never again will
genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity be allowed to take place under our noses
with nothing done.
The responsibility to protect is, of course, a
reflection of our common morality. But it is also a
recognition that the world in which we now live is too
small for us to be unaffected by, or indifferent to, the
innocent victims of murder and oppression. This
shrinking of the world has been as sudden as it has
been profound. When the Berlin wall fell, a generation
of ideological certainties was swept away. People could
suddenly see partners where before they had only
glimpsed adversaries. And as that very visible barrier
was noisily being breached, a revolution in information
technology was quietly erasing the barriers of distance
and time. Continents and cultures are now cabled
together and bound by trade and services in a way that
was unimaginable even a decade ago.
In this new world, we can no longer safely
tolerate the general threat that can come from a
particular human tragedy, wherever it takes place. To a
greater extent than ever before, we share the same
world: the same threats and responsibilities, the same
opportunities and interests. And precisely because the
boundaries of our world have contracted, the
horizons — the ambitions — of many people around
the globe have infinitely expanded. For the first time in
our history, mankind has the ability to realize the
potential of individuals in societies of all kinds and in
every region through an open exchange of goods,
investment, technology and, above all, ideas.
Not least in all of this, it is the rise of India and
of China that is reordering the world economy.
Hundreds of millions there and elsewhere have been
lifted out of poverty. A new global market has been
created that ignores the divide — which seemed so
fundamental for so many decades — between East and
West.
Currently, not everyone has the chance to share in
all of that. Much of sub-Saharan Africa remains
blighted by poverty, disease and conflict. The
European Union has now set a clear timetable to
achieve the 0.7 per cent target for aid. Debt relief, trade
reform and development aid are all vital, but none of
them can work alone. Fundamental to making poverty
history are the Governments of the developing world
themselves. And where Governments fail, their own
peoples are the victims, as United Nations Special
Envoy Anna Tibaijuka’s damning assessment of the
situation in Zimbabwe only too graphically shows.
Sub-Saharan Africa is not alone in having yet to
achieve its potential. The American author Thomas
Friedman, in his recent book The World Is Flat,
highlights an extraordinary anomaly: it was the Arab
peoples whose forebears devised algebra and the
algorithms upon which our entire digital age is based,
but those peoples are now right at the rear of today’s
technological revolution, with, for example, fewer than
2 per cent of those populations having Internet access.
Three United Nations Development Programme Arab
Human Development Reports have now set out clearly
how limited economic prospects and stunted political
freedoms have led young and talented people towards
alienation and disillusionment.
The answer, however, does not lie in easy
stereotypes about some clash of civilizations. It is only
the terrorists and the preachers of hate who want us to
believe that Islam and the West are fundamentally
28

different. Theirs is a philosophy of mistrust and
despair, and we reject it utterly. Indonesia and
Turkey — to name just two — are both striking
examples of how countries with predominantly Muslim
populations can embrace democracy and modernity.
We in the European Union have seen the vibrant
Muslim communities in our own countries, and from
that experience have seen how Islamic and Western
cultures can be partners in a global society.
Everyone knows that the Arab peoples want
prosperity, freedom and democracy every bit as much
as anyone in Europe or America. So the fact that the
Arab world has the lowest scores in regional
measurements of democratic practices, civil freedoms
and good governance is not some cultural inevitability,
but a temporary failure of human will. In that regard,
the international community has a clear responsibility
to encourage regionally led political, social and
economic reform. The European Union strongly
supports such reform and will continue to do so.
Equally, it has been our active foreign policy that has
placed us in the lead with regard to Iran, especially on
the nuclear dossier.
With our High Representative Javier Solana and
my French and German Foreign Minister colleagues,
we have made detailed proposals for the relationship
between the European Union and Iran to be based on
cooperation and respect for international norms and
treaties.
Our proposals envisage a high-level, long-term
political and security framework between the European
Union and Iran, in which we would work together in
political, economic, scientific and technological areas,
including the civil nuclear field, in return for Iran
providing guarantees about its intentions and
capabilities concerning nuclear weapons. So, we will
listen very carefully to and reflect on this afternoon’s
speech by the new President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
On Iraq, the European Union now has a
comprehensive programme of engagement and has put
behind it divisions over the military action two and a
half years ago. We are supporting the goal of a
peaceful, prosperous, democratic and stable nation.
We are also giving very active support to the
Quartet’s efforts to secure a just and lasting peace
between Israel and the Palestinians, with two States
living side by side. We salute Prime Minister Sharon’s
brave decision to withdraw from the Gaza Strip, and
we salute President Mahmoud Abbas’s work to build
the first stage of an effective, viable State of Palestine.
In July, the European Union again suffered the
horror of a major terrorist atrocity. This time the target
was my country, the United Kingdom: its capital,
London. But none of us is safe from the threat of terror.
International terrorism requires an international
response; otherwise, we all pay the price for each
other’s vulnerabilities. The ratification of a
comprehensive treaty on terrorism is, therefore, at the
highest priority.
But the threat from terrorists and the political
instability they bring is made worse by the easy
availability of weapons in what has become an
anarchic, unregulated international trade. These same
weapons fuelled the killings in Rwanda and in Bosnia a
decade ago and are fuelling the conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur today.
We already have international instruments to regulate
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. We in the
European Union have a comprehensive arms control
regime. But I suggest to the General Assembly that the
time has now come for this Organization to embrace
the idea of an international arms trade treaty, which
would build on and strengthen existing initiatives.
It was in the killing fields of Europe, in two
successive wars, that the twin ideas of the United
Nations and of the European Union became imperative.
Today, the European Union’s commitment to the
United Nations is profound; it has never been stronger.
And it is reflected in what we give in voluntary
donations and to the regular budget and peacekeeping
operations.
The fundamental purpose of the United Nations
remains today what it was at its foundation: to remove
the scourge of war, to reaffirm the worth of the human
person and to promote social progress and better
standards of life. In this changed and changing world,
it is the responsibility of us all to ensure that this
Organization has the powers and the resources to
achieve all these aims.Your election, Sir, as
President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session comes at a significant moment in the history of
the United Nations. The outcome document adopted by
our heads of State or Government shortly after the
beginning of the session represents the culmination of
a long process. It started with the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. It
continued with the Secretary-General’s “In larger
freedom” report, and the efforts of your distinguished
predecessor to synthesize those ideas for the
consideration of Member States. We thank all of those
involved for their dedicated efforts.
We are united in our commitment to
multilateralism; that is a good foundation for our
further efforts. All countries, especially those from the
developing world, played a significant role in the
negotiations on the outcome document. Much was
achieved; much has been left out. There are
foundations on which we have to build, but there are
also shortcomings which we need to correct in the
process of implementation. A notable omission is the
theme of disarmament. Our struggle for multilaterally
negotiated, universal and verifiable nuclear
disarmament, in a time-bound manner, must continue
with vigour. The outcome document must serve as a
road map, with its main elements acting as signposts in
our discussions over the coming months under your
stewardship, Mr. President.
26

You, Sir, have suggested a very appropriate theme
for the general debate: “For a stronger and more
effective United Nations: follow-up to and
implementation of the High-Level Meeting in
September 2005”. We believe that that captures the
spirit and essence of all that we, co-partners in the
United Nations, wish to achieve.
India is the world’s largest democracy. There is
no historical precedent for a democracy of over 1
billion people. It is a tremendous undertaking. It is also
an exciting and inspiring one. We are breaking new
ground. The fact that Indian democracy works is a
political miracle. The credit goes to the Indian voters.
They ensure that India remains secular, democratic and
pluralistic.
We also believe that we need to do much more to
inculcate respect for and acceptance of pluralism. I am
reminded of what Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our
nation, said:
“I do not want my house to be walled in on all
sides and my windows to be stuffed. I want the
cultures of all the lands to be blown about my
house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be
blown off my feet by any.”
Humankind is now learning, to some extent, to
cope with the menace of terrorism. We all know that
that evil is increasingly directed at innocent civilians.
It invites the strongest condemnation. We all agree that
there can be no justification for terrorism in any form.
Whether we are considering terrorism or non-
proliferation, unless there is a non-selective, uniform
and sustained approach, the objectives of the
international community cannot be achieved. The
outcome document reflects the joint resolve of the
international community to fight terrorism. In our
judgement, there is no institutional setting that is more
capable than the United Nations of providing cohesion
and vigour to those efforts.
As a victim of terrorism over the past two
decades, India understands, and is fully supportive of,
the need for United Nations action on counter-
terrorism. A key aspect of the implementation of the
outcome document will be the development and
adoption by the General Assembly of a strong counter-
terrorism agenda to supplement the existing General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on that
issue. As an initiator of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, India welcomes,
and is fully committed to, the decision taken by heads
of State or Government to conclude negotiations on the
convention during this session of the General
Assembly.
The main purpose of the summit last week was to
review the implementation of the Millennium
Declaration. Unfortunately, most developing countries
will not be able to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, given current growth rates and
levels of international support. We must strengthen
efforts at both the national and the international levels
to take us closer to the development targets set out in
the Millennium document.
The Millennium Development Goals embody a
quantifiable vision of human dignity and solidarity, as
well as of important economic and social rights. Yet,
important objectives, such as employment, critical for
developing countries, are excluded. India’s use of
innovative financial instruments for rural
infrastructural investment, as well as our Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill — recently passed in
Parliament — I believe may be of interest to other
developing countries.
Most of us had much higher expectations of the
summit in the area of development, particularly in
agreeing on a definite timetable for the achievement of
the 0.7 per cent target for official development
assistance. Unfortunately, that has not been achieved,
and we have gone down to 0.5 per cent. That is equally
true of innovative sources of financing because
developing countries cannot break out of the cycle of
poverty without enhanced resource flows and the
application of science and technology to meet their
developmental challenges.
As India’s own economy develops — at about 8
per cent per year — and its technological advancement
comes of age, we are expanding our economic and
technical cooperation with the developing countries,
reinforcing our political solidarity. We have extensive
programmes in Africa and elsewhere in the developing
world. We are also happy to have contributed to the
South Fund for Development and Humanitarian
Assistance. The India-Brazil-South Africa Facility for
Alleviation of Poverty and Hunger is a good example
of South-South cooperation.
India has written off the debts of all the highly
indebted poor countries. Given India’s long-term
association with and commitment to Africa, we
27

welcome the recognition given by the High-level
Plenary Meeting to the need to urgently address the
special needs of our African brothers and sisters. On its
part, India has undertaken several initiatives in
partnership with Africa. The Techno-Economic
Approach for Africa-India Movement initiative is
designed to promote technology transfer to West
Africa. The pivotal role of scientific knowledge and
technology for economic development cannot be
overstated. India stands ready to share its experience
with the developing countries of Africa and elsewhere.
To bridge the digital divide within a country
itself, which sometimes becomes as problematic as it is
at the international level, wireless local loop
technology developed in India, which eliminates
expensive equipment and copper lines, has already
been used in several countries in Africa. India has put
together a connectivity mission in Africa, using fiber
optics and dedicated satellite. It will support tele-
education, telemedicine, e-commerce and e-
governance, infotainment, resource mapping and
meteorological services. India is also earmarking $1.5
billion for lines of credit to assist developing countries,
in particular those in Africa, in fighting HIV/AIDS and
other pandemics.
The international community needs to address
intellectual property regimes that seek to deny
technologies rather than facilitating their transfer to the
developing countries, including in the areas of
environment and public health.
Although both the Millennium Declaration and
the outcome document have spoken of exploiting the
beneficial aspects of globalization, we are yet to agree
on and implement the modalities for such a process.
Making the process of globalization fairer and more
equitable remains one of the main challenges of our
time. At present, the accumulation of wealth is
accompanied by the accumulation of poverty. Ruskin,
the nineteenth century British author, in his book Unto
this Last — a favourite of Mahatma Gandhi —
described such wealth as “the gilded index of a far-
reaching ruin, a wrecker’s pile of coin gleaned from a
beach to which he has beguiled an argosy.” Poverty is
sometimes attributed to lack of entrepreneurship. The
poor of the world prove their entrepreneurship every
day by ensuring their families’ physical survival.
Regrettably, the summit has not given a clear and
comprehensive direction to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) Doha Round of trade
negotiations. Formulas are not an end in themselves;
the end has to be a decrease in poverty and an increase
in employment. Therefore, equal treatment cannot be
forced on unequal partners. Special and differential
treatment remains an integral component of all trade
negotiations, including agriculture and non-agricultural
market access. India, as a member of the G-20, will
continue to promote in the WTO and elsewhere the
interests of all developing countries, including the
small island developing States, the least developed, the
landlocked and the highly indebted poor countries.
An achievement of the developing countries in
the Group of 77 is their hard-fought and reasonably
successful struggle for progress on systemic issues
critical to good international economic governance. We
have to build on that to ensure the reform of Bretton
Woods institutions and the restoration of the central
role of the United Nations in setting the international
economic agenda.
A change in the composition of the Security
Council is an imperative. The G-4 framework
resolution has made United Nations reform a central
issue that can no longer be ignored or disregarded.
There is a democracy deficit, as the Secretary-General
also said in July, in the governance of the United
Nations. There is not much point in speaking of
inclusiveness, transparency and democracy and leaving
the Security Council as a glaring exception to those
principles. Measures taken so far to revitalize the
General Assembly are simply not enough. Only by
electing permanent members committed to rendering
unto the General Assembly what is the General
Assembly’s can that be done. That is essential for a
world order in which decisions are optimal and
therefore acceptable, and the use of force minimal.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime Minister,
aptly stated: “Above all, we have to participate in the
growing structure of a world order. We cannot rely on
others to do it on our behalf.” One cannot argue in
favour of democracy in the rest of the world and leave
the Security Council undemocratic. Effectiveness is a
function of right decisions with broad support.
Negotiations on the outcome document and many
subsequent statements have demonstrated that, if more
could not be achieved on the development aspects of
trade in the document, it is because the Security
Council has not been made representative. If
institutional reform has been faltering and many are
28

doubtful of securing a just solution, it is because the
Security Council does not reflect the world of today. It
reflects the world of 1945.
The unsatisfactory progress on other issues shows
that critics of Security Council expansion in both the
categories were profoundly mistaken. Security Council
reform, far from hindering progress, was actually
helping it. In its absence, fears of intervention have
prevented agreement on a human rights council and
other issues. Therefore, Security Council reform
remains more necessary than ever and should
preferably, as the Secretary-General has said, be
completed by the end of the year. That should be our
main priority; I doubt if it is. Security Council reform
is not about any country’s prestige or power, but about
transforming the balance of power in the world. Our
experience in India from the freedom movement to
present times shows that diversity is a source of
strength and effectiveness. The same would be true of a
reformed Security Council. We would continue also to
engage actively in the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council, the restructuring of the Secretariat
and the setting-up of peacebuilding commission.
As we observe the sixtieth anniversary of the
United Nations, I am reminded once again of the words
of India’s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, who
said at this very forum 45 years ago:
“During these past fifteen years the United
Nations has often been criticized for its structure
and for some of its activities. These criticisms
have had some justification behind them, but
looking at the broad picture I think that we can
definitely say that the United Nations has amply
justified its existence and repeatedly prevented
our recurrent crises from developing into war. It
has played a great role, and it is a little difficult
now to think of this troubled world without the
United Nations.” (A/PV.882, para. 110)
In the life of individuals as well as of institutions,
the completion of 60 years is a significant moment for
stocktaking — certainly in my part of the world. Even
as we reflect upon the functioning of this institution
since its inception in 1945, all of us gathered here look
forward to the realization of new hopes, aspirations
and, indeed, to a rejuvenated United Nations which is
fully geared to meet the myriad challenges of our times
and effectively contribute to the well-being and
development of humanity at large and to manage
change.
The vision which we have for a better world is
best described in the words of a great son of India, the
great poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was the first
Asian to be awarded the Nobel Prize in literature. I
shall end my statement by quoting a very famous text
of his:
“Where the mind is without fear and the head is
held high
Where knowledge is free
Where the world has not been broken up into
fragments by narrow domestic walls
Where words come out from the depth of truth
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its
way
Into the dreary desert sand of dead habit
Where the mind is led forward by thee
Into ever-widening thought and action
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my
country awake.”It is my unique pleasure to
praise His Excellency Ambassador Dan Gillerman, my
emissary to the United Nations, who is in the Chair at
present, upon his election to the post of Vice-President
at this session of the General Assembly, and to wish
him much success.
These are optimistic times in the Middle East.
The iron wall that has defined Israel's relations with
most of the Arab and Muslim world for generations, is
coming down. Israel's contacts with Arab and Muslim
States are growing at a rate never seen before.
Countries like Pakistan and others that in the past
refused to acknowledge our shared humanity, today
extend their hands in friendship and recognition.
Relations with key Muslim States, such as Turkey, are
flourishing, while our peaceful ties with both Egypt
and Jordan are constantly improving.
Here in New York this week, I have had the
honour of meeting with more than 10 of my colleagues
from the Arab and Muslim world - a number
unthinkable just two years ago. Those meetings have
been friendly, as is only fitting for countries that are
not in conflict - either territorially, or economically.
Israel welcomes this new readiness for contact, and we
encourage our neighbours to build on the foundations
that we are now laying. Contacts between Israel and its
Arab and Muslim neighbours are good for the region,
and good for peace.
We all share a common interest in building a
region of tolerance and cooperation - a region where
the moderates have the initiative, not the extremists,
whose violence has set the agenda for so long. Indeed,
those who genuinely wish to help the Palestinians and
to bring them the benefits of peace and prosperity must
realize that building contacts and cooperation with
Israel is a crucial element in that process.
Possibilities for cooperation abound. In fields as
diverse as agriculture, health, the environment,
transportation and electricity, the potential benefits of
Middle East regional cooperation are immense. Such
cooperation can bring tangible and immediate
economic benefits, as Israel's improving relations with
Jordan and Egypt have shown.
Unfortunately, many of our ties with the Arab and
Muslim world are still deep in the shadows, hidden
from the public eye. Today, I call on my Arab and
Muslim colleagues to bring our contacts out into the
light of day, so that our peoples may understand our
8

shared desire to work with each other to bring peace
and prosperity to our region. I call on the leaders of the
Arab and Muslim world, to join us in speaking to our
populations of peace rather than conflict, of reasons to
cooperate, rather than reasons to boycott.
In November of this year, I will sit alongside my
Arab and Muslim colleagues at two international
gatherings: the World Summit on the Information
Society, in Tunisia; and the summit of the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership, in Barcelona. I call upon
the international community and my Arab and Muslim
counterparts to work together with us to ensure that
those meetings result in concrete projects that will help
reinforce our peace efforts on the ground.
This is also the time for the international
community to renew its investment in the future of the
Middle East by reviving the multilateral track of the
Middle East peace talks.
Just one week ago, Israel completed the
evacuation of all Israeli communities in the Gaza Strip.
Entire families - many of whom had lived and tilled
those lands for three generations - were called upon
by their Government to leave and to begin their lives
anew. Today, there are no more Israelis in Gaza. Israeli
military rule is now over. Responsibility for the affairs
of Gaza and its residents is now in Palestinian hands.
Israel's actions have opened the door to a new future,
and we invite our neighbours to walk with us together
through that door.
We are committed to the road map, and we wish
to get back to its full implementation. To do that, we
need a partner. A partner who is committed, as we are,
to the peaceful resolution of our differences, and to the
democratic and universal principles on which peace is
founded.
Israel attaches great importance to the Palestinian
assumption of responsibility. In it lies the key to
progress towards peace. The transfer of responsibility
for Gaza provides the Palestinian side with the chance
to take their fate into their own hands; an opportunity
not just to say that they want to govern, but to show
that they are ready and able to do so. Gaza, we hope, will
serve as a model for how the Palestinian Authority can
build a functioning, democratic and peaceful society.
Recognizing the significance of this moment,
Israel is taking great pains to ensure that Palestinian
leader Mahmoud Abbas is given every opportunity to
establish his authority. We want to promote conditions
that will benefit ordinary Palestinians, without posing a
security threat to Israel.
Israel has expressed its strong support for
international aid and assistance for the social and
economic development of Gaza, and we are committed
to facilitating those efforts. Constructive international
engagement is crucial to the Palestinian Authority's
success. The international community's priority now
must be ensuring that the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions can deliver the services and outcomes their
people and ours expect and deserve.
Economic reconstruction, of course, is not
enough. The Palestinian Authority must also deliver on
its commitment to end the campaign of terror against
Israel. For Israel, security is an issue on which we will
never compromise. We insist on the end of terror and
the dismantlement of its infrastructure, for the safety of
our citizens, and so that our peace efforts can succeed.
Turning Gaza into a model of success requires
that the Palestinian Authority act to promote and
protect democracy from its enemies. Here, as with
security, there is no room for discounts. Simply
holding elections is no guarantee of moderation and
responsible government.
Two days ago in Gaza, the terrorist organization
Hamas held a rally of 10,000 armed men dedicated to a
holy war against Israel. Like Al-Qaida and the other
organizations in the global network of terror, Hamas
seeks to destroy everything that the international
community and the moderates in our region seek to
build: tolerance, democracy and peace. Hamas is
responsible for the deliberate murder of hundreds of
Israeli civilians, amongst them scores of women and
children. Israel cannot and will not grant legitimacy to
such an organization. We will not cooperate with its
desire to participate in the forthcoming Palestinian
elections. And we call on the international community
to make clear its own opposition to the inclusion of
such terrorists in the democratic process. If Gaza is
indeed to be the positive model we all wish to see, then
it is those who promote dialogue, not violence, who
must be empowered.
The central threat to global security and to
renewed momentum towards dialogue and peace in the
Middle East today is Iran and its nuclear ambitions. As
the speech before this Assembly by the newly elected
president of Iran so clearly demonstrated, Iran's fanatic
regime remains determined to proceed with its nuclear
weapons programme. Israel welcomes the efforts of the
international community - in particular France, Britain
and Germany, backed by the United States - to deny Iran
the ability to terrorize the world with nuclear weapons.
The Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency is meeting at this very moment
in Vienna to discuss this urgent matter. I call on them
to stop this evil regime from acquiring nuclear
weapons. The security and stability of the entire globe
is at stake. This is why it is essential and urgent that
the Security Council take action. The international
community must rally as one and use all the means at
its disposal to stop Iran before it goes nuclear. We must
not allow the fate of mankind to rest in the hands of the
tyrants of Tehran.
In January of this year, this Assembly convened
in special session to commemorate the Holocaust and
pay tribute to the brave soldiers and nations who freed
European Jewry and the world from the calamity of
that darkest nightmare. Israel commends the
community of nations for standing up in unison on this
anniversary in commitment to the cry "never again".
We commend the Secretary-General's and this
Assembly's recognition that Holocaust remembrance
must be a universal commitment. Ultimately, it is only
the determined defence of the universal values of
tolerance and the sanctity of each human life that will
protect us from tyranny and extremism.
In this spirit, Israel calls on the General
Assembly to adopt a resolution initiated by Israel and
other like-minded countries commemorating the
Holocaust and calling for global educational efforts to
ensure that its lessons are learnt. Especially today, the
day the world's greatest Nazi-hunter, Simon
Wiesenthal, has passed away, we are reminded that the
Holocaust is passing from human memory to history.
As the generation of survivors leaves us, who will tell
their story, if not us?
The special session to commemorate the
Holocaust is only one example, of the welcome shift in
the attitude of this institution towards Israel. Our recent
election as Vice-President of this Assembly is another.
I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
unique contribution to this positive trend. Israel's
relations with the United Nations are better today than
they have ever been. Nevertheless, they are still far
from what they should be.
I call on all the States gathered here to examine
how they too can contribute to promoting a more
balanced and constructive United Nations approach to
Israel. The United Nations cannot be true to its own
lofty and universal principles, if it continues to waste
scarce resources and serve as a forum of hostility and
prejudice against one of its own.
The United Nations was born of the noble vision
to bring the ideals of peace, security and human rights
to all peoples. Sadly, reality of the United Nations
remains far removed from the United Nations ideal.
Major reform is urgent and crucial. Israel joins our
fellow Member States and their peoples in the desire to
see the United Nations fulfil the vision of its founders;
to see the United Nations serving as a force for good in
meeting the many challenges of our age.
Israel seeks to take its rightful place as a country
with full and equal rights in this institution. We seek to
realize our full potential to contribute to the global
agenda. This is why I have decided to present for the
first time Israel's candidacy for membership on the
Security Council.
It was the wisest leader of ancient Israel, King
Solomon, who wrote, in the book of Ecclesiastes, "For
everything there is a season: a time to weep and a time
to laugh; ... a time to love and a time to hate; a time
for war and a time for peace." This is a time for peace.
A time for the leaders of the world to work together to
bring the blessings of opportunity, peace and prosperity
to all humanity.
As the Jewish New Year dawns upon us, I extend
on behalf of the Jewish people greetings of peace and
brotherhood to our Muslim and Arab neighbours and to
all nations.Sixty years ago,
Prime Minister Peter Fraser of New Zealand told
representatives to the San Francisco Conference that its
sole aim should be
“the setting up of a world organization that will
really work, and that will be the background for
an orderly progress towards security, prosperity
and happiness for all the people of all nations”.
The new organization would only work, he said, if its
members were determined to stand by their
commitments and principles.
Today the essential concept of the United Nations
remains robust. We can be justly proud of its
achievements in many areas including humanitarian
assistance, development and peacekeeping. But we
have collectively underperformed in others, sometimes
with tragic results.
Our task this sixtieth anniversary is twofold: first,
to recommit ourselves as Member States to the
enduring vision and values of the Charter and,
19

secondly, to retool the United Nations machinery to
meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) provides
the blueprint for the way forward. New Zealand would
have liked more progress in a number of areas, such as
more detailed agreement on the establishment of the
Human Rights Council and more authority to the
Secretary-General to manage resources in return for
greater accountability. We deeply regret the failure to
endorse further disarmament and non-proliferation
measures.
But we are encouraged by the many significant
advances, including recognition of the need for more
and better aid, establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, a doubling of resources for the Office of
the Commissioner for Human Rights and the
recognition of our shared “responsibility to protect”.
We have as our theme for the General Assembly
implementation of our summit undertakings. We share
accountability for getting the job done. I shall confine
my comments here to the results of the summit.
New Zealand is pleased with the Summit
Outcome as it relates to development. It represents a
shared commitment by all Member States to the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
recognizes the important partnership between
developed and developing countries in the effective use
of aid.
This year New Zealand has increased its
development assistance by 23 per cent. Our official
development assistance (ODA) programme has a focus
on poverty elimination, with a core, but not exclusive,
focus on the Pacific. We strive to address aid
effectiveness, the particular problems faced by small
island developing States, HIV/AIDS, the empowerment
of women, sexual and reproductive health and rights,
education for all, sustainable development and trade
access.
On trade, we look forward to an ambitious
outcome across all aspects of the Doha Development
Agenda, including in agriculture, improved market
access, the elimination of export subsidies and
substantial reductions in trade distorting domestic
support. Improving the coherence of trade policies and
development initiatives remains a critical element in
achieving the MDGs.
New Zealand welcomes the decision to establish
a Peacebuilding Commission to help break the cycle of
conflict by better coordinating long-term international
recovery efforts and ensuring sustained political
attention to those who need it. We must now move
swiftly to get the Commission up and running by
December this year. We look to the General Assembly
President to take a lead in holding consultations to
achieve this. The core elements of the framework have
already been discussed at length and in detail. With
good will and determination, we can surely arrive at
agreement within the next few weeks on a package.
This should ensure balanced membership and flexible
reporting arrangements. We would caution against
raising the bar for assistance too high, and we hope
that all States in need of help will be able to approach
the Commission.
Our leaders have spoken with one voice and
unequivocally to condemn all forms of terrorism. We
must build on this and honour our undertaking to
conclude negotiations on the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism at this session.
New Zealand will continue to work closely with our
friends in the Pacific region to improve our collective
abilities to identify, prevent or respond to terrorist
threats. Consolidating reporting requirements created
by Security Council resolutions would, we believe, be
one step towards enhancing the counter-terrorism
programme of the United Nations. We think it very
important that Member States should now support the
Secretary-General’s counter-terrorism strategy.
One of the most far-reaching achievements of the
summit, as many countries have acknowledged, is our
collective acceptance that there is a responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. We must now
all be prepared to assist the United Nations in
establishing the early warning capability referred to in
our outcome document. It is vital that, when the need
arises, we give effect to our resolve and follow the
principles we have agreed upon.
In this context, New Zealand wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to ending impunity for those
responsible for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community. Adoption of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court was an
historic moment for the United Nations and one that
demonstrated the breadth and depth of political will to
end impunity and to secure the rule of law.
20

The absence of any reference to a commitment to
end impunity or of any acknowledgement of the
International Criminal Court’s central contribution to
this goal is one of several telling silences in our
summit outcome.
We are particularly pleased that leaders have
recognized the need to conclude, during this session,
negotiations on the draft protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
This will be a major priority for New Zealand. We call
on all Member States to contribute constructively to
this process, so that we can reach agreement on a
protocol and demonstrate our full support for the work
of United Nations personnel in the field.
New Zealand welcomes the emphasis on human
rights in the outcome document. That the budget of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is
to be doubled and her Office strengthened is an
overdue recognition of the gap between expectations of
delivery and resourcing.
While progress has been made through the
summit decision to establish a Human Rights Council,
we regret that the opportunity was lost to reach
agreement on details of the Council’s mandate and
operation, despite the support of a great majority of
Members for such a package. A small minority cannot
be allowed to veto the establishment of the Council.
Over the next weeks we must redouble our efforts
to translate that broad support into specifics on what
the Council will look like and on its mandate. We shall
look to the President to set a work programme that will
aim for agreement on the details.
Our second human rights priority for the sixtieth
session is to see negotiations completed on the draft
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities.
The constructive and collegial spirit of delegations in
the Ad Hoc Committee on the rights of persons with
disabilities has been extraordinary. New Zealand is
confident that it will be possible to conclude the
negotiations in 2006 if the Ad Hoc Committee is
enabled to meet for three weeks next January.
Our ability to strengthen the United Nations
across the board in development, security and human
rights will be enhanced by implementing summit
undertakings on Secretariat and management reform.
We need particularly to improve the managerial
effectiveness and accountability of the Secretary-
General. He should be given, as he has requested, the
tools that he needs to manage the Secretariat.
We strongly support the review of all budgetary
and human resource rules and regulations and the
review of mandates. We support also the increased
focus on ensuring ethical conduct on the part of all
United Nations personnel. We believe a system-wide
code of ethics and an independent ethics office would
facilitate that. New Zealand also welcomes the
commitment to strengthening the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services.
The outcome document calls for early reform of
the Security Council, and the General Assembly is to
review progress on this issue by the end of the year.
New Zealand continues to believe that the Security
Council needs to be more effective and more
representative for the twenty-first century, although we
have no illusions about the difficulties of reaching
agreement on this.
We should in the meantime renew our efforts to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
For those many Member States who rarely, if ever,
occupy a non-permanent seat on the Council, there
should be other ways to participate in Council
decisions and contribute to discussions.
We, as Member States, have shown in finalizing
the summit outcome a mixture of courage and
creativity on the one hand and of stubbornness and
hesitation on the other. The implementation period
ahead gives us a second chance to make good on those
moments when we allowed agreements to slip through
our fingers. We put our trust in our President to set up
the structures for ongoing work and to be the catalyst
to motivate and energize us.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the much
valued contribution that former President Ping made
over the last year, and we thank him.In no way can today’s discussion be called
routine. We are faced with summing up the preliminary
results of the large-scale United Nations reforms that
have been launched and designating the main thrust for
the work of the entire system of United Nations
institutions in implementing the outcome document of
the 2005 world summit. We propose to structure the
work of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly in
such a manner as to facilitate the broadest possible
agreement on a number of conceptual issues related to
strengthening the United Nations that will, to a large
degree, determine our ability to enhance the
manageability of international trends in an era of
globalization, and better respond to its new
accompanying threats and challenges.
An analysis of the experience of the United
Nations over the sixty years of its existence, with all
the vagaries of the post-war, cold war and post-cold
war world order, gives us much food for thought and
many conclusions. I would like to share some of that
with you from the viewpoint of the Russian Federation.
As the most representative international
institution with a universal mandate, the United
Nations has been and remains a major integration
factor in global politics. The success of the United
Nations is our success and its failures are our failures.
But ultimately the balance of its work is, we believe,
definitely positive. It is primarily due to this
Organization that we have managed to avoid a new
threat of  world war and a nuclear disaster and have
been able to prevent and settle dozens of military
conflicts. At present, the United Nations mechanisms
continue to be a means of constructive cooperation
touching upon all spheres of human activity.
The greater interdependence of the modern world
has not made it more secure. The standoff between
East and West has been replaced by numerous crises
and conflicts that until recently had remained latent,
left on the periphery of the interests of the two super-
Powers. Some of those conflicts are becoming real or
potential sources of international terrorism, feeding
transborder crime and drug trafficking, which are
closely related to it. Humanity faces the threat of the
uncontrolled spread of weapons of mass destruction
and the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. Again the world is witnessing genocide and
humanitarian disasters. All of this presents immediate
danger to each and every one of us.
11

In that context, the enormous potential of the
United Nations is in greater demand, primarily in
ensuring peace and security on a collective and, more
importantly, on a legitimate legal basis. The
Organization has at its disposal an entire arsenal of
resources enabling it to coordinate the actions of the
international community, to combine political efforts
with those in the social, economic and humanitarian
areas, as well as in the field of protection of human
rights and the environment and other spheres. We
should develop these assets through the concerted
efforts of all States. Russia considers this task to be a
strategic core element of its foreign policy.
The events of the first years of the new
millennium reaffirm the validity of the conclusions
drawn by the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change and the Secretary-General, that is, that a
stronger United Nations and a better use of its
multilateral advantages are an essential instrument to
build a balanced, safe international system, based on
respect for the unique features of every country, their
sovereign equality and collective responsibility. There
is no reasonable alternative to this.
Multilateral mechanisms should also play a key
role in resolving the issues of disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
based on strict compliance with the relevant
international agreements. United Nations achievements
include Security Council resolution 1540 (2004),
initiated by Russia, and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
which establishes the legal basis for preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of terrorists.
It is now crucial to prevent an arms race in outer
space. I remind the Assembly that Russia has assumed
the obligation not to be the first to launch any type of
new weapon into space and has called upon other
countries possessing space capabilities to join in this
measure to keep outer space peaceful. It is time to take
steps to enhance transparency and build confidence in
this area.
The legal basis for countering new threats,
primarily terrorism, is being reinforced. The adoption
at the recent Security Council summit of resolution
1624 (2005), initiated by the United Kingdom, is a
new, important step forward. It places outside the law
not only the terrorists, their accomplices and those who
finance them, but also the individuals inciting terrorist
acts. This Security Council decision should put an end
to attempts to engage the mass media to propagandize
and justify terrorism.
We anticipate that the General Assembly will also
contribute to the fight against terrorism and will
promote completion of the negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
as soon as possible. The fight against terrorism must be
continued most decisively. Each of us should critically
assess his or her efforts in this area.
The realities are that while the sanctions against
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities are still in force, the supplying of arms and
material and other kinds of assistance to the fighters
continues. The geographical scope of their activities is
expanding. For many countries, including Russia, this
is tangible on their own soil. Extremists who are not
directly linked to Al-Qaida  are also stepping up their
activities in various parts of the world. This requires
strengthening of cooperation between States and the
1267 sanctions Committee, the 1540 Committee and,
of course, the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Furthermore, we believe that the
compilation of a consolidated list of all terrorists and
terrorist organizations, whether they are associated in
any way with Al-Qaida or not, cannot be postponed.
The development of criteria for the use of force
in accordance with the United Nations Charter is
another pressing issue. Such criteria, when agreed
upon, could be useful if they become a kind of
benchmark for consideration by the Security Council
of various crisis situations. At the same time, it is clear
that these criteria cannot be applied automatically. The
Security Council would authorize the use of force on a
case-by-case basis, as called for in the Charter.
Another equally important topic is that of States,
in exercising their Charter right to individual and
collective self-defense, to include self-defense in case
of an external terrorist attack or the imminent threat of
such attack. Russia, like other States that have become
targets of terrorist attacks originating beyond their
borders, has no right to err in the eyes of its citizens,
who have entrusted their security to us. We anticipate
that those critical issues will be given due attention at
this session of the General Assembly.
Above all, force should not be used to oppose
law. It can be an effective tool to ensure the rule of law
12

in crisis situations. It is a tool to be used in
extraordinary cases in which vital, legally protected
values and interests of the entire international
community, or certain of its members, are in jeopardy.
Unfortunately, in the preparations for the 2005
world summit, insufficient attention was given to
seeking solutions to those and other important issues
and to finding a way to common understanding. Thus,
that task must remain a top priority of our agenda.
Much remains to be done in terms of
development and the eradication of poverty, epidemics,
famine and illiteracy. Such action would be the
strongest way to ensure global stability and eliminate
the breeding grounds of extremism of all kinds. Russia
endorses all initiatives aimed at attaining the
Millennium Goals and will enhance its contribution to
resolving those urgent issues. The success of our
concerted efforts to support development greatly
depends on the efficacy of the Peacebuilding
Commission to be established. The Commission will
achieve the required results if it is more than just
another debating society and if it can be a mechanism
facilitating the greater coordination of the programmes
and the projects of all the participants in development
assistance, including the World Bank Group, the
International Monetary Fund, regional development
banks, other multilateral and bilateral donors and, of
course, recipient countries.
The dramatic events of the last six months have
revealed the sensitivity of the issue of Security Council
reform for the majority of Member States. Guided
above all by its interest in ensuring the Security
Council’s effectiveness, Russia continues to support
possible modifications of that key organ on the basis of
well-conceived and mutually acceptable decisions.
United Nations Members have made the wise decision
to continue negotiations, rather than pushing for a vote
that might split the Organization.
I recall the striking words: the United Nations
was created not to make heaven on Earth but to save
the Earth from hell. Indeed, the United Nations is not
an ideal body, but the best that humanity was able to
create on the ashes of two world wars. With the help of
the United Nations, we are able to effectively counter
threats to peace and security in the context of evolving
geopolitical realities.
Today, mankind is facing the challenges of
globalization. It is not a question of whether we should
accept those challenges or not, but of how we should
respond to them, and on the basis of what principles.
The 2005 world summit decisions outline the general
direction for our efforts. As a permanent member of the
Security Council and the next President of the Group
of Eight, Russia, together with other States, will
continue to strive to strengthen the collective
underpinnings of global politics and to enhance
mechanisms for multilateral cooperation. On behalf
of President Bush and all of the American people,
welcome to New York City.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, my fellow
citizens have experienced the compassion of the United
Nations. I want to thank Secretary-General Annan for
mobilizing the support of this institution. I also want to
thank the representatives of the 126 countries that have
offered assistance in our relief efforts. The United
States will never forget their generosity in our time of
need.
In moments of tumultuous historical change,
leaders must become architects of a better world. We
must survey the new international landscape, lay firm
foundations of moral principle and build institutions
8

that reflect our unique moment in history. It is those
institutions that enable citizens of conviction to lead us
ever closer to the ideals of justice that stir every soul:
the universal desire for security, prosperity, liberty and
dignity.
Sixty years ago was just such a time of
transformation. After one of the greatest cataclysms in
world history, the United States joined with visionary
builders from over 50 countries to create the United
Nations. We placed the enduring principles of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the foundation of
the United Nations Charter. We built an institution that
has helped to support a peaceful world order for six
decades. Today, however, with the end of the cold war
and the rise of globalization and the emergence of new
threats, the very terrain of international politics has
shifted beneath our feet. In this new world we must
again embrace the challenge of building for the future.
The time to reform the United Nations is now. We
must seize this opportunity together. Chapter I, Article
1, of the Charter of the United Nations proclaims the
four purposes of the United Nations, great aspirations
that have stood the test of time. But consider what
different forms they take today, in 2005, as opposed to
1945, when they were first declared.
The first purpose of the United Nations is to help
maintain international peace and security. In 1945 the
most serious threats to peace and security emerged
between States, and were largely defined by their
borders. Today, however, the greatest threats we face
emerge within States, and melt through their borders:
transnational threats like terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons, pandemic disease and trafficking in human
beings.
The second purpose of this institution, as written
in the United Nations Charter, is to develop friendly
relations among nations, based on equal rights and the
self-determination of all peoples. In 1945, a life of
liberty and dignity was more an aspiration than a
reality for a majority of the world’s people. Today,
however, more nations than ever have enshrined the
principles of democracy and human rights — a true
moral triumph that will be complete only when all
individuals are secure in their basic freedoms.
The third purpose of the United Nations is to
achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems. In 1945, the fear was that
strong, aggressive States, eager and able to expand
their frontiers with force, would be the primary cause
of international problems. Today, however, it is clear
that weak and poorly governed States, unwilling or
incapable of ruling their countries with justice, are the
principal source of global crises, from civil war and
genocide to extreme poverty and humanitarian disaster.
The final purpose of the United Nations, as the
Charter states, is to be a centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations in the attainment of common ends.
In 1945, the world’s leaders joined together to build an
institutional partnership that could address the shared
challenges of their time. Today, faced with the realities
of a new world, we must transform the United Nations
to meet the shared challenges of our time.
The Members of this body must work together to
strengthen security in a world threatened by stateless
extremists. Today, I call on the nations of the world to
ratify the comprehensive convention on terrorism. No
cause, no movement and no grievance can justify the
intentional killing of innocent civilians and non-
combatants. That is unacceptable by any moral
standard. It is time for every Member of the United
Nations to outlaw acts of international terrorism.
We must also work together to promote
prosperity and development in a world of great
potential. The United States is committed to the
Millennium Development Goals. And at the Monterrey
Conference three years ago all nations agreed that
development must be a two-way street. Donor
countries have a responsibility to increase their
assistance to developing nations. And developing
nations have a responsibility to govern justly, advance
economic liberty and invest in their people. The
Monterrey Consensus is working.
Now is not the time to revert to old, failed
thinking about development. Countries representing
three quarters of the developing world’s population are
on a pace to meet the targets of the Millennium
Declaration by 2015.
And, as President Bush said on Wednesday, the
United States is prepared to take new action to
accelerate this progress: we will eliminate all tariffs
and subsidies that distort free trade — as other nations
do the same.
Members of the United Nations must work
together as well to support democracy in a world of
expanding liberty. To advance this common purpose, in
9

2004 President Bush proposed the creation of a
democracy fund. With the broad support of this body,
we have made it a reality. The Fund is now receiving
donations in cash and in kind from countries large and
small that wish to help other nations lay the
foundations of democracy. Showing its leadership as
the world’s largest democracy, India made the generous
opening pledge of $10 million.
Now, to be sure, when speaking about democracy,
the United States has every reason for humility. After
all, it was only in my lifetime that America guaranteed
the right to vote for all its citizens. Obviously, the path
to democracy is long and imperfect and different for
every nation. But the principles of democracy are
universal, as is the desire for them. And the United
Nations must support every country that embraces the
challenge of self-government. In Afghanistan, Iraq,
Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and throughout the
world, peoples who want to build democracy deserve
our help.
The many goals we share are great indeed. And
the United Nations has a major role to play in their
achievement. But for this institution to become an
engine of change in the twenty-first century, it must
now change itself. The United Nations must launch a
lasting revolution of reform.
The United Nations summit declaration
(resolution 60/1), which every head of State endorsed
this week, expresses a global consensus on the fact that
reform is imperative. I want to thank former General
Assembly President Ping for his tireless hard work.
Our challenge now, under President Eliasson’s
leadership, is to enact the vital reforms that will make
the United Nations more accountable to its Members,
more suited to new challenges and more faithful to its
founding purposes.
The United States welcomes the commitment of
all leaders to establish a new Peacebuilding
Commission. Now, we must embrace the difficult task
of implementing that vision. A Peacebuilding
Commission should plan for post-conflict missions
before crises erupt. And it must help to coordinate
reconstruction efforts after the fighting stops. In a
world threatened by civil strife, the United Nations
needs to be better prepared to help countries rebuild in
the aftermath of conflict.
We are also pleased that the world’s leaders have
recognized the importance of establishing a new
Human Rights Council. But it will take a lot of hard
work in the coming months to realize that goal. The
Human Rights Council must have fewer members, less
politics and more credibility. And it should never,
never, empower brutal dictatorships to sit in judgement
of responsible democracies. The Human Rights
Council must have the moral authority to condemn all
violators of human rights, even those that sit among us
in this Hall.
Finally, we welcome the promise of the world’s
leaders to make the United Nations a more effective
and a more principled institution. As President Bush
said on Wednesday (see A/60/PV.2), the United
Nations must stand for integrity and live by the high
standards it sets for others. For the United Nations to
champion democracy more legitimately, we must
increase the transparency and the accountability of this
institution. For the United Nations to promote
prosperity more credibly, tougher ethics rules and
greater internal oversight are needed to ensure the
highest professional standards. And to make the United
Nations relevant to the challenges of today, the purpose
and the performance of all United Nations programmes
must be reviewed thoroughly, consistently and
comprehensively.
Our fellow citizens deserve a United Nations that
commands their respect and is worthy of their hard-
earned tax dollars. In a democracy, leaders must be
able to justify that their people’s money is indeed being
well spent.
Real progress on those fundamental reforms will
prove that the United Nations can address greater
issues of change, in particular the reform of the
Security Council. We want that important body to
reflect the world as it is in 2005, not as it was in 1945.
The United States is open to expanding the Security
Council. We have long supported a permanent seat for
Japan. And we believe that developing countries
deserve greater representation on that body. All this
would make for a more effective Security Council.
And the Security Council must be effective. It
must be able to deal with great challenges such as
terrorism and nuclear proliferation, especially when it
faces real threats and when countries such as Iran
threaten the effectiveness of the global non-
proliferation regime. When diplomacy has been
10

exhausted, the Security Council must become involved.
Questions about Iran’s nuclear activities remain
unanswered, despite repeated efforts by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. And after
agreeing to negotiate with Europe, Iran unilaterally
walked away from the talks and restarted its nuclear
programmes. Iran should return to the negotiations
with the European Union three and abandon forever its
plans for a nuclear-weapons capability.
The experience of recent years has reinforced the
universal truth that international institutions are only as
strong and effective and relevant as their members
choose to make them. The United Nations is no
different.
The United States believes in a United Nations
that is strong and effective. And we have ambitious
hopes for its future.
So in this year, as the United Nations marks its
sixtieth anniversary, let us recommit ourselves to
principled action. Let us embrace the same spirit of
creation that moved the builders and leaders of 1945.
And let us reform this great institution to meet the
challenges of a new era.First, I would like to salute
Mr. Jean Ping, the outgoing President of the General
Assembly, for the work he did to guide the General
Assembly as the nations of the world considered the
immensely important matters that led to the elaboration
of the outcome document that was adopted last night.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to preside over the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. We are confident that you will lead
the Assembly well as it confronts the challenge of
implementing the decisions taken during the
millennium review summit and remains seized of other
important matters that were not adequately addressed
in the outcome document.
Shortly before we convened here for the
millennium review summit, an important meeting of
Christian leaders took place in Washington, D.C. Those
leaders issued a communique entitled ìA Call to
Partnershipî, directed at our summit meeting. In part
the call says,
"At the urgent call of church leaders in the
southern hemisphere, we came together at the
Washington National Cathedral as Christian
leaders from diverse traditions and places, both
rich and poor, in the South and the North, united
in a common concern for those of us living in
poverty. We see their faces; we hear their voices;
they are a part of us, and we are a part of them."
As the United Nations reaches its sixtieth
anniversary, we give thanks for its work in
peacemaking and global reconciliation,
particularly the historic commitment to eradicate
poverty in the Millennium Declaration of 2000.
10

Five years have passed, and, despite the triumph
of principle, there has been a failure in practice.
In this communique, we offer our partnership to
the leaders gathered at the World Summit at the
United Nations in building a global movement to
make real the promises of the Millennium
Development Goals as a crucial step towards a
more just world for all God's children.
We believe that God calls us to place
people struggling with poverty at the centre of
our concern. Globalization has brought
unprecedented economic growth. At the same
time, one sixth of the world's people still fight
daily for survival under the crushing burden of
extreme poverty. The increasing concentration of
wealth in our world, while so many suffer, is a
scandal that impoverishes us all.
"We believe that the spirit of partnership
between rich and poor, exemplified in the MDGs,
is a way the world can address poverty in all its
dimensions. In particular, we support the goal of
a global partnership for development, and believe
that the Churches can make a unique contribution
to that partnership."
If nothing else, the fact that the religious leaders
who issued that call gathered from many parts of the
world to agree on a message to our summit Meeting
must remind us that the masses - the people who
elected us - entertain high expectations about the
United Nations. They see this Organization as their
pre-eminent partner in the continuing struggle to build
a better and humane world.
They challenge those of us who have the
privilege to represent our States in the United Nations
to build, strengthen and direct this world Organization
so that it can, indeed, play its role as a pre-eminent
partner of the peoples of the world in constructing a
better and more humane world.
Accordingly, I believe that we must view with the
greatest seriousness their conclusion that five years
have passed since we adopted the Millennium
Declaration and that, 'despite this triumph of principle,
there has been a failure in practice'.
Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the
destructive fury of the Second World War and the
villainous genocide committed during that war, the
United Nations was formed, in the words of the
Charter, "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind".
Responding to the universal demand for human
and peoples' rights, the founders declared that they
were forming the United Nations "to reaffirm faith in
the fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small" and to
"promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom".
As we gather here, in part to celebrate the sixtieth
anniversary of an international Organization
established to bring hope to the peoples of the world,
we cannot avoid asking some hard questions. That is
necessary if we are to live up to our obligation to
ensure that the United Nations discharges its
responsibilities, described by the religious leaders who
met at the Washington National Cathedral as
peacemaking, global reconciliation and the eradication
of poverty.
We must ask ourselves how well prepared the
United Nations is today, 60 years after it was
established, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; to protect and advance the fundamental
human rights of all; to protect and advance the dignity
and worth of each human person; to ensure equal rights
between men and women; to ensure equal rights
between nations large and small; and to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
We must ask - and answer honestly - whether
what we do as the United Nations is properly described
as a triumph of principle but a failure in practice, as the
religious leaders put it.
The reality is that, 60 years after the United
Nations was formed as a response to the appalling and
ghastly results of the crime of racism, we are still
confronted by the cancer of racism. Although the
United Nations has adopted important decisions on that
matter, and convened the necessary conferences to
unite the peoples of the world against racism, those
who continue to fall victim to that crime against
humanity would find it difficult to cite the instances
when the United Nations came to their aid.
Sixty years after the United Nations was formed,
the indecencies of war and violent conflict continue to
afflict innocent people, evidently because we, the
11

United Nations, lack the will to live up to the
commitment that was made when this Organization
was established.
Africans, who have been exposed to many violent
conflicts since the United Nations was formed, are
particularly keen for this Organization to live up to its
obligation to save succeeding African generations from
the scourge of war. Even as we speak, the United
Nations is faced with the urgent task of taking the
necessary action in CÙte díIvoire to help to bring a
lasting peace to that important African country,
opening the way to its reunification, the holding of
democratic elections and the promotion of social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
to use the words of the Charter.
A similar challenge faces this Organization with
regard to the restoration of lasting peace in Darfur in
the Sudan, building on the historic conclusion and
implementation of the Sudanese Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, signed in Nairobi, Kenya, earlier this year.
Only 11 years ago, we experienced a terrible
genocide in Rwanda, and thousands were killed in the
internecine conflict that took place in the Balkans.
Those who were exposed to the savagery would be
fully justified in concluding that the United Nations
had betrayed its commitment to the peoples of the
world.
I am certain that all of us are impatient to see an
end to the conflicts in the Middle East, including Iraq,
and in particular the restoration of the rights of the
people of Palestine, in the context of the successful
implementation of the road map.
While we welcome recent positive developments
in this regard, we must accept the reality that every day
that passes without the full implementation of the road
map only serves to point an accusing finger at us, the
United Nations, accusing us of not having done
everything we could to help secure the just and lasting
peace that is the right of the Palestinian, the Israeli and
the Arab peoples.
We have all recognized the serious and urgent
threat posed by international terrorism to all our
nations. We have all accepted the reality that we need a
multilateral response to that common threat. Yet we
have still not succeeded in arriving at a common
definition of that threat or identified its fundamental
causes.
The issues of non-proliferation and the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction are
matters of critical concern to all nations, both large and
small. Yet we failed to address those matters in the
outcome document adopted at the review summit last
night, even as the issue of nuclear weapons and their
non-proliferation is among the most prominent items in
world news and on the international agenda. None of
us could justly claim that our failure as the United
Nations to take specific decisions on these matters
served to enhance global security in the face of the
threat of weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the issue of Iran, we firmly believe
that negotiations should resume and that the matter be
settled within the framework of the provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and with the full participation of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
The gap between the rich and the poor is
becoming worse within and between countries, as
observed by the United Nations Development
Programmeís 2005 Human Development Report, which
states that the gap between the average citizen in the
richest and in the poorest countries is wide and is
getting wider. It states that in 1990 the average
American was 38 times richer than the average
Tanzanian, while today the average American is 61
times richer.
The same report states, on page 3,
"In 2003, 18 countries with a combined
population of 460 million people registered lower
scores on the human development index (HDI)
than in 1990 - an unprecedented reversal. In the
midst of an increasingly prosperous global
economy, 10.7 million children every year do not
live to see their fifth birthday, and more than 1
billion people survive in abject poverty on less
than a $1 a day."
Accordingly, if we pause and scan the road
travelled to judge whether we have succeeded in saving
the world from the scourge of war; whether we have
built a world that has reaffirmed faith in fundamental
human rights; whether we have created a world that
has restored the dignity and worth of the human
person - a world that has entrenched equal rights for
men and women and for nations, large and small - the
answer from the majority of the people of the world
may very well be a resounding "No".
12

The United Nations has adopted many decisions
intended to help address the various global challenges
that have persisted over the 60 years of its existence.
Accordingly, we have the necessary policies to address
the social, economic, political and other problems
facing humanity. We have also adopted comprehensive
and clear programmes to give effect to those policies
and have identified the resources required for their
implementation.
The questions we must answer are: why have we
not implemented these programmes, and what must be
done to correct the situation?
The process of globalization means that our
common world is more integrated today than it was
when the United Nations was formed 60 years ago.
Similarly, the interconnectedness of the issues of
peace, security, development and human rights has
never been more pronounced than it is today. All this
means that the imperatives that made it necessary and
correct to establish the United Nations as part of a
desirable system of global governance are that much
more compelling today, and that the necessary reform
of the Organization must take place to ensure that it
reflects the new global realities since it was formed
and that it is empowered to respond effectively to the
urgent challenges that face all humanity.
And yet, the painful paradox we face is that it
seems obvious that, over the years, there has been a
continuous erosion of the authority and prestige of the
United Nations and a sustained drift towards its
marginalization in terms of playing its rightful role, as
so clearly defined in the United Nations Charter. At its
sixtieth session, the General Assembly has the heavy
responsibility to reassert the critical need for the
United Nations to discharge its responsibilities as
spelled out in that Charter. Experience over the last 60
years has shown that, to address the criticism levelled
against the Organization by religious leaders ó that
there has been a triumph of principle and a failure in
practice ó we must be ready to engage in a sustained
struggle to ensure that the vision contained in the
United Nations Charter is actually translated into
reality.
As we engage in this struggle, we should say, as
did the religious leaders who met at the Washington
National Cathedral, that we are united in a common
concern for those of us living in poverty: "We see their
faces; we hear their voices; they are a part of us, and
we are a part of them."
Let me close by reiterating our deepest
sympathies and condolences to the Government and the
people of the United States in the wake of the death
and destruction wreaked by Hurricane Katrina.May I begin by extending my congratulations on your
election as the President of the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session. I am confident that under your
guidance this session will achieve fruitful results. I also
wish to take this opportunity to express my sincere
respects to Mr. Jean Ping, President at the previous
session, and to the Secretary-General.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the
end of the world war against fascism and the founding
of the United Nations. Just a few days ago in this Hall,
world leaders solemnly adopted the outcome document
of the High-level Plenary Meeting (resolution 60/1).
Now, it falls to us to fulfil the important and pressing
task of working towards a harmonious world of lasting
peace and common prosperity by translating that
document into action and turning fine words into
reality. This session should serve to promote peace,
harmony and common development.
We want peaceful development. Progress of
mankind needs a peaceful environment. Stability and
security of one country cannot be built on the
turbulence or crisis of another. Only a new security
concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality
and coordination will enable us to develop in peace and
safeguard peace through development.
We want harmonious development. To build a
better future is the long-cherished dream of mankind.
Any development strategy should be guided by a long-
term and holistic perspective instead of immediate and
sectoral benefits. Therefore, we should work together
for more democratic and law-based international
relations and a harmonious environment in which
countries respect one another, treat one another as
equals, and in which different cultures can emulate and
interchange with each other.
18

We want common development. No model of
development that benefits only a few countries or a
small group of people is acceptable or sustainable.
Countries should cooperate with each other more
closely so that economic globalization may yield
successful results, benefit-sharing and common
prosperity.
This session should serve to push forward
reforms of the United Nations and strengthen its role.
Having weathered 60 years of vicissitudes, the United
Nations needs multifaceted and multidimensional
reforms so as to be able to make a greater contribution
to mankind’s noble cause of peace and development.
The position of the United Nations as the core of
the world collective security mechanism must be
strengthened so that it can perform its duty of
safeguarding peace in a more effective way. China
supports the efforts to enhance the Organization’s
capacity on conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices. We also favour a greater role by the Secretary-
General in this respect and the fostering of a preventive
culture.
We support the efforts to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly with
regard to rapid deployment capacity and strategic
preparedness, as well as the capacity to fully mobilize
regional organizations and their resources under the
leadership of the Security Council.
China supports the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission to more effectively
coordinate United Nations efforts in the areas of
peacekeeping, post-conflict rehabilitation and
development. In that respect, the Economic and Social
Council and other development assistance agencies
should have an important role to play in the
Commission.
It has been our consistent position to oppose the
use or threat of force in international relations. We do
not support the reinterpretation or revision of the
provisions in the Charter of the United Nations related
to the right of self-defence. Should an occasion arise
that calls for the use of force, it is the Security Council
that should make sound judgements and take prudent
decisions as to the merits of the situation.
The international community should continue to
press ahead with the international process on arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation; safeguard
and enhance the authority and effectiveness of existing
multilateral treaties; give full scope to the role of the
United Nations and other international organizations in
the area of non-proliferation; and seek solutions to
related issues by political and diplomatic means.
The United Nations should be able to cope more
effectively with non-traditional security threats. We
welcome the comprehensive strategy on counter-
terrorism proposed by the Secretary-General, and we
hope to see the early conclusion of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, taking full
account of the concerns of various parties, particularly
developing countries.
In the effort to reduce and prevent large-scale
humanitarian crises, the international community
should strictly observe the United Nations Charter,
respect the opinions of the countries or organizations
concerned and, with the Security Council’s
authorization, explore, to the greatest extent possible,
peaceful settlement within the United Nations
framework. We oppose any rash intervention carried
out on the basis of the claim that a nation is unable or
unwilling to protect its own citizens.
Development should be a main focus of United
Nations reform. Although China is a low-income
developing country, it is prepared to contribute as
much as it can to international cooperation for
development. As President Hu Jintao announced at the
summit, China will take substantive steps in five areas.
We will join hands with all Members to advance
reforms in the area of development so as to facilitate
the resolution of development issues. The United
Nations should put in place a fair and rational
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) review
framework to assess progress made in various
countries and to monitor follow-up of international
cooperation and aid commitments. We support the
coordinating role of the Economic and Social Council
in development-related areas.
The Doha Round should embody development in
its focus, paying more attention and taking actions to
address the concerns of developing countries,
particularly with regard to agricultural produce and
special and differential treatment. China has decided to
grant zero-tariff treatment to some commodities from
39 least developed countries, which will cover the
majority of China’s imports from those countries.
19

China is in favour of incorporating the prevention
and treatment of HIV/AIDS and the building of the
public health sector into the development programmes
and activities of various countries and of the United
Nations. We will be submitting at the current session a
draft resolution on strengthening global capacity-
building in the area of public health. In the next three
years, we plan to provide more aid and medicine to
developing countries for preventing and treating
malaria and other communicable diseases and to help
them establish and reform their public health systems
and train medical personnel.
The international community — particularly
developed countries — should take substantive steps to
help developing countries break the vicious circle of
debt. Such steps include substantial debt reduction and
the streamlining of debt relief procedures and
requirements. In the next two years, China will write
off or otherwise cancel the overdue portions, as of the
end of 2004, of interest-free or low-interest
Government loans owed by all heavily indebted poor
countries having diplomatic relations with China.
We call on the United Nations to give priority to
helping developing countries to strengthen their
capacity-building. China will help developing
countries train 30,000 people for various professions in
the next three years.
My country also favours setting a timetable for
developed countries to allocate 0.7 per cent of their
gross national income to official development
assistance. New fund-raising methods should be
explored so as to put more funds into development.
China pledges $10 billion in concessional loans
to developing countries in the next three years within
the framework of South-South cooperation.
The Charter of the United Nations grants the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
highly efficient, responsible and representative Council
serves the long-term interests of the United Nations
and the common interests of all its Member States.
China supports reform of the Security Council
aimed at strengthening its authority and efficiency and
improving its working methods. The representation of
developing countries, particularly African countries,
should be increased so that small and medium-sized
countries would have more say in the Council’s
decision-making. No reform proposal can work that
addresses only the concerns of a few countries,
disregarding the interests of the majority of countries,
and treats developing countries in Africa and in other
parts of the world unfairly.
China supports the principle of cooperation based
on democratic consultation. As reform will affect the
future of the United Nations and the interests of
various parties, there should be no artificial timeframes
or attempts to force decisions through a vote. Instead,
Member States should seek consensus through dialogue
and consultation and in accordance with the principle
of democratic international relations.
China embraces the spirit of unity and
cooperation. The United Nations family has 191
Members. Unity is the source of strength. We want
unity, not division. As long as Member States respect
one another’s interests, accommodate one another’s
concerns and show pragmatism and flexibility, we will
be able to find a reform path that is acceptable to all.
The current session should focus on Africa.
African countries make up a quarter of the United
Nations membership, and their populations account for
13 per cent of the world’s total population. If there is
no stability in Africa, the world will have no peace. If
Africa remains poor, there will be no development for
the world. The outcome document of the summit calls
for efforts to meet the special needs of Africa. I believe
that that is correct and necessary.
Despite the gratifying progress made in Africa in
recent years, conflicts in some of its regions have
persisted. The Security Council should pay special
attention to African problems and give them priority on
its agenda. That means not only devoting more Council
meetings to African issues, but also, and more
important, taking concrete actions to heed Africa’s
voice, respect its views and accommodate its concerns.
China applauds the mediation and good offices of
the African Union and other regional organizations
aimed at conflict settlement in Africa. We support
close cooperation between the Security Council and
those organizations by providing them with funds,
logistics and technical assistance to strengthen their
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
capacities.
African countries face difficulties in the area of
development, particularly in attaining the MDGs. More
20

than 300 million people are still living under the
poverty line. One third of all children are
malnourished. More than 30 million people are
suffering from HIV/AIDS. With less than 2 per cent of
the world’s economic aggregate, Africa is weighed
down by debts amounting to $300 billion. All of that
poses a challenge to the conscience of mankind.
The international community should reach a
global consensus on African development and help the
continent to achieve the MDGs on schedule by
implementing the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Those who provide assistance must do
so in all sincerity and respect the right of African
countries to make their own decisions. Assistance must
also have a clear aim: to meet the basic and long-term
needs of the African people. Assistance is by no means
charity or a gift; it is a response to the call for mutual
benefit and common development. Furthermore, it is
our moral duty to help the needy and redress injustices.
In the twentieth century, Africa shook off
colonial rule and achieved national liberation. That was
an epoch-making event. The twenty-first century will
bring peace and development to Africa — it is
historically inevitable. The Chinese people will
continue to stand beside their African brothers and
sisters on that journey of historic significance.
The recently concluded Six-Party Talks in Beijing
on the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue have reached an
important consensus and issued a joint declaration,
marking an important step forward in the Talks and a
crystallization of the political will and diligence of the
parties concerned. It also reflects the common
aspiration of the international community. Because it
was so hard-won, this result needs to be especially
prized. We hope that the parties will continue to work
together to promote further progress in the Six-Party
Talks, resolve the nuclear issue on the Peninsula
through dialogue and by peaceful means, ensure lasting
peace and stability in the region and realize its
common goals for development and prosperity. The
Chinese Government will continue to make a positive
contribution in that regard.Please accept
my congratulations, Sir, on your election to the
presidency of this historic sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. I wish you every success. I would
also like to express my sincere thanks to the outgoing
President for his dedicated work at the fifty-ninth
session. I endorse the statement of the European Union
(EU) presidency.
The debate at last week’s summit highlighted one
important point, namely, that peace, development,
security and human rights are inseparably linked. One
cannot address human rights and security without also
addressing development. All of those issues are at the
very heart of our policies.
People are waiting for our solutions to the
pressing problems of development. We must achieve
the Millennium Development Goals. Of that we are
acutely aware, both in Germany and in Europe. The EU
plan to reach the 0.7 per cent official development
assistance goal by 2015, and the Group of Eight (G-8)
commitments made at Gleneagles, substantially
strengthen the financial basis of our work.
We are also willing to forge new paths by making
use of innovative financing mechanisms.
At the same time, frameworks establishing fair
conditions for international trade are a prerequisite if
poorer States are to share the benefits of globalization.
The EU is leading the way with its “Everything But
Arms” initiative, which grants the least developed
countries duty-free and quota-free market access. In
that context, we must do all we can to make the
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization, to be held in Hong Kong in December, a
success. Only in that way can we bring the Doha round
negotiations to a successful conclusion.
We also know that excessive indebtedness curbs
growth and development. The realignment of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt
Initiative after 1999 has considerably reduced the
indebtedness of some 27 States. Germany has to date
forgiven €6.5 billion of debt and has earmarked a
further €4 billion for the continuation of the HIPC
initiative.
Debt relief is, however, dependent on all creditors
spreading the burden fairly among themselves. We are
alarmed by the fact that commercial and State creditors
outside the Paris Club are doing less and less to live up
to their responsibilities. I would like to seize this
opportunity to call for your support at the forthcoming
annual meeting of the Bretton Woods institutions, for
the G-8 proposal and for an extensive cancellation of
debts — including multilateral debts — for the
countries concerned.
All of the foregoing emphasizes the great
importance we attach to the global partnership for
33

development. That partnership is not, however, a one-
way street. It also requires a commitment by partner
States to put in place the conditions for
development — that is, democracy, good governance,
respect for human rights and anti-corruption measures.
Climate protection and development are also
closely intertwined. Of course, everyone must have
access to energy. Nevertheless, all States must do their
part to prevent the ominous advance of climate change.
In late November the parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Kyoto Protocol will meet in Montreal. There, we will
have the opportunity to adopt effective mechanisms to
reduce emissions of greenhouse gases beyond 2012.
That is precisely the policy pursued by the Kyoto
Protocol, and it is a policy we will adhere to.
This year two natural catastrophes — the tsunami
in the Indian Ocean and Hurricane Katrina in the
United States of America — have clearly demonstrated
just how vulnerable our societies are to natural
disasters. We have all learned just how important
disaster prevention is. As host to the Third
International Conference on Early Warning, which will
be held in Bonn in March 2006, Germany hopes to
contribute to making better use of and improving early
warning mechanisms and thereby limiting the scale of
the damage caused by such disasters. Here I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our invitation to all
Member States to join us in making the Bonn
Conference a success.
For years, United Nations engagement has been
hailed all over the world as a welcome sign of
protection and assistance, of peace and reconstruction.
Last Sunday saw the first free parliamentary elections
in Afghanistan under the new Constitution. The
Government of Afghanistan, with a full complement of
democratically legitimated institutions, is now
prepared to assume responsibility for the further
reconstruction of the country. By going to the polls,
millions of women and men in Afghanistan have
proved that they have opted for democracy. Our thanks
go to the United Nations, which worked hard to make
those elections possible.
In his latest report on Afghanistan (A/60/224) the
Secretary-General announced that the United Nations
will remain committed to assisting the country after the
elections. I heartily endorse that commitment; such
help is indispensable. For even if the Bonn process,
launched four years ago, has now been brought to a
successful conclusion, the international community
will still need to stand by Afghanistan. Germany, too,
will continue to do its utmost to support the country.
The President returned to the Chair.
Ten years after the conclusion of the Dayton
Agreement, and six years after the end of the Kosovo
conflict, the situation in the Western Balkans has
improved tangibly. Nonetheless, major progress is still
required in the political, legal and economic fields. The
people of that region must genuinely come to terms
with their past, and the parties to the conflict must be
reconciled. In that connection, we call for full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague.
The Middle East still faces great challenges. As
its neighbours, we in Europe have a strategic interest in
peace and stability in the region. We are convinced that
only through reform, the strengthening of democracy
and the rule of law can lasting stability be guaranteed.
The free and fair parliamentary elections in Palestine
and Lebanon are encouraging signs of change.
The Middle East peace process has also gained
new momentum over past months. We emphatically
welcome the Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip
and the northern part of the West Bank. Now it is vital
that Israelis, Palestinians and the international
community do all they can to lay the foundations for
political and economic stability in the Gaza Strip.
Efforts should be focused on a two-State solution based
on the road map. The objective remains a viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders.
The international community is united in its
determination to help Iraq establish democracy and the
rule of law. We want all Iraqis to be able to live free
from fear and material hardship. The forces of terror
and violence must not and shall not be permitted to win
the upper hand. The Middle East needs a stable,
prosperous Iraq.
Here, too, the United Nations is making its
contribution towards the process of political transition
and reconstruction. That is why we have provided
considerable financial assistance for the protection
force whose presence allows the United Nations to
work in Iraq. It is also why Germany has, at Iraq’s
request, advised that country on constitutional issues.
34

The Iranian nuclear programme continues to be a
major cause of concern. Past violations of international
obligations, a lack of transparency in its actions, and
insufficient cooperation with subsequent investigations
have destroyed any confidence that the programme is
for exclusively peaceful purposes. With support from
the EU High Representative, Germany, France and the
United Kingdom have worked with Iran on finding a
way to restore confidence. Those efforts have received
broad support from the international community.
Tehran’s continued disregard of International Atomic
Energy Agency decisions, however, is further
weakening that confidence and the gains made to date
are being put at risk for no good reason. We should
emphasize that our concerns do not relate to Iran’s
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
This has never been and will not be put in
question. Our concerns do not relate to Iran’s right to
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That has
never been and will not be called into question.
We remain prepared to work on solutions which
include objective guarantees that the Iranian nuclear
programme can serve only peaceful ends. I appeal to
Iran to refrain from taking unilateral measures and to
return to the negotiating table.
There is general agreement that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction is now more than ever
a life-threatening risk to us all. It is thus all the more
regrettable that no consensus could be reached on the
inclusion in the outcome document of a chapter on
non-proliferation and disarmament. If we want to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular of nuclear weapons, all States
must fulfil their obligations. At the same time, new
momentum must be brought to the process of nuclear
disarmament.
In that context, I welcome the latest progress made
by the six-party talks towards resolving the nuclear
crisis on the Korean peninsula. It is a vital first step.
Africa is in many ways a touchstone for and an
example of an effective multilateral system. The close
cooperation of the United Nations with the African
Union, as well as with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), has had a beneficial
impact in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and,
recently, in Burundi. The United Nations is also
playing an equally important role in efforts to stabilize
the Great Lakes region.
Following the death of John Garang, the peace
process in the Sudan requires an even greater
commitment by all parties to implement the historic
Nairobi peace agreement. The United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), to which Germany has
contributed personnel, is making a major contribution.
However, we must not neglect other crisis areas, in
particular Darfur. The African Union mission in Darfur
has helped to stabilize the security situation in the area
where it is stationed.
The variety of problems facing us — poverty, social
polarization, global population growth, inadequate water
supplies and global climate change, to name only the
most pressing — serves to highlight the need for
concerted action. We must prepare the United Nations
for the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Over the past 12 months, reform of the United
Nations has been intensively debated. Member States,
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General himself
have provided valuable input. Some of their proposals
are contained in the outcome document adopted at last
week’s world summit.
However, only when we have managed to
implement those proposals will we be able to speak of
true achievement. To be a success, the process requires
the active participation of all Member States.
The tasks that the summit has set the General
Assembly must be tackled with speed and focus. At
this session, the General Assembly must make a
breakthrough towards the adoption of the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
It must also work on the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission.
Sustainable peace requires more than merely
restoring security. The post-conflict peacebuilding
phase is particularly crucial. The sooner reconstruction
can begin, and the better coordinated the peacemaking
and post-conflict recovery efforts are, the better the
chances of lasting stabilization. The summit took a
vital step in that direction by deciding to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission by the end of the year.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report
entitled “In larger freedom”, states that:
“No security agenda and no drive for
development will be successful unless they are
based on … respect for human dignity”.
(A/59/2005, para. 128)
35

If we wish to lend greater weight to the
protection and promotion of human rights, we must
also strengthen the relevant United Nations bodies and
mechanisms.
Germany therefore welcomes the decision taken
by the summit to create a Human Rights Council which
will replace the Commission on Human Rights. The
General Assembly must now move fast to define the
mandate and structures of the Human Rights Council.
It must ensure that the new body enjoys greater
legitimacy than its predecessor and that its working
methods are more effective, especially when it comes
to responding to acute crises.
Allow me a last word. A glance at the trouble
spots around the world makes it clear that we, the
international community, face far more conflicts in the
South than we do in the North. Key decisions on
settling those conflicts are taken in the Security
Council which, under the Charter of the United
Nations, has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace. Its composition, however, still reflects the
world of 1945 and not that of the twenty-first century.
Adjusting and expanding the membership of the
Security Council by adding both permanent and non-
permanent members thus remains essential. Any reform
of the United Nations that does not include reform of the
Security Council is not worthy of the name.
The Security Council is in danger of losing its
authority and legitimacy as long as entire continents
and major contributors are not adequately represented.
Germany and its partners Brazil, India and Japan
therefore have submitted a proposal on reform of the
Council. It is the only proposal that includes a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council and its
working methods. We are convinced that it is the only
proposal capable of obtaining the necessary two-thirds
majority in the General Assembly.
Reform of the Security Council is an
indispensable part of the overhaul of the United
Nations. In last week’s summit document, we all
pledged to swiftly advance those reforms. We do not
need only progress; we need results. The time is ripe
for radical reform. Let us use this session of the
General Assembly to finally resolve this issue, which is
so vital to the future of the United Nations.Speaking for the first time from this rostrum, I wish to
reaffirm here the importance France attaches to the
multilateral system. Our common future cannot be
envisaged without strengthening it.
The declaration adopted the day before yesterday
is a milestone in that direction, even if it does not meet
all our expectations. Indeed, the text makes some
significant advances. I am thinking in particular of
innovative financing for development. I am also
thinking of the decision to establish a peacebuilding
commission within the Security Council. Finally, I am
thinking of the establishment of a Human Rights
Council and the endorsement of the principle of the
responsibility to protect. Now it is up to us to put those
new concepts into practice.
In that connection, I wish to pay tribute here to
the remarkable work that has been done under the
stewardship of Mr. Jean Ping.
But let us not underestimate the extent of the task
that still remains to be accomplished, be it in the areas
of counter-terrorism, non-proliferation, Security
Council reform or development assistance.
The United Nations is founded on the rule of law
and the promotion of universal standards. Those reflect
our common values and our conviction that there can
be no security and development without scrupulous
respect for human rights. This is not a moral question
but one of respect for the identity of every individual.
It is not a matter of passing judgement but of enabling
all people to live in greater freedom and in dignity.
Let us reject the impressment of children in
armed conflicts, the systematic use of sexual violence
against women and girls as a weapon of war, the
recourse to threats, arbitrary detention and torture of
opponents, journalists, labour leaders and defenders of
human rights. And, let us conclude the negotiations on
a convention against forced disappearances. To that
end, let us strengthen the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and promptly
establish the Human Rights Council.
France particularly welcomes the fact that the
international community now has the necessary
legitimacy to exercise effectively its responsibility to
protect populations threatened by ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and genocide. France also
welcomes the progress of the international criminal
justice system, in particular through the action of the
Security Council. Those who believe they can count on
the international community not to act when they
commit their crimes should make no mistake: they will
be held accountable.
Sixty years after the founding of the United
Nations, terrorism is now at the top of the list of human
rights violations. Nothing — no cause, religion or
moral order — can justify attacks on the lives of
innocents, the lives of civilians. We must define acts of
terrorism once and for all so that we can better combat
that barbaric practice which sets humankind back.
17

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes another major threat for the planet, against
which we must remain united and determined.
France, together with its British and German
partners, has proposed to Iran a constructive approach
paving the way for a new relationship between that
great country and the international community. That
relationship is currently compromised by concerns over
Iran’s nuclear programme. We ask Iran to build trust by
providing objective guarantees on the exclusively
peaceful nature of its programme. Iran’s statements
from this rostrum compel the international community
to meet its responsibilities, as referral of the matter to
the Security Council is on the agenda in order to
strengthen the authority of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The very integrity of the non-
proliferation regime is at stake.
But let us also work to reduce the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, which fuel so many very
deadly conflicts.
To better serve peace and ensure the security of
populations, the Security Council has expanded its
field of action to the trafficking that finances conflicts
and the impunity that protects traffickers, using, in
particular, sanctions and embargoes. The United
Nations is resolutely engaged on the ground, at the
very heart of conflicts. More than 70,000 blue
helmeted soldiers and police officers are now serving
in 18 peacekeeping operations, and thousands of others
are operating under Security Council mandates.
The results can be seen, for example, in Timor-
Leste, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. But as countries emerge from
crisis, it is essential that they continue to benefit from
our full attention and support. The United Nations has
the duty to take a central role in the transition phase
through the Peacebuilding Commission.
Other situations demand great vigilance and a
high level of mobilization. Thus, in Haiti, the presence
of strong contingents of United Nations soldiers and
police must lead to the strengthening of the political
process by involving all peaceful forces without
exception. Preparations for elections must be
accelerated. Like all peoples, the Haitian people, who
have suffered for too long, are entitled to respect and
freedom.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the presence of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
appointment of a High Representative of the Secretary-
General for the elections should also help strengthen
implementation of the process set out at Marcoussis
and Pretoria.
But in Côte d’Ivoire, as in Haiti, the determined
action of the united international community will not
produce results unless all parties cooperate in good
faith and demonstrate their sense of responsibility. In
Abidjan as in Bouaké, all must respect their pledged
commitments so that free and transparent elections can
be held throughout the country. No other solution is
possible. That is why it is essential to resolutely
support the electoral process that has begun, as well as
the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programmes. All Ivorian parties must understand that
they will not block the peace efforts with impunity if
they take an obstructive stance, make hate speeches or
challenge democratic rules. The Security Council will
meet its responsibilities.
The situation in Lebanon demonstrates what can
be accomplished by a determined international
mobilization, supported by the courageous will of the
people. Most Syrian forces have now left Lebanon.
Elections have been held. A representative Government
has been formed. Our Organization must continue to
support the Lebanese Government’s efforts to recover
full sovereignty and exercise its authority over the
whole of its territory. At the same time, we must
continue to support the work of the commission of
inquiry into the assassination of Rafik Hariri. We are
determined to see justice done.
Also with respect to the Middle East, a dynamic
of hope, which could touch all States of the region, is
emerging following Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza.
France, together with its European partners, stands
with the Palestinians to rebuild and develop that
territory so that its inhabitants can move around freely
and have access to jobs and, quite simply, to decent
living conditions.
But we must not stop there. It is important to
restore political prospects for relaunching
implementation of the road map by, on the one hand,
encouraging the Palestinians to redouble their efforts
on security and, on the other, encouraging the Israelis
to take the measures necessary to stop settlement
activity and to comply with international law in their
18

struggle for security. Peace can come only with the
existence of two peaceful and democratic States living
side by side in peace and security.
Finally, with respect to Iraq, France remains
engaged so that, with the assistance of the United
Nations in particular, the Iraqi people can acquire
democratic institutions with which all Iraqis can feel
identified. It is clear that a policy focused exclusively
on security leads to the retrenchment of a community,
thus jeopardizing the cohesion of Iraqi society and the
country’s unity. In Iraq, too, the political process must
not exclude any representative, peaceful force, and the
political process must offer Iraq the prospect of the
restoration of its complete sovereignty.
In all those crises, the Security Council has
gradually imposed the authority of the United Nations
in the service of international peace and security. Its
action is legitimate, and its authority will be further
strengthened when we reach agreement on an
enlargement of the Council that reflects the emergence
of new Powers and which gives an equitable place to
all continents.
At the same time, it is important to carry out the
thorough management reforms that our Organization
requires. In his report entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General proposed elements
of an action plan and initiated the first reforms. I pay
tribute to his resoluteness and reaffirm France’s
determination to support him in his approach.
We all know that security and development
cannot be separated. Five years after the Millennium
Summit, heads of State or Government have just issued
a troubling assessment of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals.
The outcome document they adopted (resolution
60/1) clearly sets out the priorities on which we must
take action. The first of those sadly remains food
security, because, as underlined by the Declaration on
Action Against Hunger and Poverty, adopted in 2004
on the initiative of President Lula and President
Chirac, hunger remains the worst weapon of mass
destruction. It continues to kill several hundred million
men, women and children around the planet. We can
see it happening right now in the Sahel and southern
Africa. That scourge belonging to another age can and
must be fought.
Of course, emergency humanitarian aid must be
provided to people in distress. That implies
strengthening the coordination of United Nations
interventions and, in particular, the establishment of an
international humanitarian force, as proposed on
several occasions by France.
But beyond that, it is important to provide all
areas at risk with the technical resources for prevention
and early warning. Above all, it is essential to create
the conditions for sustainable development to the
benefit of all. That is the aim of the Millennium
Development Goals, whose attainment requires
substantial long-term financing. Official development
assistance will continue to be primary for much time to
come. The summit’s outcome document recalls the
international commitments made in that regard, which
France and the European Union will respect. It is
urgent that the other developed countries make the
same commitments. But we know well that this will
not be sufficient. Additional long-term resources have
to be found through innovative financing mechanisms.
France endorses the establishment of
international solidarity contributions. Over 66
countries have given their support to the pilot project
to levy a tax on airline tickets, and we welcome this. In
February, France will host a ministerial conference on
this initiative so that it can be implemented specifically
and promptly.
By devoting three of the eight Goals to health, the
Millennium Declaration has put public health back at
the centre of sustainable development. In terms of its
scope and socio-economic impact, the HIV/AIDS
pandemic is of concern to us all. Only by working
together will we be able to deal with it, through an
approach that integrates prevention, treatment, care and
the medical and social vulnerability of infected
persons. France wants to carry out this integrated
approach with its European partners and with the
World Health Organization, the Joint United Nations
Program on HIV/AIDS and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. We must do
everything possible to achieve universal access to
treatment by 2010, if need be promoting greater
flexibility of intellectual property rights as provided for
in the Doha international trade agreements.
The fight against AIDS requires us all to mobilize
our efforts. For its part, France has pledged to double
its contribution to the Global Fund, increasing the
19

amount to 300 million euros by 2007. At the same
time, international cooperation must take into account
the particular challenges faced by certain categories of
individuals: victims of abject poverty who are
excluded, young women denied the right to sexual and
reproductive health, those with disabilities
marginalized by society.
From the Indian Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico,
from Japan to Antarctica, man is confronted today with
an unprecedented rise in environmental threats that he
himself has caused. Scientific proof of the reality of
climate change and its human origins are irrefutable.
All initiatives must be compatible with the Kyoto
Protocol; prospects must be charted for the future of
the multilateral climate regime after 2012. France
would hope to see more robust commitments,
especially regarding the transfer of technologies to
emerging countries. To respond to the threat and more
effectively mobilize energies and resources, France and
Europe have proposed the establishment of a
specialized agency, based on the United Nations
Environment Programme, for the purpose of
coordinating international action. This idea is
mentioned in the summit’s outcome document; it must
now be translated into reality.
The United Nations is commemorating its sixtieth
anniversary this year. The world has changed
profoundly since 1945. Millions of men and women
have gained freedom and have emerged from
underdevelopment. Technological progress has been
staggering and has radically changed the life of society
and relations among States. Challenges and threats
have changed; they are now worldwide and jeopardize
humanity itself.
Yet, we must remain optimistic. It is not too late,
given that we understand what is at stake and that we
mobilize collectively. The United Nations is
rediscovering the way charted for it by the founding
fathers: helping in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
building international cooperation for development and
promoting human rights.
We need the United Nations more than ever; it is
the sole framework for universal comprehensive action
which is legitimate and recognized as such by all
States. Let us give it our full support. France for its
part makes this commitment.Let me begin, Sir,
by paying tribute to your predecessor, Jean Ping, for
his extraordinary work — above all on the world
summit, but also throughout his year as President —
and by offering my congratulations to you on
beginning your year in office.
I should also like to express, on behalf of the
European Union and all its member States, our deepest
sympathy and solidarity to the people of the United
27

States, particularly those in the Gulf states, in their
hour of need.
In early July, my first duty in the presidency of
the European Union was to go to Srebrenica to mark
the tenth anniversary of the massacre there, the worst
in Europe since the end of the Second World War.
More than 8,000 people, mainly Muslim, were taken
away and killed as the international community just
stood to one side. To be sure, we had shown the right
convictions in words, but shamefully, we had failed to
act. The lesson of that massacre — and of the even
greater horror of Rwanda a year before — was that we
all needed better means to turn our collective will into
decisive action. I think that we in the European Union
have learned in the intervening period. Today, the
Union is on the ground as a military, police or civilian
presence in Bosnia, in Aceh, in Iraq, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, with the African Union, in
Darfur.
I also think that the United Nations has learned
the lessons of the past decade. At the summit this
week, we agreed on the further steps that we need to
take for the Organization to be even more effective. Of
all that was agreed at the summit, I believe it will be
the agreement on our “responsibility to protect” that
will be seen in the future as having the greatest
significance of all. If we follow through on the
responsibility to protect, then never again will
genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity be allowed to take place under our noses
with nothing done.
The responsibility to protect is, of course, a
reflection of our common morality. But it is also a
recognition that the world in which we now live is too
small for us to be unaffected by, or indifferent to, the
innocent victims of murder and oppression. This
shrinking of the world has been as sudden as it has
been profound. When the Berlin wall fell, a generation
of ideological certainties was swept away. People could
suddenly see partners where before they had only
glimpsed adversaries. And as that very visible barrier
was noisily being breached, a revolution in information
technology was quietly erasing the barriers of distance
and time. Continents and cultures are now cabled
together and bound by trade and services in a way that
was unimaginable even a decade ago.
In this new world, we can no longer safely
tolerate the general threat that can come from a
particular human tragedy, wherever it takes place. To a
greater extent than ever before, we share the same
world: the same threats and responsibilities, the same
opportunities and interests. And precisely because the
boundaries of our world have contracted, the
horizons — the ambitions — of many people around
the globe have infinitely expanded. For the first time in
our history, mankind has the ability to realize the
potential of individuals in societies of all kinds and in
every region through an open exchange of goods,
investment, technology and, above all, ideas.
Not least in all of this, it is the rise of India and
of China that is reordering the world economy.
Hundreds of millions there and elsewhere have been
lifted out of poverty. A new global market has been
created that ignores the divide — which seemed so
fundamental for so many decades — between East and
West.
Currently, not everyone has the chance to share in
all of that. Much of sub-Saharan Africa remains
blighted by poverty, disease and conflict. The
European Union has now set a clear timetable to
achieve the 0.7 per cent target for aid. Debt relief, trade
reform and development aid are all vital, but none of
them can work alone. Fundamental to making poverty
history are the Governments of the developing world
themselves. And where Governments fail, their own
peoples are the victims, as United Nations Special
Envoy Anna Tibaijuka’s damning assessment of the
situation in Zimbabwe only too graphically shows.
Sub-Saharan Africa is not alone in having yet to
achieve its potential. The American author Thomas
Friedman, in his recent book The World Is Flat,
highlights an extraordinary anomaly: it was the Arab
peoples whose forebears devised algebra and the
algorithms upon which our entire digital age is based,
but those peoples are now right at the rear of today’s
technological revolution, with, for example, fewer than
2 per cent of those populations having Internet access.
Three United Nations Development Programme Arab
Human Development Reports have now set out clearly
how limited economic prospects and stunted political
freedoms have led young and talented people towards
alienation and disillusionment.
The answer, however, does not lie in easy
stereotypes about some clash of civilizations. It is only
the terrorists and the preachers of hate who want us to
believe that Islam and the West are fundamentally
28

different. Theirs is a philosophy of mistrust and
despair, and we reject it utterly. Indonesia and
Turkey — to name just two — are both striking
examples of how countries with predominantly Muslim
populations can embrace democracy and modernity.
We in the European Union have seen the vibrant
Muslim communities in our own countries, and from
that experience have seen how Islamic and Western
cultures can be partners in a global society.
Everyone knows that the Arab peoples want
prosperity, freedom and democracy every bit as much
as anyone in Europe or America. So the fact that the
Arab world has the lowest scores in regional
measurements of democratic practices, civil freedoms
and good governance is not some cultural inevitability,
but a temporary failure of human will. In that regard,
the international community has a clear responsibility
to encourage regionally led political, social and
economic reform. The European Union strongly
supports such reform and will continue to do so.
Equally, it has been our active foreign policy that has
placed us in the lead with regard to Iran, especially on
the nuclear dossier.
With our High Representative Javier Solana and
my French and German Foreign Minister colleagues,
we have made detailed proposals for the relationship
between the European Union and Iran to be based on
cooperation and respect for international norms and
treaties.
Our proposals envisage a high-level, long-term
political and security framework between the European
Union and Iran, in which we would work together in
political, economic, scientific and technological areas,
including the civil nuclear field, in return for Iran
providing guarantees about its intentions and
capabilities concerning nuclear weapons. So, we will
listen very carefully to and reflect on this afternoon’s
speech by the new President of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Mr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
On Iraq, the European Union now has a
comprehensive programme of engagement and has put
behind it divisions over the military action two and a
half years ago. We are supporting the goal of a
peaceful, prosperous, democratic and stable nation.
We are also giving very active support to the
Quartet’s efforts to secure a just and lasting peace
between Israel and the Palestinians, with two States
living side by side. We salute Prime Minister Sharon’s
brave decision to withdraw from the Gaza Strip, and
we salute President Mahmoud Abbas’s work to build
the first stage of an effective, viable State of Palestine.
In July, the European Union again suffered the
horror of a major terrorist atrocity. This time the target
was my country, the United Kingdom: its capital,
London. But none of us is safe from the threat of terror.
International terrorism requires an international
response; otherwise, we all pay the price for each
other’s vulnerabilities. The ratification of a
comprehensive treaty on terrorism is, therefore, at the
highest priority.
But the threat from terrorists and the political
instability they bring is made worse by the easy
availability of weapons in what has become an
anarchic, unregulated international trade. These same
weapons fuelled the killings in Rwanda and in Bosnia a
decade ago and are fuelling the conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur today.
We already have international instruments to regulate
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. We in the
European Union have a comprehensive arms control
regime. But I suggest to the General Assembly that the
time has now come for this Organization to embrace
the idea of an international arms trade treaty, which
would build on and strengthen existing initiatives.
It was in the killing fields of Europe, in two
successive wars, that the twin ideas of the United
Nations and of the European Union became imperative.
Today, the European Union’s commitment to the
United Nations is profound; it has never been stronger.
And it is reflected in what we give in voluntary
donations and to the regular budget and peacekeeping
operations.
The fundamental purpose of the United Nations
remains today what it was at its foundation: to remove
the scourge of war, to reaffirm the worth of the human
person and to promote social progress and better
standards of life. In this changed and changing world,
it is the responsibility of us all to ensure that this
Organization has the powers and the resources to
achieve all these aims.Your election, Sir, as
President of the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session comes at a significant moment in the history of
the United Nations. The outcome document adopted by
our heads of State or Government shortly after the
beginning of the session represents the culmination of
a long process. It started with the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. It
continued with the Secretary-General’s “In larger
freedom” report, and the efforts of your distinguished
predecessor to synthesize those ideas for the
consideration of Member States. We thank all of those
involved for their dedicated efforts.
We are united in our commitment to
multilateralism; that is a good foundation for our
further efforts. All countries, especially those from the
developing world, played a significant role in the
negotiations on the outcome document. Much was
achieved; much has been left out. There are
foundations on which we have to build, but there are
also shortcomings which we need to correct in the
process of implementation. A notable omission is the
theme of disarmament. Our struggle for multilaterally
negotiated, universal and verifiable nuclear
disarmament, in a time-bound manner, must continue
with vigour. The outcome document must serve as a
road map, with its main elements acting as signposts in
our discussions over the coming months under your
stewardship, Mr. President.
26

You, Sir, have suggested a very appropriate theme
for the general debate: “For a stronger and more
effective United Nations: follow-up to and
implementation of the High-Level Meeting in
September 2005”. We believe that that captures the
spirit and essence of all that we, co-partners in the
United Nations, wish to achieve.
India is the world’s largest democracy. There is
no historical precedent for a democracy of over 1
billion people. It is a tremendous undertaking. It is also
an exciting and inspiring one. We are breaking new
ground. The fact that Indian democracy works is a
political miracle. The credit goes to the Indian voters.
They ensure that India remains secular, democratic and
pluralistic.
We also believe that we need to do much more to
inculcate respect for and acceptance of pluralism. I am
reminded of what Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our
nation, said:
“I do not want my house to be walled in on all
sides and my windows to be stuffed. I want the
cultures of all the lands to be blown about my
house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be
blown off my feet by any.”
Humankind is now learning, to some extent, to
cope with the menace of terrorism. We all know that
that evil is increasingly directed at innocent civilians.
It invites the strongest condemnation. We all agree that
there can be no justification for terrorism in any form.
Whether we are considering terrorism or non-
proliferation, unless there is a non-selective, uniform
and sustained approach, the objectives of the
international community cannot be achieved. The
outcome document reflects the joint resolve of the
international community to fight terrorism. In our
judgement, there is no institutional setting that is more
capable than the United Nations of providing cohesion
and vigour to those efforts.
As a victim of terrorism over the past two
decades, India understands, and is fully supportive of,
the need for United Nations action on counter-
terrorism. A key aspect of the implementation of the
outcome document will be the development and
adoption by the General Assembly of a strong counter-
terrorism agenda to supplement the existing General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on that
issue. As an initiator of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, India welcomes,
and is fully committed to, the decision taken by heads
of State or Government to conclude negotiations on the
convention during this session of the General
Assembly.
The main purpose of the summit last week was to
review the implementation of the Millennium
Declaration. Unfortunately, most developing countries
will not be able to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, given current growth rates and
levels of international support. We must strengthen
efforts at both the national and the international levels
to take us closer to the development targets set out in
the Millennium document.
The Millennium Development Goals embody a
quantifiable vision of human dignity and solidarity, as
well as of important economic and social rights. Yet,
important objectives, such as employment, critical for
developing countries, are excluded. India’s use of
innovative financial instruments for rural
infrastructural investment, as well as our Rural
Employment Guarantee Bill — recently passed in
Parliament — I believe may be of interest to other
developing countries.
Most of us had much higher expectations of the
summit in the area of development, particularly in
agreeing on a definite timetable for the achievement of
the 0.7 per cent target for official development
assistance. Unfortunately, that has not been achieved,
and we have gone down to 0.5 per cent. That is equally
true of innovative sources of financing because
developing countries cannot break out of the cycle of
poverty without enhanced resource flows and the
application of science and technology to meet their
developmental challenges.
As India’s own economy develops — at about 8
per cent per year — and its technological advancement
comes of age, we are expanding our economic and
technical cooperation with the developing countries,
reinforcing our political solidarity. We have extensive
programmes in Africa and elsewhere in the developing
world. We are also happy to have contributed to the
South Fund for Development and Humanitarian
Assistance. The India-Brazil-South Africa Facility for
Alleviation of Poverty and Hunger is a good example
of South-South cooperation.
India has written off the debts of all the highly
indebted poor countries. Given India’s long-term
association with and commitment to Africa, we
27

welcome the recognition given by the High-level
Plenary Meeting to the need to urgently address the
special needs of our African brothers and sisters. On its
part, India has undertaken several initiatives in
partnership with Africa. The Techno-Economic
Approach for Africa-India Movement initiative is
designed to promote technology transfer to West
Africa. The pivotal role of scientific knowledge and
technology for economic development cannot be
overstated. India stands ready to share its experience
with the developing countries of Africa and elsewhere.
To bridge the digital divide within a country
itself, which sometimes becomes as problematic as it is
at the international level, wireless local loop
technology developed in India, which eliminates
expensive equipment and copper lines, has already
been used in several countries in Africa. India has put
together a connectivity mission in Africa, using fiber
optics and dedicated satellite. It will support tele-
education, telemedicine, e-commerce and e-
governance, infotainment, resource mapping and
meteorological services. India is also earmarking $1.5
billion for lines of credit to assist developing countries,
in particular those in Africa, in fighting HIV/AIDS and
other pandemics.
The international community needs to address
intellectual property regimes that seek to deny
technologies rather than facilitating their transfer to the
developing countries, including in the areas of
environment and public health.
Although both the Millennium Declaration and
the outcome document have spoken of exploiting the
beneficial aspects of globalization, we are yet to agree
on and implement the modalities for such a process.
Making the process of globalization fairer and more
equitable remains one of the main challenges of our
time. At present, the accumulation of wealth is
accompanied by the accumulation of poverty. Ruskin,
the nineteenth century British author, in his book Unto
this Last — a favourite of Mahatma Gandhi —
described such wealth as “the gilded index of a far-
reaching ruin, a wrecker’s pile of coin gleaned from a
beach to which he has beguiled an argosy.” Poverty is
sometimes attributed to lack of entrepreneurship. The
poor of the world prove their entrepreneurship every
day by ensuring their families’ physical survival.
Regrettably, the summit has not given a clear and
comprehensive direction to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) Doha Round of trade
negotiations. Formulas are not an end in themselves;
the end has to be a decrease in poverty and an increase
in employment. Therefore, equal treatment cannot be
forced on unequal partners. Special and differential
treatment remains an integral component of all trade
negotiations, including agriculture and non-agricultural
market access. India, as a member of the G-20, will
continue to promote in the WTO and elsewhere the
interests of all developing countries, including the
small island developing States, the least developed, the
landlocked and the highly indebted poor countries.
An achievement of the developing countries in
the Group of 77 is their hard-fought and reasonably
successful struggle for progress on systemic issues
critical to good international economic governance. We
have to build on that to ensure the reform of Bretton
Woods institutions and the restoration of the central
role of the United Nations in setting the international
economic agenda.
A change in the composition of the Security
Council is an imperative. The G-4 framework
resolution has made United Nations reform a central
issue that can no longer be ignored or disregarded.
There is a democracy deficit, as the Secretary-General
also said in July, in the governance of the United
Nations. There is not much point in speaking of
inclusiveness, transparency and democracy and leaving
the Security Council as a glaring exception to those
principles. Measures taken so far to revitalize the
General Assembly are simply not enough. Only by
electing permanent members committed to rendering
unto the General Assembly what is the General
Assembly’s can that be done. That is essential for a
world order in which decisions are optimal and
therefore acceptable, and the use of force minimal.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime Minister,
aptly stated: “Above all, we have to participate in the
growing structure of a world order. We cannot rely on
others to do it on our behalf.” One cannot argue in
favour of democracy in the rest of the world and leave
the Security Council undemocratic. Effectiveness is a
function of right decisions with broad support.
Negotiations on the outcome document and many
subsequent statements have demonstrated that, if more
could not be achieved on the development aspects of
trade in the document, it is because the Security
Council has not been made representative. If
institutional reform has been faltering and many are
28

doubtful of securing a just solution, it is because the
Security Council does not reflect the world of today. It
reflects the world of 1945.
The unsatisfactory progress on other issues shows
that critics of Security Council expansion in both the
categories were profoundly mistaken. Security Council
reform, far from hindering progress, was actually
helping it. In its absence, fears of intervention have
prevented agreement on a human rights council and
other issues. Therefore, Security Council reform
remains more necessary than ever and should
preferably, as the Secretary-General has said, be
completed by the end of the year. That should be our
main priority; I doubt if it is. Security Council reform
is not about any country’s prestige or power, but about
transforming the balance of power in the world. Our
experience in India from the freedom movement to
present times shows that diversity is a source of
strength and effectiveness. The same would be true of a
reformed Security Council. We would continue also to
engage actively in the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council, the restructuring of the Secretariat
and the setting-up of peacebuilding commission.
As we observe the sixtieth anniversary of the
United Nations, I am reminded once again of the words
of India’s first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, who
said at this very forum 45 years ago:
“During these past fifteen years the United
Nations has often been criticized for its structure
and for some of its activities. These criticisms
have had some justification behind them, but
looking at the broad picture I think that we can
definitely say that the United Nations has amply
justified its existence and repeatedly prevented
our recurrent crises from developing into war. It
has played a great role, and it is a little difficult
now to think of this troubled world without the
United Nations.” (A/PV.882, para. 110)
In the life of individuals as well as of institutions,
the completion of 60 years is a significant moment for
stocktaking — certainly in my part of the world. Even
as we reflect upon the functioning of this institution
since its inception in 1945, all of us gathered here look
forward to the realization of new hopes, aspirations
and, indeed, to a rejuvenated United Nations which is
fully geared to meet the myriad challenges of our times
and effectively contribute to the well-being and
development of humanity at large and to manage
change.
The vision which we have for a better world is
best described in the words of a great son of India, the
great poet Rabindranath Tagore, who was the first
Asian to be awarded the Nobel Prize in literature. I
shall end my statement by quoting a very famous text
of his:
“Where the mind is without fear and the head is
held high
Where knowledge is free
Where the world has not been broken up into
fragments by narrow domestic walls
Where words come out from the depth of truth
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its
way
Into the dreary desert sand of dead habit
Where the mind is led forward by thee
Into ever-widening thought and action
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my
country awake.”It is my unique pleasure to
praise His Excellency Ambassador Dan Gillerman, my
emissary to the United Nations, who is in the Chair at
present, upon his election to the post of Vice-President
at this session of the General Assembly, and to wish
him much success.
These are optimistic times in the Middle East.
The iron wall that has defined Israel's relations with
most of the Arab and Muslim world for generations, is
coming down. Israel's contacts with Arab and Muslim
States are growing at a rate never seen before.
Countries like Pakistan and others that in the past
refused to acknowledge our shared humanity, today
extend their hands in friendship and recognition.
Relations with key Muslim States, such as Turkey, are
flourishing, while our peaceful ties with both Egypt
and Jordan are constantly improving.
Here in New York this week, I have had the
honour of meeting with more than 10 of my colleagues
from the Arab and Muslim world - a number
unthinkable just two years ago. Those meetings have
been friendly, as is only fitting for countries that are
not in conflict - either territorially, or economically.
Israel welcomes this new readiness for contact, and we
encourage our neighbours to build on the foundations
that we are now laying. Contacts between Israel and its
Arab and Muslim neighbours are good for the region,
and good for peace.
We all share a common interest in building a
region of tolerance and cooperation - a region where
the moderates have the initiative, not the extremists,
whose violence has set the agenda for so long. Indeed,
those who genuinely wish to help the Palestinians and
to bring them the benefits of peace and prosperity must
realize that building contacts and cooperation with
Israel is a crucial element in that process.
Possibilities for cooperation abound. In fields as
diverse as agriculture, health, the environment,
transportation and electricity, the potential benefits of
Middle East regional cooperation are immense. Such
cooperation can bring tangible and immediate
economic benefits, as Israel's improving relations with
Jordan and Egypt have shown.
Unfortunately, many of our ties with the Arab and
Muslim world are still deep in the shadows, hidden
from the public eye. Today, I call on my Arab and
Muslim colleagues to bring our contacts out into the
light of day, so that our peoples may understand our
8

shared desire to work with each other to bring peace
and prosperity to our region. I call on the leaders of the
Arab and Muslim world, to join us in speaking to our
populations of peace rather than conflict, of reasons to
cooperate, rather than reasons to boycott.
In November of this year, I will sit alongside my
Arab and Muslim colleagues at two international
gatherings: the World Summit on the Information
Society, in Tunisia; and the summit of the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership, in Barcelona. I call upon
the international community and my Arab and Muslim
counterparts to work together with us to ensure that
those meetings result in concrete projects that will help
reinforce our peace efforts on the ground.
This is also the time for the international
community to renew its investment in the future of the
Middle East by reviving the multilateral track of the
Middle East peace talks.
Just one week ago, Israel completed the
evacuation of all Israeli communities in the Gaza Strip.
Entire families - many of whom had lived and tilled
those lands for three generations - were called upon
by their Government to leave and to begin their lives
anew. Today, there are no more Israelis in Gaza. Israeli
military rule is now over. Responsibility for the affairs
of Gaza and its residents is now in Palestinian hands.
Israel's actions have opened the door to a new future,
and we invite our neighbours to walk with us together
through that door.
We are committed to the road map, and we wish
to get back to its full implementation. To do that, we
need a partner. A partner who is committed, as we are,
to the peaceful resolution of our differences, and to the
democratic and universal principles on which peace is
founded.
Israel attaches great importance to the Palestinian
assumption of responsibility. In it lies the key to
progress towards peace. The transfer of responsibility
for Gaza provides the Palestinian side with the chance
to take their fate into their own hands; an opportunity
not just to say that they want to govern, but to show
that they are ready and able to do so. Gaza, we hope, will
serve as a model for how the Palestinian Authority can
build a functioning, democratic and peaceful society.
Recognizing the significance of this moment,
Israel is taking great pains to ensure that Palestinian
leader Mahmoud Abbas is given every opportunity to
establish his authority. We want to promote conditions
that will benefit ordinary Palestinians, without posing a
security threat to Israel.
Israel has expressed its strong support for
international aid and assistance for the social and
economic development of Gaza, and we are committed
to facilitating those efforts. Constructive international
engagement is crucial to the Palestinian Authority's
success. The international community's priority now
must be ensuring that the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions can deliver the services and outcomes their
people and ours expect and deserve.
Economic reconstruction, of course, is not
enough. The Palestinian Authority must also deliver on
its commitment to end the campaign of terror against
Israel. For Israel, security is an issue on which we will
never compromise. We insist on the end of terror and
the dismantlement of its infrastructure, for the safety of
our citizens, and so that our peace efforts can succeed.
Turning Gaza into a model of success requires
that the Palestinian Authority act to promote and
protect democracy from its enemies. Here, as with
security, there is no room for discounts. Simply
holding elections is no guarantee of moderation and
responsible government.
Two days ago in Gaza, the terrorist organization
Hamas held a rally of 10,000 armed men dedicated to a
holy war against Israel. Like Al-Qaida and the other
organizations in the global network of terror, Hamas
seeks to destroy everything that the international
community and the moderates in our region seek to
build: tolerance, democracy and peace. Hamas is
responsible for the deliberate murder of hundreds of
Israeli civilians, amongst them scores of women and
children. Israel cannot and will not grant legitimacy to
such an organization. We will not cooperate with its
desire to participate in the forthcoming Palestinian
elections. And we call on the international community
to make clear its own opposition to the inclusion of
such terrorists in the democratic process. If Gaza is
indeed to be the positive model we all wish to see, then
it is those who promote dialogue, not violence, who
must be empowered.
The central threat to global security and to
renewed momentum towards dialogue and peace in the
Middle East today is Iran and its nuclear ambitions. As
the speech before this Assembly by the newly elected
president of Iran so clearly demonstrated, Iran's fanatic
regime remains determined to proceed with its nuclear
weapons programme. Israel welcomes the efforts of the
international community - in particular France, Britain
and Germany, backed by the United States - to deny Iran
the ability to terrorize the world with nuclear weapons.
The Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency is meeting at this very moment
in Vienna to discuss this urgent matter. I call on them
to stop this evil regime from acquiring nuclear
weapons. The security and stability of the entire globe
is at stake. This is why it is essential and urgent that
the Security Council take action. The international
community must rally as one and use all the means at
its disposal to stop Iran before it goes nuclear. We must
not allow the fate of mankind to rest in the hands of the
tyrants of Tehran.
In January of this year, this Assembly convened
in special session to commemorate the Holocaust and
pay tribute to the brave soldiers and nations who freed
European Jewry and the world from the calamity of
that darkest nightmare. Israel commends the
community of nations for standing up in unison on this
anniversary in commitment to the cry "never again".
We commend the Secretary-General's and this
Assembly's recognition that Holocaust remembrance
must be a universal commitment. Ultimately, it is only
the determined defence of the universal values of
tolerance and the sanctity of each human life that will
protect us from tyranny and extremism.
In this spirit, Israel calls on the General
Assembly to adopt a resolution initiated by Israel and
other like-minded countries commemorating the
Holocaust and calling for global educational efforts to
ensure that its lessons are learnt. Especially today, the
day the world's greatest Nazi-hunter, Simon
Wiesenthal, has passed away, we are reminded that the
Holocaust is passing from human memory to history.
As the generation of survivors leaves us, who will tell
their story, if not us?
The special session to commemorate the
Holocaust is only one example, of the welcome shift in
the attitude of this institution towards Israel. Our recent
election as Vice-President of this Assembly is another.
I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
unique contribution to this positive trend. Israel's
relations with the United Nations are better today than
they have ever been. Nevertheless, they are still far
from what they should be.
I call on all the States gathered here to examine
how they too can contribute to promoting a more
balanced and constructive United Nations approach to
Israel. The United Nations cannot be true to its own
lofty and universal principles, if it continues to waste
scarce resources and serve as a forum of hostility and
prejudice against one of its own.
The United Nations was born of the noble vision
to bring the ideals of peace, security and human rights
to all peoples. Sadly, reality of the United Nations
remains far removed from the United Nations ideal.
Major reform is urgent and crucial. Israel joins our
fellow Member States and their peoples in the desire to
see the United Nations fulfil the vision of its founders;
to see the United Nations serving as a force for good in
meeting the many challenges of our age.
Israel seeks to take its rightful place as a country
with full and equal rights in this institution. We seek to
realize our full potential to contribute to the global
agenda. This is why I have decided to present for the
first time Israel's candidacy for membership on the
Security Council.
It was the wisest leader of ancient Israel, King
Solomon, who wrote, in the book of Ecclesiastes, "For
everything there is a season: a time to weep and a time
to laugh; ... a time to love and a time to hate; a time
for war and a time for peace." This is a time for peace.
A time for the leaders of the world to work together to
bring the blessings of opportunity, peace and prosperity
to all humanity.
As the Jewish New Year dawns upon us, I extend
on behalf of the Jewish people greetings of peace and
brotherhood to our Muslim and Arab neighbours and to
all nations.Sixty years ago,
Prime Minister Peter Fraser of New Zealand told
representatives to the San Francisco Conference that its
sole aim should be
“the setting up of a world organization that will
really work, and that will be the background for
an orderly progress towards security, prosperity
and happiness for all the people of all nations”.
The new organization would only work, he said, if its
members were determined to stand by their
commitments and principles.
Today the essential concept of the United Nations
remains robust. We can be justly proud of its
achievements in many areas including humanitarian
assistance, development and peacekeeping. But we
have collectively underperformed in others, sometimes
with tragic results.
Our task this sixtieth anniversary is twofold: first,
to recommit ourselves as Member States to the
enduring vision and values of the Charter and,
19

secondly, to retool the United Nations machinery to
meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.
The Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) provides
the blueprint for the way forward. New Zealand would
have liked more progress in a number of areas, such as
more detailed agreement on the establishment of the
Human Rights Council and more authority to the
Secretary-General to manage resources in return for
greater accountability. We deeply regret the failure to
endorse further disarmament and non-proliferation
measures.
But we are encouraged by the many significant
advances, including recognition of the need for more
and better aid, establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, a doubling of resources for the Office of
the Commissioner for Human Rights and the
recognition of our shared “responsibility to protect”.
We have as our theme for the General Assembly
implementation of our summit undertakings. We share
accountability for getting the job done. I shall confine
my comments here to the results of the summit.
New Zealand is pleased with the Summit
Outcome as it relates to development. It represents a
shared commitment by all Member States to the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
recognizes the important partnership between
developed and developing countries in the effective use
of aid.
This year New Zealand has increased its
development assistance by 23 per cent. Our official
development assistance (ODA) programme has a focus
on poverty elimination, with a core, but not exclusive,
focus on the Pacific. We strive to address aid
effectiveness, the particular problems faced by small
island developing States, HIV/AIDS, the empowerment
of women, sexual and reproductive health and rights,
education for all, sustainable development and trade
access.
On trade, we look forward to an ambitious
outcome across all aspects of the Doha Development
Agenda, including in agriculture, improved market
access, the elimination of export subsidies and
substantial reductions in trade distorting domestic
support. Improving the coherence of trade policies and
development initiatives remains a critical element in
achieving the MDGs.
New Zealand welcomes the decision to establish
a Peacebuilding Commission to help break the cycle of
conflict by better coordinating long-term international
recovery efforts and ensuring sustained political
attention to those who need it. We must now move
swiftly to get the Commission up and running by
December this year. We look to the General Assembly
President to take a lead in holding consultations to
achieve this. The core elements of the framework have
already been discussed at length and in detail. With
good will and determination, we can surely arrive at
agreement within the next few weeks on a package.
This should ensure balanced membership and flexible
reporting arrangements. We would caution against
raising the bar for assistance too high, and we hope
that all States in need of help will be able to approach
the Commission.
Our leaders have spoken with one voice and
unequivocally to condemn all forms of terrorism. We
must build on this and honour our undertaking to
conclude negotiations on the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism at this session.
New Zealand will continue to work closely with our
friends in the Pacific region to improve our collective
abilities to identify, prevent or respond to terrorist
threats. Consolidating reporting requirements created
by Security Council resolutions would, we believe, be
one step towards enhancing the counter-terrorism
programme of the United Nations. We think it very
important that Member States should now support the
Secretary-General’s counter-terrorism strategy.
One of the most far-reaching achievements of the
summit, as many countries have acknowledged, is our
collective acceptance that there is a responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. We must now
all be prepared to assist the United Nations in
establishing the early warning capability referred to in
our outcome document. It is vital that, when the need
arises, we give effect to our resolve and follow the
principles we have agreed upon.
In this context, New Zealand wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to ending impunity for those
responsible for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community. Adoption of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court was an
historic moment for the United Nations and one that
demonstrated the breadth and depth of political will to
end impunity and to secure the rule of law.
20

The absence of any reference to a commitment to
end impunity or of any acknowledgement of the
International Criminal Court’s central contribution to
this goal is one of several telling silences in our
summit outcome.
We are particularly pleased that leaders have
recognized the need to conclude, during this session,
negotiations on the draft protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
This will be a major priority for New Zealand. We call
on all Member States to contribute constructively to
this process, so that we can reach agreement on a
protocol and demonstrate our full support for the work
of United Nations personnel in the field.
New Zealand welcomes the emphasis on human
rights in the outcome document. That the budget of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights is
to be doubled and her Office strengthened is an
overdue recognition of the gap between expectations of
delivery and resourcing.
While progress has been made through the
summit decision to establish a Human Rights Council,
we regret that the opportunity was lost to reach
agreement on details of the Council’s mandate and
operation, despite the support of a great majority of
Members for such a package. A small minority cannot
be allowed to veto the establishment of the Council.
Over the next weeks we must redouble our efforts
to translate that broad support into specifics on what
the Council will look like and on its mandate. We shall
look to the President to set a work programme that will
aim for agreement on the details.
Our second human rights priority for the sixtieth
session is to see negotiations completed on the draft
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities.
The constructive and collegial spirit of delegations in
the Ad Hoc Committee on the rights of persons with
disabilities has been extraordinary. New Zealand is
confident that it will be possible to conclude the
negotiations in 2006 if the Ad Hoc Committee is
enabled to meet for three weeks next January.
Our ability to strengthen the United Nations
across the board in development, security and human
rights will be enhanced by implementing summit
undertakings on Secretariat and management reform.
We need particularly to improve the managerial
effectiveness and accountability of the Secretary-
General. He should be given, as he has requested, the
tools that he needs to manage the Secretariat.
We strongly support the review of all budgetary
and human resource rules and regulations and the
review of mandates. We support also the increased
focus on ensuring ethical conduct on the part of all
United Nations personnel. We believe a system-wide
code of ethics and an independent ethics office would
facilitate that. New Zealand also welcomes the
commitment to strengthening the United Nations
Office of Internal Oversight Services.
The outcome document calls for early reform of
the Security Council, and the General Assembly is to
review progress on this issue by the end of the year.
New Zealand continues to believe that the Security
Council needs to be more effective and more
representative for the twenty-first century, although we
have no illusions about the difficulties of reaching
agreement on this.
We should in the meantime renew our efforts to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
For those many Member States who rarely, if ever,
occupy a non-permanent seat on the Council, there
should be other ways to participate in Council
decisions and contribute to discussions.
We, as Member States, have shown in finalizing
the summit outcome a mixture of courage and
creativity on the one hand and of stubbornness and
hesitation on the other. The implementation period
ahead gives us a second chance to make good on those
moments when we allowed agreements to slip through
our fingers. We put our trust in our President to set up
the structures for ongoing work and to be the catalyst
to motivate and energize us.
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the much
valued contribution that former President Ping made
over the last year, and we thank him.In no way can today’s discussion be called
routine. We are faced with summing up the preliminary
results of the large-scale United Nations reforms that
have been launched and designating the main thrust for
the work of the entire system of United Nations
institutions in implementing the outcome document of
the 2005 world summit. We propose to structure the
work of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly in
such a manner as to facilitate the broadest possible
agreement on a number of conceptual issues related to
strengthening the United Nations that will, to a large
degree, determine our ability to enhance the
manageability of international trends in an era of
globalization, and better respond to its new
accompanying threats and challenges.
An analysis of the experience of the United
Nations over the sixty years of its existence, with all
the vagaries of the post-war, cold war and post-cold
war world order, gives us much food for thought and
many conclusions. I would like to share some of that
with you from the viewpoint of the Russian Federation.
As the most representative international
institution with a universal mandate, the United
Nations has been and remains a major integration
factor in global politics. The success of the United
Nations is our success and its failures are our failures.
But ultimately the balance of its work is, we believe,
definitely positive. It is primarily due to this
Organization that we have managed to avoid a new
threat of  world war and a nuclear disaster and have
been able to prevent and settle dozens of military
conflicts. At present, the United Nations mechanisms
continue to be a means of constructive cooperation
touching upon all spheres of human activity.
The greater interdependence of the modern world
has not made it more secure. The standoff between
East and West has been replaced by numerous crises
and conflicts that until recently had remained latent,
left on the periphery of the interests of the two super-
Powers. Some of those conflicts are becoming real or
potential sources of international terrorism, feeding
transborder crime and drug trafficking, which are
closely related to it. Humanity faces the threat of the
uncontrolled spread of weapons of mass destruction
and the possibility of their falling into the hands of
terrorists. Again the world is witnessing genocide and
humanitarian disasters. All of this presents immediate
danger to each and every one of us.
11

In that context, the enormous potential of the
United Nations is in greater demand, primarily in
ensuring peace and security on a collective and, more
importantly, on a legitimate legal basis. The
Organization has at its disposal an entire arsenal of
resources enabling it to coordinate the actions of the
international community, to combine political efforts
with those in the social, economic and humanitarian
areas, as well as in the field of protection of human
rights and the environment and other spheres. We
should develop these assets through the concerted
efforts of all States. Russia considers this task to be a
strategic core element of its foreign policy.
The events of the first years of the new
millennium reaffirm the validity of the conclusions
drawn by the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change and the Secretary-General, that is, that a
stronger United Nations and a better use of its
multilateral advantages are an essential instrument to
build a balanced, safe international system, based on
respect for the unique features of every country, their
sovereign equality and collective responsibility. There
is no reasonable alternative to this.
Multilateral mechanisms should also play a key
role in resolving the issues of disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
based on strict compliance with the relevant
international agreements. United Nations achievements
include Security Council resolution 1540 (2004),
initiated by Russia, and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
which establishes the legal basis for preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of terrorists.
It is now crucial to prevent an arms race in outer
space. I remind the Assembly that Russia has assumed
the obligation not to be the first to launch any type of
new weapon into space and has called upon other
countries possessing space capabilities to join in this
measure to keep outer space peaceful. It is time to take
steps to enhance transparency and build confidence in
this area.
The legal basis for countering new threats,
primarily terrorism, is being reinforced. The adoption
at the recent Security Council summit of resolution
1624 (2005), initiated by the United Kingdom, is a
new, important step forward. It places outside the law
not only the terrorists, their accomplices and those who
finance them, but also the individuals inciting terrorist
acts. This Security Council decision should put an end
to attempts to engage the mass media to propagandize
and justify terrorism.
We anticipate that the General Assembly will also
contribute to the fight against terrorism and will
promote completion of the negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
as soon as possible. The fight against terrorism must be
continued most decisively. Each of us should critically
assess his or her efforts in this area.
The realities are that while the sanctions against
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities are still in force, the supplying of arms and
material and other kinds of assistance to the fighters
continues. The geographical scope of their activities is
expanding. For many countries, including Russia, this
is tangible on their own soil. Extremists who are not
directly linked to Al-Qaida  are also stepping up their
activities in various parts of the world. This requires
strengthening of cooperation between States and the
1267 sanctions Committee, the 1540 Committee and,
of course, the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Furthermore, we believe that the
compilation of a consolidated list of all terrorists and
terrorist organizations, whether they are associated in
any way with Al-Qaida or not, cannot be postponed.
The development of criteria for the use of force
in accordance with the United Nations Charter is
another pressing issue. Such criteria, when agreed
upon, could be useful if they become a kind of
benchmark for consideration by the Security Council
of various crisis situations. At the same time, it is clear
that these criteria cannot be applied automatically. The
Security Council would authorize the use of force on a
case-by-case basis, as called for in the Charter.
Another equally important topic is that of States,
in exercising their Charter right to individual and
collective self-defense, to include self-defense in case
of an external terrorist attack or the imminent threat of
such attack. Russia, like other States that have become
targets of terrorist attacks originating beyond their
borders, has no right to err in the eyes of its citizens,
who have entrusted their security to us. We anticipate
that those critical issues will be given due attention at
this session of the General Assembly.
Above all, force should not be used to oppose
law. It can be an effective tool to ensure the rule of law
12

in crisis situations. It is a tool to be used in
extraordinary cases in which vital, legally protected
values and interests of the entire international
community, or certain of its members, are in jeopardy.
Unfortunately, in the preparations for the 2005
world summit, insufficient attention was given to
seeking solutions to those and other important issues
and to finding a way to common understanding. Thus,
that task must remain a top priority of our agenda.
Much remains to be done in terms of
development and the eradication of poverty, epidemics,
famine and illiteracy. Such action would be the
strongest way to ensure global stability and eliminate
the breeding grounds of extremism of all kinds. Russia
endorses all initiatives aimed at attaining the
Millennium Goals and will enhance its contribution to
resolving those urgent issues. The success of our
concerted efforts to support development greatly
depends on the efficacy of the Peacebuilding
Commission to be established. The Commission will
achieve the required results if it is more than just
another debating society and if it can be a mechanism
facilitating the greater coordination of the programmes
and the projects of all the participants in development
assistance, including the World Bank Group, the
International Monetary Fund, regional development
banks, other multilateral and bilateral donors and, of
course, recipient countries.
The dramatic events of the last six months have
revealed the sensitivity of the issue of Security Council
reform for the majority of Member States. Guided
above all by its interest in ensuring the Security
Council’s effectiveness, Russia continues to support
possible modifications of that key organ on the basis of
well-conceived and mutually acceptable decisions.
United Nations Members have made the wise decision
to continue negotiations, rather than pushing for a vote
that might split the Organization.
I recall the striking words: the United Nations
was created not to make heaven on Earth but to save
the Earth from hell. Indeed, the United Nations is not
an ideal body, but the best that humanity was able to
create on the ashes of two world wars. With the help of
the United Nations, we are able to effectively counter
threats to peace and security in the context of evolving
geopolitical realities.
Today, mankind is facing the challenges of
globalization. It is not a question of whether we should
accept those challenges or not, but of how we should
respond to them, and on the basis of what principles.
The 2005 world summit decisions outline the general
direction for our efforts. As a permanent member of the
Security Council and the next President of the Group
of Eight, Russia, together with other States, will
continue to strive to strengthen the collective
underpinnings of global politics and to enhance
mechanisms for multilateral cooperation. On behalf
of President Bush and all of the American people,
welcome to New York City.
In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, my fellow
citizens have experienced the compassion of the United
Nations. I want to thank Secretary-General Annan for
mobilizing the support of this institution. I also want to
thank the representatives of the 126 countries that have
offered assistance in our relief efforts. The United
States will never forget their generosity in our time of
need.
In moments of tumultuous historical change,
leaders must become architects of a better world. We
must survey the new international landscape, lay firm
foundations of moral principle and build institutions
8

that reflect our unique moment in history. It is those
institutions that enable citizens of conviction to lead us
ever closer to the ideals of justice that stir every soul:
the universal desire for security, prosperity, liberty and
dignity.
Sixty years ago was just such a time of
transformation. After one of the greatest cataclysms in
world history, the United States joined with visionary
builders from over 50 countries to create the United
Nations. We placed the enduring principles of human
rights and fundamental freedoms at the foundation of
the United Nations Charter. We built an institution that
has helped to support a peaceful world order for six
decades. Today, however, with the end of the cold war
and the rise of globalization and the emergence of new
threats, the very terrain of international politics has
shifted beneath our feet. In this new world we must
again embrace the challenge of building for the future.
The time to reform the United Nations is now. We
must seize this opportunity together. Chapter I, Article
1, of the Charter of the United Nations proclaims the
four purposes of the United Nations, great aspirations
that have stood the test of time. But consider what
different forms they take today, in 2005, as opposed to
1945, when they were first declared.
The first purpose of the United Nations is to help
maintain international peace and security. In 1945 the
most serious threats to peace and security emerged
between States, and were largely defined by their
borders. Today, however, the greatest threats we face
emerge within States, and melt through their borders:
transnational threats like terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons, pandemic disease and trafficking in human
beings.
The second purpose of this institution, as written
in the United Nations Charter, is to develop friendly
relations among nations, based on equal rights and the
self-determination of all peoples. In 1945, a life of
liberty and dignity was more an aspiration than a
reality for a majority of the world’s people. Today,
however, more nations than ever have enshrined the
principles of democracy and human rights — a true
moral triumph that will be complete only when all
individuals are secure in their basic freedoms.
The third purpose of the United Nations is to
achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems. In 1945, the fear was that
strong, aggressive States, eager and able to expand
their frontiers with force, would be the primary cause
of international problems. Today, however, it is clear
that weak and poorly governed States, unwilling or
incapable of ruling their countries with justice, are the
principal source of global crises, from civil war and
genocide to extreme poverty and humanitarian disaster.
The final purpose of the United Nations, as the
Charter states, is to be a centre for harmonizing the
actions of nations in the attainment of common ends.
In 1945, the world’s leaders joined together to build an
institutional partnership that could address the shared
challenges of their time. Today, faced with the realities
of a new world, we must transform the United Nations
to meet the shared challenges of our time.
The Members of this body must work together to
strengthen security in a world threatened by stateless
extremists. Today, I call on the nations of the world to
ratify the comprehensive convention on terrorism. No
cause, no movement and no grievance can justify the
intentional killing of innocent civilians and non-
combatants. That is unacceptable by any moral
standard. It is time for every Member of the United
Nations to outlaw acts of international terrorism.
We must also work together to promote
prosperity and development in a world of great
potential. The United States is committed to the
Millennium Development Goals. And at the Monterrey
Conference three years ago all nations agreed that
development must be a two-way street. Donor
countries have a responsibility to increase their
assistance to developing nations. And developing
nations have a responsibility to govern justly, advance
economic liberty and invest in their people. The
Monterrey Consensus is working.
Now is not the time to revert to old, failed
thinking about development. Countries representing
three quarters of the developing world’s population are
on a pace to meet the targets of the Millennium
Declaration by 2015.
And, as President Bush said on Wednesday, the
United States is prepared to take new action to
accelerate this progress: we will eliminate all tariffs
and subsidies that distort free trade — as other nations
do the same.
Members of the United Nations must work
together as well to support democracy in a world of
expanding liberty. To advance this common purpose, in
9

2004 President Bush proposed the creation of a
democracy fund. With the broad support of this body,
we have made it a reality. The Fund is now receiving
donations in cash and in kind from countries large and
small that wish to help other nations lay the
foundations of democracy. Showing its leadership as
the world’s largest democracy, India made the generous
opening pledge of $10 million.
Now, to be sure, when speaking about democracy,
the United States has every reason for humility. After
all, it was only in my lifetime that America guaranteed
the right to vote for all its citizens. Obviously, the path
to democracy is long and imperfect and different for
every nation. But the principles of democracy are
universal, as is the desire for them. And the United
Nations must support every country that embraces the
challenge of self-government. In Afghanistan, Iraq,
Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and throughout the
world, peoples who want to build democracy deserve
our help.
The many goals we share are great indeed. And
the United Nations has a major role to play in their
achievement. But for this institution to become an
engine of change in the twenty-first century, it must
now change itself. The United Nations must launch a
lasting revolution of reform.
The United Nations summit declaration
(resolution 60/1), which every head of State endorsed
this week, expresses a global consensus on the fact that
reform is imperative. I want to thank former General
Assembly President Ping for his tireless hard work.
Our challenge now, under President Eliasson’s
leadership, is to enact the vital reforms that will make
the United Nations more accountable to its Members,
more suited to new challenges and more faithful to its
founding purposes.
The United States welcomes the commitment of
all leaders to establish a new Peacebuilding
Commission. Now, we must embrace the difficult task
of implementing that vision. A Peacebuilding
Commission should plan for post-conflict missions
before crises erupt. And it must help to coordinate
reconstruction efforts after the fighting stops. In a
world threatened by civil strife, the United Nations
needs to be better prepared to help countries rebuild in
the aftermath of conflict.
We are also pleased that the world’s leaders have
recognized the importance of establishing a new
Human Rights Council. But it will take a lot of hard
work in the coming months to realize that goal. The
Human Rights Council must have fewer members, less
politics and more credibility. And it should never,
never, empower brutal dictatorships to sit in judgement
of responsible democracies. The Human Rights
Council must have the moral authority to condemn all
violators of human rights, even those that sit among us
in this Hall.
Finally, we welcome the promise of the world’s
leaders to make the United Nations a more effective
and a more principled institution. As President Bush
said on Wednesday (see A/60/PV.2), the United
Nations must stand for integrity and live by the high
standards it sets for others. For the United Nations to
champion democracy more legitimately, we must
increase the transparency and the accountability of this
institution. For the United Nations to promote
prosperity more credibly, tougher ethics rules and
greater internal oversight are needed to ensure the
highest professional standards. And to make the United
Nations relevant to the challenges of today, the purpose
and the performance of all United Nations programmes
must be reviewed thoroughly, consistently and
comprehensively.
Our fellow citizens deserve a United Nations that
commands their respect and is worthy of their hard-
earned tax dollars. In a democracy, leaders must be
able to justify that their people’s money is indeed being
well spent.
Real progress on those fundamental reforms will
prove that the United Nations can address greater
issues of change, in particular the reform of the
Security Council. We want that important body to
reflect the world as it is in 2005, not as it was in 1945.
The United States is open to expanding the Security
Council. We have long supported a permanent seat for
Japan. And we believe that developing countries
deserve greater representation on that body. All this
would make for a more effective Security Council.
And the Security Council must be effective. It
must be able to deal with great challenges such as
terrorism and nuclear proliferation, especially when it
faces real threats and when countries such as Iran
threaten the effectiveness of the global non-
proliferation regime. When diplomacy has been
10

exhausted, the Security Council must become involved.
Questions about Iran’s nuclear activities remain
unanswered, despite repeated efforts by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. And after
agreeing to negotiate with Europe, Iran unilaterally
walked away from the talks and restarted its nuclear
programmes. Iran should return to the negotiations
with the European Union three and abandon forever its
plans for a nuclear-weapons capability.
The experience of recent years has reinforced the
universal truth that international institutions are only as
strong and effective and relevant as their members
choose to make them. The United Nations is no
different.
The United States believes in a United Nations
that is strong and effective. And we have ambitious
hopes for its future.
So in this year, as the United Nations marks its
sixtieth anniversary, let us recommit ourselves to
principled action. Let us embrace the same spirit of
creation that moved the builders and leaders of 1945.
And let us reform this great institution to meet the
challenges of a new era.First, I would like to salute
Mr. Jean Ping, the outgoing President of the General
Assembly, for the work he did to guide the General
Assembly as the nations of the world considered the
immensely important matters that led to the elaboration
of the outcome document that was adopted last night.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to preside over the sixtieth session of the
General Assembly. We are confident that you will lead
the Assembly well as it confronts the challenge of
implementing the decisions taken during the
millennium review summit and remains seized of other
important matters that were not adequately addressed
in the outcome document.
Shortly before we convened here for the
millennium review summit, an important meeting of
Christian leaders took place in Washington, D.C. Those
leaders issued a communique entitled ìA Call to
Partnershipî, directed at our summit meeting. In part
the call says,
"At the urgent call of church leaders in the
southern hemisphere, we came together at the
Washington National Cathedral as Christian
leaders from diverse traditions and places, both
rich and poor, in the South and the North, united
in a common concern for those of us living in
poverty. We see their faces; we hear their voices;
they are a part of us, and we are a part of them."
As the United Nations reaches its sixtieth
anniversary, we give thanks for its work in
peacemaking and global reconciliation,
particularly the historic commitment to eradicate
poverty in the Millennium Declaration of 2000.
10

Five years have passed, and, despite the triumph
of principle, there has been a failure in practice.
In this communique, we offer our partnership to
the leaders gathered at the World Summit at the
United Nations in building a global movement to
make real the promises of the Millennium
Development Goals as a crucial step towards a
more just world for all God's children.
We believe that God calls us to place
people struggling with poverty at the centre of
our concern. Globalization has brought
unprecedented economic growth. At the same
time, one sixth of the world's people still fight
daily for survival under the crushing burden of
extreme poverty. The increasing concentration of
wealth in our world, while so many suffer, is a
scandal that impoverishes us all.
"We believe that the spirit of partnership
between rich and poor, exemplified in the MDGs,
is a way the world can address poverty in all its
dimensions. In particular, we support the goal of
a global partnership for development, and believe
that the Churches can make a unique contribution
to that partnership."
If nothing else, the fact that the religious leaders
who issued that call gathered from many parts of the
world to agree on a message to our summit Meeting
must remind us that the masses - the people who
elected us - entertain high expectations about the
United Nations. They see this Organization as their
pre-eminent partner in the continuing struggle to build
a better and humane world.
They challenge those of us who have the
privilege to represent our States in the United Nations
to build, strengthen and direct this world Organization
so that it can, indeed, play its role as a pre-eminent
partner of the peoples of the world in constructing a
better and more humane world.
Accordingly, I believe that we must view with the
greatest seriousness their conclusion that five years
have passed since we adopted the Millennium
Declaration and that, 'despite this triumph of principle,
there has been a failure in practice'.
Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the
destructive fury of the Second World War and the
villainous genocide committed during that war, the
United Nations was formed, in the words of the
Charter, "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind".
Responding to the universal demand for human
and peoples' rights, the founders declared that they
were forming the United Nations "to reaffirm faith in
the fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person, in the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small" and to
"promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom".
As we gather here, in part to celebrate the sixtieth
anniversary of an international Organization
established to bring hope to the peoples of the world,
we cannot avoid asking some hard questions. That is
necessary if we are to live up to our obligation to
ensure that the United Nations discharges its
responsibilities, described by the religious leaders who
met at the Washington National Cathedral as
peacemaking, global reconciliation and the eradication
of poverty.
We must ask ourselves how well prepared the
United Nations is today, 60 years after it was
established, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; to protect and advance the fundamental
human rights of all; to protect and advance the dignity
and worth of each human person; to ensure equal rights
between men and women; to ensure equal rights
between nations large and small; and to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
We must ask - and answer honestly - whether
what we do as the United Nations is properly described
as a triumph of principle but a failure in practice, as the
religious leaders put it.
The reality is that, 60 years after the United
Nations was formed as a response to the appalling and
ghastly results of the crime of racism, we are still
confronted by the cancer of racism. Although the
United Nations has adopted important decisions on that
matter, and convened the necessary conferences to
unite the peoples of the world against racism, those
who continue to fall victim to that crime against
humanity would find it difficult to cite the instances
when the United Nations came to their aid.
Sixty years after the United Nations was formed,
the indecencies of war and violent conflict continue to
afflict innocent people, evidently because we, the
11

United Nations, lack the will to live up to the
commitment that was made when this Organization
was established.
Africans, who have been exposed to many violent
conflicts since the United Nations was formed, are
particularly keen for this Organization to live up to its
obligation to save succeeding African generations from
the scourge of war. Even as we speak, the United
Nations is faced with the urgent task of taking the
necessary action in CÙte díIvoire to help to bring a
lasting peace to that important African country,
opening the way to its reunification, the holding of
democratic elections and the promotion of social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
to use the words of the Charter.
A similar challenge faces this Organization with
regard to the restoration of lasting peace in Darfur in
the Sudan, building on the historic conclusion and
implementation of the Sudanese Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, signed in Nairobi, Kenya, earlier this year.
Only 11 years ago, we experienced a terrible
genocide in Rwanda, and thousands were killed in the
internecine conflict that took place in the Balkans.
Those who were exposed to the savagery would be
fully justified in concluding that the United Nations
had betrayed its commitment to the peoples of the
world.
I am certain that all of us are impatient to see an
end to the conflicts in the Middle East, including Iraq,
and in particular the restoration of the rights of the
people of Palestine, in the context of the successful
implementation of the road map.
While we welcome recent positive developments
in this regard, we must accept the reality that every day
that passes without the full implementation of the road
map only serves to point an accusing finger at us, the
United Nations, accusing us of not having done
everything we could to help secure the just and lasting
peace that is the right of the Palestinian, the Israeli and
the Arab peoples.
We have all recognized the serious and urgent
threat posed by international terrorism to all our
nations. We have all accepted the reality that we need a
multilateral response to that common threat. Yet we
have still not succeeded in arriving at a common
definition of that threat or identified its fundamental
causes.
The issues of non-proliferation and the
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction are
matters of critical concern to all nations, both large and
small. Yet we failed to address those matters in the
outcome document adopted at the review summit last
night, even as the issue of nuclear weapons and their
non-proliferation is among the most prominent items in
world news and on the international agenda. None of
us could justly claim that our failure as the United
Nations to take specific decisions on these matters
served to enhance global security in the face of the
threat of weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the issue of Iran, we firmly believe
that negotiations should resume and that the matter be
settled within the framework of the provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and with the full participation of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
The gap between the rich and the poor is
becoming worse within and between countries, as
observed by the United Nations Development
Programmeís 2005 Human Development Report, which
states that the gap between the average citizen in the
richest and in the poorest countries is wide and is
getting wider. It states that in 1990 the average
American was 38 times richer than the average
Tanzanian, while today the average American is 61
times richer.
The same report states, on page 3,
"In 2003, 18 countries with a combined
population of 460 million people registered lower
scores on the human development index (HDI)
than in 1990 - an unprecedented reversal. In the
midst of an increasingly prosperous global
economy, 10.7 million children every year do not
live to see their fifth birthday, and more than 1
billion people survive in abject poverty on less
than a $1 a day."
Accordingly, if we pause and scan the road
travelled to judge whether we have succeeded in saving
the world from the scourge of war; whether we have
built a world that has reaffirmed faith in fundamental
human rights; whether we have created a world that
has restored the dignity and worth of the human
person - a world that has entrenched equal rights for
men and women and for nations, large and small - the
answer from the majority of the people of the world
may very well be a resounding "No".
12

The United Nations has adopted many decisions
intended to help address the various global challenges
that have persisted over the 60 years of its existence.
Accordingly, we have the necessary policies to address
the social, economic, political and other problems
facing humanity. We have also adopted comprehensive
and clear programmes to give effect to those policies
and have identified the resources required for their
implementation.
The questions we must answer are: why have we
not implemented these programmes, and what must be
done to correct the situation?
The process of globalization means that our
common world is more integrated today than it was
when the United Nations was formed 60 years ago.
Similarly, the interconnectedness of the issues of
peace, security, development and human rights has
never been more pronounced than it is today. All this
means that the imperatives that made it necessary and
correct to establish the United Nations as part of a
desirable system of global governance are that much
more compelling today, and that the necessary reform
of the Organization must take place to ensure that it
reflects the new global realities since it was formed
and that it is empowered to respond effectively to the
urgent challenges that face all humanity.
And yet, the painful paradox we face is that it
seems obvious that, over the years, there has been a
continuous erosion of the authority and prestige of the
United Nations and a sustained drift towards its
marginalization in terms of playing its rightful role, as
so clearly defined in the United Nations Charter. At its
sixtieth session, the General Assembly has the heavy
responsibility to reassert the critical need for the
United Nations to discharge its responsibilities as
spelled out in that Charter. Experience over the last 60
years has shown that, to address the criticism levelled
against the Organization by religious leaders ó that
there has been a triumph of principle and a failure in
practice ó we must be ready to engage in a sustained
struggle to ensure that the vision contained in the
United Nations Charter is actually translated into
reality.
As we engage in this struggle, we should say, as
did the religious leaders who met at the Washington
National Cathedral, that we are united in a common
concern for those of us living in poverty: "We see their
faces; we hear their voices; they are a part of us, and
we are a part of them."
Let me close by reiterating our deepest
sympathies and condolences to the Government and the
people of the United States in the wake of the death
and destruction wreaked by Hurricane Katrina.