I 
wish to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, 
on your election as President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. I am confident that, under your 
guidance, this session will achieve full success. I also 
wish to pay tribute to Mr. Jan Eliasson, President of the 
last session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan. I 
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
the Republic of Montenegro on becoming a Member of 
the United Nations. 
 The world is experiencing profound and complex 
changes. Peace, development and cooperation have 
become trends of our times and represent the common 
aspirations of all countries and peoples in the world. 
However, the world is not tranquil and the issue of 
development remains prominent. There is still a long 
way to go in the pursuit of durable peace and common 
development. Recently, the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, the Iranian nuclear issue and the Lebanese-
Israeli conflict have flared up, adversely affecting 
regional and global stability and testing the wisdom, 
unity and patience of the international community. 
  
 
06-53317 22 
 
 To maintain peace is the shared mission of the 
entire international community. Consultations based on 
equality and peaceful negotiations are the only 
effective means to resolve disputes. China, as a 
permanent member of the Security Council and a 
member of the international community, will continue 
to make every effort to achieve a peaceful resolution of 
hotspot issues. 
 As regards the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, China is committed to maintaining peace 
and stability on the Peninsula, making it free of nuclear 
weapons and promoting the six-party talks. During the 
Security Council’s deliberations in July regarding the 
missile tests by the Democratic People’s Republic of 
Korea and the related resolution, China made strenuous 
efforts to engage the parties concerned, in an effort to 
maintain peace on the Peninsula and in North-East Asia 
and preserve the unity and authority of the Security 
Council and safeguard the progress already made in the 
six-party talks. 
 Long-standing antagonism and mistrust between 
the parties concerned is the main cause of the current 
difficulty. All parties should be patient and pragmatic 
and act with vision to reduce differences and remove 
obstacles through dialogue. The six-party talks remain 
an effective mechanism to enhance understanding and 
trust and resolve the Korean nuclear issue. We hope 
that the parties involved will be cool-headed and more 
flexible, expand common ground, meet each other 
halfway and work together for the early resumption of 
the six-party talks and progressive implementation of 
the joint statement. That is the only viable solution to 
the Korean nuclear issue. 
 With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, China 
calls for upholding the integrity of the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, and is opposed to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It has worked for a 
peaceful resolution of the issue in order to promote 
peace and stability in the Middle East. At the same 
time, the legitimate right of countries to the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy should be fully respected, 
provided they fulfil their relevant international 
obligations. 
 Diplomatic negotiation represents the best chance 
to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue and serve the 
interests of all parties. China hopes that the parties 
involved will exercise patience and restraint, continue 
to take a flexible approach and remain committed to 
the right course of pursuing a peaceful resolution. 
China will continue to play a constructive role in 
working for an appropriate settlement of the Iranian 
nuclear issue. 
 As regards the Lebanese-Israeli conflict, China 
opposes any move that will undermine peace and 
stability in the region, and calls for a comprehensive 
cessation of hostilities. China welcomes Security 
Council resolution 1701 (2006) and hopes that it will 
be strictly observed. China hopes that the parties 
concerned will reach an early agreement on a 
framework of political settlement that is both just and 
durable. 
 The question of Palestine is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. The peace process should be re-
started in keeping with the relevant resolutions of the 
United Nations and the principle of land for peace, in 
the interest of reaching an early and comprehensive 
settlement of the Middle East issue, including the 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, so that the countries 
involved can live in harmony and the region can enjoy 
durable peace. 
 The United Nations has played an instrumental 
role in resolving regional flashpoints this year. But the 
Organization also faces major challenges. In the new 
international environment, to enhance its role through 
reform is in the common interest of humankind. The 
United Nations needs to take resolute steps in carrying 
out reform. The United Nations should develop in a 
way that promotes the purposes and principles of its 
Charter, upholds the unity and cooperation of the 
Organization and serves the collective interests of its 
Members. The reform of the United Nations should be 
comprehensive in coverage, and progress should be 
made in security, development, human rights and other 
fields. More should be done to promote development 
and facilitate the realization of the Millennium 
Development Goals. The reform of the Organization 
should, as far as possible, satisfy the needs of its 
Member States, particularly those from the developing 
world. The reform should be a democratic process and 
full consultations should be conducted to reach 
widespread consensus. Major controversial issues 
should be handled with caution and dealt with through 
in-depth consultations. 
 China welcomes the progress made in reforming 
the United Nations, in particular the progress in 
implementing the World Summit Outcome. We will 
 
 
23 06-53317 
 
pledge $3 million to the United Nations Peacebuilding 
Fund. We will continue to work with other countries to 
make progress in the reform of the United Nations, 
strengthen the unity and authority of the Organization 
and increase its efficiency and capacity to respond to 
challenges. 
 As the chief administrator of the United Nations, 
the Secretary-General has an important role to play. In 
the election of the next Secretary-General, China will 
firmly support an Asian candidate. We are convinced 
that Asia can produce a competent and well-respected 
Secretary-General acceptable to all Member States. 
 The scale of assessments for the apportionment of 
the expenses of the United Nations involves the 
interests of all Member States and constitutes the 
financial foundation of the Organization. All Member 
States have an obligation to pay their assessments on 
time and in full. The ability to pay is the basic 
principle governing the scale of assessments. It should 
be adhered to, as it has proved effective and represents 
the general consensus of Member States. Over the 
years, China has honoured its financial obligations in 
good faith and has made appropriate contributions to 
the budget of the United Nations. As China’s economy 
grows, we are prepared to increase our contributions to 
the Organization’s budget in accordance with the 
principle of ability to pay. We are ready to take part in 
relevant discussions in a constructive way, and hope 
that a fair and equitable formula will be reached on the 
basis of extensive consultations. 
 Without overall development, global peace and 
progress cannot be sustained. In addition to developing 
the concept of partnership and improving its 
modalities, all countries should honour our 
commitment to the global partnership for development 
set out in the Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey 
Consensus, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation 
and last year’s World Summit Outcome.  
 Countries should shoulder the primary 
responsibility for their own development and 
implement comprehensive development strategies in 
keeping with the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). 
 The international community — and developed 
countries in particular — should increase development 
assistance, promote international trade, technology 
transfers and investment, offer more extensive debt 
relief, provide more support to developing countries 
and respect their ownership of national development 
strategies. 
 The United Nations should play a bigger role in 
the field of development. It should create a fair and 
equitable framework to assess progress in meeting the 
MDGs and ensure that the United Nations Foundation 
and the various United Nations programmes and 
specialized agencies provide greater support for 
capacity-building programmes in developing countries. 
It should enhance coordination between international 
development policy and monetary, financial and 
trading regimes and create an enabling international 
environment for developing countries. 
 The suspension of the Doha round serves 
nobody’s interests. Members of the World Trade 
Organization should demonstrate political will, 
speedily resume the Doha development round and 
work towards a comprehensive and balanced outcome. 
 Non-governmental organizations should be 
encouraged to be more extensively and deeply involved 
in development cooperation. Their efforts and those of 
Governments should complement each other. 
 The establishment of the Human Rights Council 
echoes the calling of our times. Member States have a 
common responsibility to make the Council a dynamic 
and effective body. The Council should give greater 
attention to massive and gross violations of human 
rights caused by armed conflicts and should support 
the international community in its efforts to prevent 
conflicts, restore peace and combat terrorism in all its 
forms and manifestations. 
 The Council should attach equal importance to 
economic, social and cultural rights and encourage the 
international community and United Nations agencies 
to take effective measures to support countries in their 
efforts to realize their right to development.  
 The Council should continue to give special 
attention to the rights of women, children, persons with 
disabilities, migrant workers, ethnic minorities and 
other vulnerable groups to ensure that they enjoy the 
same level of respect as others. 
 The Council should promote dialogue and 
cooperation on an equal footing between countries of 
different social systems and levels of development, 
address human rights issues properly and reject double 
standards and politicization. 
  
 
06-53317 24 
 
 For decades, relations between China and African 
countries have been characterized by sincerity and 
mutual support. We have conducted our cooperation on 
the basis of equality and mutual benefit, while 
safeguarding sovereignty and independence and 
promoting social and economic development in our 
respective countries. All that has served to bring about 
significant benefits for the Chinese and African peoples 
alike. 
 China and Africa will hold a summit and the third 
ministerial meeting of the Forum on China-Africa 
Cooperation in Beijing from 3 to 5 November. 
Focusing on the theme of friendship, peace, 
cooperation and development, Chinese and African 
leaders will discuss ways to establish and foster a new 
type of strategic partnership featuring political equality 
and mutual trust, win-win economic cooperation and 
cultural exchanges. They will also draft a blueprint to 
enhance China-Africa cooperation. China is committed 
to peaceful development. Africa, which is home to the 
largest number of developing countries, is committed 
to achieving stability and renewal. Stronger ties 
between China and Africa will contribute to South-
South cooperation and international peace and 
development. 
 The conduct of China’s diplomacy aims to 
safeguard world peace and promote common 
development. China is committed to developing itself 
through safeguarding and promoting world peace 
through its own development. We are pursuing 
development that is peaceful, inclusive, cooperative 
and harmonious in nature. We will endeavour to 
promote the fundamental interests of our own people in 
harmony with the common interests of other peoples 
and to pursue peace, promote development and resolve 
disputes through cooperation. 
 China is dedicated to building a harmonious 
world. It hopes to increase mutual respect and 
understanding with other countries and to live in 
harmony with them. China respects the right of a 
country to choose its own path to development. It 
supports equal participation by different countries in 
international affairs and democracy in international 
relations. It works to enhance mutual benefits, win-win 
outcomes and global prosperity through sharing the 
benefits of economic globalization and technological 
progress. China seeks to promote a diversified world 
and advance human civilization by furthering dialogue, 
understanding and mutual enrichment between 
different cultures. China is committed to advancing 
human progress by enhancing dialogue, building 
mutual trust with other countries and working with 
them to address global issues. 
 China will continue to demonstrate to the world 
that it is an important force for global peace and 
development and that the Chinese people will remain 
trustworthy friends and cooperation partners to the 
world’s peoples. Please accept 
my congratulations, Madam, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first 
session. I wish you every success. I should also like to 
express my sincere thanks to the President of the 
General Assembly at its sixtieth session for his 
dedicated work and to wish him every success in his 
future endeavours. 
 The world events that have taken place over the 
past 60 years are reflected more graphically in 
Germany than in almost any other country. Until 1989, 
the wall and the barbed wire across our country 
symbolized the division of Europe and the rest of the 
world into two blocs. Since then, Germany has become 
the embodiment of the successful overcoming of that 
division. 
 Both division and the overcoming of division 
have influenced our view of the world. For 45 years, 
peace in Germany was due largely to the friendship and 
the political and military protection of partner 
countries, which took their responsibility seriously. 
That experience shaped the political outlook of 
Germans. That is why we, too, are now shouldering our 
responsibility, both in Europe and in other parts of the 
world. In the context of the United Nations, that means 
that a reunited Germany believes it has an obligation to 
do everything it can to support the Organization in 
creating a more peaceful and more equitable world. 
 German soldiers and police officers are taking 
part in numerous peace missions that are either led or 
mandated by the United Nations. In the Western 
Balkans, Germany has provided the largest contingent 
of peacekeeping troops in Kosovo and in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Germany is playing a prominent role in 
the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Germany is leading 
the European operation in the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo and is supporting the first free elections 
there in 40 years. Germany is engaged in the Sudan 
through its support for the African Union Mission in 
the Sudan and the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan. And, at this very moment, German navy vessels 
 
 
29 06-53317 
 
are on their way to the Lebanese coast, where they will 
reinforce the United Nations peacekeeping force. 
Germany will contribute up to 2,400 troops to that 
peace mission. 
 Germany supports a policy of dialogue and the 
peaceful reconciliation of differing interests. We firmly 
believe that political conflicts cannot be resolved 
through military force or military victories. Peace is 
brought about by engaging in political dialogue, 
establishing economic ties and giving people tangible 
hope for the future. If the parties to a conflict are 
unable to overcome political divisions on their own, 
the international community, represented by the United 
Nations, has an obligation to help. That is the guiding 
principle of our foreign policy. 
 As Minister for Foreign Affairs of a reunited 
Germany, I have been profoundly influenced by 
German and European history. On that basis, I have a 
concrete mandate for German foreign policy: we must 
do everything in our power to prevent the world from 
dividing once again into hostile blocs. Politicians in 
every country have a responsibility in that regard. 
Everyone can — and, I believe, everyone must — 
make a contribution. It is my firm conviction that 
anyone who instigates antagonism between people of 
different cultures and religions is not living up to his or 
her responsibility. 
 No one should interpret the involvement of 
Germany and its partners in the Balkans, in 
Afghanistan, in the Sudan and in Lebanon as an 
aggressive global campaign waged by the West against 
Islam. In a world that has grown closer together than 
ever before, we do not need exclusion or polarization. 
Rather, we need the courage to promote understanding 
and to engage in dialogue. 
 In the Middle East, it is crucial, following 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), on Lebanon, 
that we seize the opportunity to promote 
understanding. I call on all parties to the conflict in the 
region to act responsibly. Those who want their 
children and grandchildren to live in peace instead of 
violence, in safety instead of fear, in prosperity instead 
of poverty, must have the courage to embark on new 
paths rather than simply cultivating long-standing 
enmities.  
 The principles for a settlement are clear: Israel’s 
right to exist, on the one hand, and the establishment of 
a Palestinian State, on the other. Those were the core 
concerns of the Road Map, to which, I am firmly 
convinced, we must return. However, if we are to 
ensure lasting success, we must do everything we can 
to include everyone involved, even if that seems a 
roundabout way to achieve our goal. Therefore, I hope 
that we will succeed in persuading Syria to engage in a 
constructive dialogue. We need stronger engagement 
on the part of the international community, particularly 
the Middle East Quartet. I welcome the Quartet’s 
recent meeting. 
 In Afghanistan, the international community is 
demonstrating how the principle of responsibility can 
be put into practice in concrete terms. After 23 years of 
civil war, political structures are now being developed. 
Millions of refugees have returned to their home 
country. Just as important, young people — including 
girls — can go to school again. However, drug 
cultivation and the security situation pose a threat to 
the progress that has been made, at least in certain 
regions of the country. We, the international 
community cannot allow the successes to date to be 
brought to naught. 
 In the Western Balkans, too, war is a thing of the 
past; I am very pleased to note that that is so. The 
political and military commitment of the United 
Nations, the United States of America, Russia and the 
European Union has played a key role in this. In 
Kosovo, the task now is to ensure that the two parties 
to the conflict take their responsibility for peace and 
stability seriously. A solution to the status of Kosovo, 
which has remained unresolved for many years, is 
overdue. Germany staunchly backs the efforts of the 
United Nations Special Envoy, President Martti 
Ahtisaari. We believe that stability cannot be achieved 
if the will of only the majority population of Kosovo is 
expressed. Kosovo Serbs must be guaranteed adequate 
protections as a minority. 
 We need only glance at a map of Africa to 
understand how important the peace and stability of the 
Sudan and the Congo are for the African continent as a 
whole. I believe that instability and conflicts in Africa 
also have a direct impact on Europe. For this reason, 
too, Germany is supporting the United Nations in its 
efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in those two 
countries. 
 While the United Nations peace mission in 
southern Sudan — the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan (UNMIS) — has made an effective contribution 
  
 
06-53317 30 
 
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement 
between northern and southern Sudan, peace in Darfur 
is still a long way off. Neither the Sudanese 
Government nor rebel groups can be absolved of 
responsibility for the humanitarian disaster in the west 
of the country. Nevertheless, I am firmly convinced 
that a lasting solution to the conflict will be possible 
only if we work with, not against, them. 
 As members are aware, over the past few years 
Germany, together with France and Britain, supported 
by the United States of America, Russia and China, has 
been intensively seeking a solution to the conflict 
regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. Let me state 
clearly that no one wants to deny Iran the right to use 
nuclear energy peacefully. Nor is isolating Iran the 
objective of the diplomatic effort. On the contrary, we 
hope that Iran will become a reliable and responsible 
partner in the crisis-stricken Middle East. That is why, 
on 6 June, we offered Iran a package aimed at far-
reaching cooperation. The package includes proposals 
for closer diplomatic, economic and security 
cooperation, and expressly acknowledges Iran’s right 
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
 However, the international community also 
rightly expects cooperation and transparency from Iran. 
If Iran were to prove that the suspicions of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are 
unfounded and if it sent a clear sign that it truly intends 
to use its nuclear programme for peaceful purposes 
only, that could open the door to a development which 
benefits the people of Iran and the entire region. 
 It is now up to the Government in Tehran to face 
up to its responsibility. The decision in favour of peace 
and stability in the entire Middle East requires courage. 
I call upon Iran to end the current phase of 
procrastination and give a clear sign of trust so that we 
can look to the future together and can finally sit down 
at the negotiating table. 
 Resolution of the nuclear dispute with Iran is 
urgent. However, the challenges of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons go far beyond that. We must act now 
if we want to halt the erosion of the non-proliferation 
regime. The next attempt to implement the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must not 
fail. 
 Not only Iran but also other countries are 
thinking about developing enrichment technology. We 
will have to develop new instruments if we want to 
prevent such risks from arising. 
 I am therefore strongly in favour of not merely 
exchanging ideas on the multilateralization of the fuel 
cycle and transferring responsibility for uranium 
enrichment to the international community, but of 
further developing such ideas into concrete options. I 
therefore appeal for greater efforts to find solutions, 
working together with the IAEA. 
 The conflicts in the Middle East, Afghanistan, the 
Western Balkans and the Sudan, and the dispute with 
Iran, as well as the fight against international terrorism, 
have one thing in common: in none of those cases is 
the West taking a hostile stance against Islam. Nor do 
they involve a clash of civilizations. Rather, they are 
very diverse conflicts involving diverse interests. 
 I believe that there is just one link, albeit a very 
different one: each one of those conflicts can be 
resolved only with a willingness and ability to engage 
in dialogue. That is because dialogue gets everyone 
concerned involved, engages them and does not allow 
them to shirk their responsibility for resolving a 
conflict. However, a policy of cooperation and 
dialogue does not mean talking at any cost. Those who 
want to engage in dialogue must meet some basic 
prerequisites. In my view, these include a readiness to 
bring about a peaceful reconciliation of interests — 
that is to say, they must be prepared to renounce 
violence and respect the position of the other side — 
and their own position must be consistent and credible. 
If these prerequisites are not met, then no dialogue 
with any chance of success can get off the ground. 
 I am firmly convinced that a dialogue beyond 
cultural borders can succeed because, despite all of our 
differences, we are living in one world. The various 
cultures of the world have more in common than 
political rabble-rousers would have us believe. People 
everywhere have the same fundamental interests: they 
want to live in peace and security, free from poverty. 
They want good health care and good schools for their 
children. No responsible Government would ever want 
to withhold these from its people — nor should they 
ever be allowed to try to do so. 
 The United Nations and its agencies and 
programmes embody this vision — and it is this vision 
that makes the United Nations so indispensable. I am 
convinced that we will need the United Nations more 
than ever in the coming decades. The number and the 
 
 
31 06-53317 
 
scale of crises in the world are increasing. That could 
bring about a renaissance of the United Nations even in 
countries that are sometimes still sceptical about the 
world Organization. 
 The effectiveness of the United Nations, its 
ability to act and the confidence it inspires as the 
international community’s main multilateral 
Organization are closely connected. Everyone can see 
how necessary transparent structures and effective 
institutions are for the United Nations. The reform of 
the United Nations — the entire Organization, not just 
the Security Council — should not, therefore, simply 
remain on the agenda; concrete progress must be made. 
 We see the expectations placed on the United 
Nations rising. This is especially urgent in the case of 
the review of mandates, as well as management and 
financial reform. Germany pledges to support this 
endeavour, because we must reform if we, as members 
of the international community, wish to remain 
effective. We owe that not only to the United Nations 
but, above all, to the people in whose name we 
shoulder responsibility together. Lebanon 
has again been set ablaze by war, a further 
manifestation of the interminable conflict in the Middle 
East whose tragedies have, for 60 years now, 
punctuated the life of the United Nations. 
 By endlessly deferring its settlement, this 
confrontation has become the epicentre of international 
instability, the main source of incomprehension 
between the different worlds and an easy alibi for all 
forms of terrorism. 
 This situation is not a foregone conclusion. With 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), the United 
Nations is shouldering its responsibilities. The 
unanimous adoption of this resolution has brought the 
fighting to an end. France, Europe and Asia have 
contributed to the strengthening of United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). 
 But the fire is still smouldering. It is now up to 
all the parties to work towards the consolidation of 
peace and the recovery of Lebanon. 
 It is now up to Israel to complete the withdrawal 
of its forces. It is up to the Lebanese Government to 
affirm its sovereignty throughout its territory. And it is 
up to the countries in the region to cooperate fully in 
order to ensure the success of resolution 1701 (2006), 
to cooperate with the United Nations. 
 In this highly sensitive region where divides 
meet, the status quo has become unbearable. Because 
the conflict in the Middle East is a threat to global 
peace and security, the world has no option but to be 
the guarantor of peace. Let us tread off the beaten track 
of habit. Let us define a global strategy the key to 
which is an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. 
 The parameters for that settlement are well-
known, namely, the secure coexistence of two viable 
States, as has already been widely accepted by both 
peoples; safe and recognized borders; and a fair 
solution for refugees and for Jerusalem. All that still 
stands between Israelis and Palestinians and the peace 
to which they aspire is the deep-seated, mutual distrust 
of two peoples shattered by history and reeling from 
their sufferings and ordeals. Let us now stop extremists 
from laying down the law! Let us help peoples and 
leaders bold enough to seek peace! Like, before them, 
Sadat and Begin, Rabin and Arafat! Before this 
Assembly, I call on the world to commit itself to 
restoring the conditions for confidence. 
 The Quartet should meet shortly to start preparing 
an international conference. I propose that the 
conference define in advance the guarantees that we 
are prepared to provide to the parties as soon as they 
reach an agreement. I also propose that the conference 
pave the way for a new future in the Middle East 
through a regional framework for collective security, 
economic integration and dialogue among cultures. 
 Building peace means fighting terrorism. It 
means preventing proliferation. It means shouldering 
the “responsibility to protect” that we enshrined here 
last year. 
 International legality must prevail over the threats 
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In the 
crisis with Iran, confidence has been impaired by the 
existence of hidden programmes. We have extended 
ambitious offers of cooperation to that major country, 
 
 
21 06-52731 
 
provided it restores confidence by suspending its 
contentious activities. Dialogue must prevail. Let us 
talk in order to enter into negotiations. 
 Given the seriousness of what is at stake, the 
international community must stand firm and united. 
We do not aim to call regimes into question. We aim to 
ensure security in accordance with international law 
and with due regard for the sovereignty of all 
countries. 
 The “responsibility to protect” — that was what 
we affirmed here. In Darfur, millions of people are 
threatened. A crime against humanity looms. 
Bloodshed and turmoil are about to convulse the very 
heart of Africa again. 
 France entreats the international community to 
ward off a further humanitarian catastrophe. I solemnly 
call on Sudan to accept the United Nations peace 
mission without delay. I call on the International 
Criminal Court to bring to justice those responsible for 
these crimes. 
 The time has come for the immense continent of 
Africa, with its wealth of peoples and vibrant youth, 
which has embarked on the road to growth and reform, 
to find, at long last, a destiny worthy of it and of the 
cradle of humanity it represents. Humanity must be 
united and there must be solidarity among its diverse 
peoples. Humanity needs, more than ever, a strong and 
respected United Nations, the irreplaceable tool for 
shared sovereignty and responsibility. 
 It is here that universal and sacred human rights 
must be defended and protected. With the new Human 
Rights Council and the International Criminal Court, 
the United Nations returns to this primary vocation. Let 
us not disappoint the hopes of all those who love 
freedom and justice. 
 At a time when the world’s wealth is increasing 
as never before, the separation between the rich and 
poor is becoming intolerable. From its inception, the 
United Nations has stood for the moral imperatives of 
fairness and solidarity. For this reason France wishes to 
submit to the United Nations the idea of innovative 
development financing mechanisms such as the 
international solidarity levy on airplane tickets, a 
modern, pragmatic and experimental response to the 
need to fight poverty and pandemics. In this spirit we 
will be launching the International Drug Purchase 
Facility (UNITAID) initiative this afternoon. Let us 
overcome selfishness and dogmatism and give the 
generous idea of a world united for human progress a 
chance. 
 Finally, we all know that uncontrolled human 
activity is bringing about a sort of slow collective 
suicide. Disaster can only be averted if nations can 
come together to support jointly agreed commitments. 
Let us create a United Nations for the environment, as 
the expression of the world’s ecological conscience and 
the premier forum in which we take common action for 
future generations. France will host an international 
conference next year to bring together all those who 
want to make progress on this project, which is crucial 
to the future of the planet. 
 For 10 years now, a man has held high the torch 
of the United Nations and our universal values. Today, 
I wish to pay Kofi Annan the solemn and merited 
honour of our profound admiration, of our respect and 
of our recognition. 
 In a few weeks’ time, we will appoint a new 
Secretary-General, who will be faced with immense 
challenges. He will be able to count on the support of 
France, on its unswerving commitment to serving 
peace and justice, fraternity and progress. First, I would 
like to pay tribute to the work of the Secretary-General. 
A former British Minister once said of the NATO 
Secretary General that he should be more of a secretary 
and less of a general. Kofi Annan has been more of 
everything: more of a diplomat, more of a reformer and 
more of a moral voice of leadership in the world. 
 In a world shattered by conflict, the founders of 
the United Nations saw that only by coming together, 
united in support of larger freedom, could we build our 
shared future. Today, when the world’s nations are 
even more interdependent than they were in 1945, what 
does it mean to stand, as they intended, united? At one 
level it means taking action when things go wrong, 
where there is an actual breakdown of security or a 
descent into violence or chaos. Today in particular, the 
United Nations faces the challenges posed by multiple 
upheavals and crises across the world. 
 In the Middle East the United Nations is playing 
a vital role in establishing stability in southern 
Lebanon. Troops from the European Union are 
deploying alongside those from the Middle East, Asia 
and Africa. All Member States must meet their 
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1701 
(2006), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), if we are to 
enable Lebanon to be the proud, democratic and 
diverse nation that its people want it to be. 
 But we are all aware that this most recent conflict 
in Lebanon had its roots in the continuing failure to 
achieve a just solution to the Palestinian question. That 
is why the United Kingdom has consistently argued 
that there can be no higher priority than reinvigorating 
the Middle East peace process. 
 In Iraq, Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s national 
reconciliation plan can help leaders from all 
communities come together. At this crucial juncture, 
we must all intensify our support. The International 
Compact provides the right vehicle. It allows the Iraqi 
Government to set its own vision and shows us how we 
can help turn that vision into a reality. 
 In Afghanistan, real progress has been made, with 
the United Nations taking a leading role in 
coordinating the international effort. But real 
challenges still lie ahead. NATO’s task of securing the 
south of the country is far from easy. Soldiers from 
many NATO countries, not least my own, have given 
their lives to provide a better future for the people of 
Afghanistan. The Afghan Government and people, too, 
want security, development and good governance. The 
United Kingdom and the international community are 
determined to help them to achieve them. 
 We must show a similar shared determination in 
urging the Government of Iran to address international 
concerns over its nuclear ambitions and its support for 
terrorism. The proposals put forward by Britain, France 
and Germany with China, Russia and the United States 
offer a path for the Iranian Government to develop a 
more constructive relationship with the rest of the 
world and give Iran’s talented population the 
opportunities and prosperity that is their right, 
including, if they wish, a modern nuclear power 
industry. We want to be able to resume negotiations. 
  
 
06-53317 20 
 
Iran knows what is required, and that the alternative is 
increasing isolation. 
 Darfur remains in crisis. I pay tribute to the 
efforts of the African Union and its peacekeepers. 
Wednesday’s decision to extend their mandate averted 
a security vacuum. We must now strengthen the force 
of the African Union Mission in the Sudan. But it can 
only be a temporary reprieve. We also need action 
immediately on the political and humanitarian front. 
Those who have not signed the Darfur Peace 
Agreement must do so. Those who have must abide by 
its provisions. 
 To underpin that Agreement, we urgently need a 
greatly strengthened international presence on the 
ground, with the active engagement and support of 
Asian and Muslim, as well as African, countries. That 
is why the Security Council authorized the deployment 
of United Nations peacekeepers to Darfur. I urge 
President Bashir to extend the Sudan’s relations with 
the United Nations in a common purpose to bring 
lasting peace and genuine stability to the whole of the 
Sudan. It is, above all, his responsibility. 
 The security challenges the world faces are real. 
As an international community we must deal with 
them. But standing united also requires us to take up a 
second, deeper level of global responsibility, namely, 
tackling the underlying problems that promote conflict 
and underdevelopment. We must strive to promote 
sound global values and to build multilateral systems 
within which nations and individuals can cooperate, 
co-exist and each achieve their potential. 
 Many representatives to the Assembly have 
already spoken of the need to accelerate progress 
towards the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals. Progress on those Goals is a moral 
imperative rooted in a concern for, and an 
understanding of, our common humanity. But it is also 
a political imperative, because there will be no stability 
and security in our global community while so many 
millions of men, women and children in that 
community face only a life of hunger, poverty, 
inequality and disease. 
 The same is true for those whose lives are 
shattered by conflict or blighted by injustice. The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council are new structures that give us new 
opportunities and new impetus. At the same time, we 
must see a step change in efforts towards an 
international arms trade treaty that will end the 
irresponsible transfer of arms that fuel conflict and 
facilitate the abuse of human rights. That is why the 
United Kingdom, with six other countries, will 
introduce a draft resolution in the First Committee to 
establish a process to work towards a legally binding 
treaty on the trade in all conventional arms. 
 Collectively, we have a responsibility to protect 
human life and a duty to defend the international 
institutions that help us as a community to achieve that 
goal. The answers lie not in division or in personal 
attacks, but in the earnest and consistent pursuit of 
justice and peace.  
 Our collective responsibility to each other is 
nowhere more evident than in the huge challenge posed 
by climate change. The British Prime Minister, Tony 
Blair, made climate change one of our two G8 
priorities last year, alongside poverty reduction in 
Africa. When the Prime Minister appointed me as his 
Foreign Secretary, in May, he specifically charged me 
with putting climate security at the heart of our foreign 
policy. We will not solve that problem if we do not 
each assume our share of the responsibility for tackling 
it. Nobody can protect themselves from climate change 
unless we protect each other by building a global basis 
for climate security. That goes to the heart of the 
United Nations mission, and the United Nations must 
be at the heart of the solution. 
 To put it starkly, if we all try to freeride, we will 
all end up in free fall, with accelerating climate change 
the result of our collective failure to respond in time to 
that shared threat that faces us all. Look just at the 
danger posed by rising sea levels. Potentially, that 
could cause massive damage to some of the key urban 
centres of our global civilization. London, Shanghai, 
Dhaka, Singapore, Amsterdam, Cairo and, yes, 
Manhattan are all at risk. That is why we must all — as 
foreign ministers, heads of Government and heads of 
State — be ready to do more, and do it more quickly. 
Our climate presents us with an ever-growing threat to 
international security. Dealing with climate change, by 
both adapting to what is now inevitable and acting to 
avert still greater damage, is no longer a choice, it is an 
imperative. 
 We need common commitment and genuine 
action. We must all be ready to find a way to get the 
agenda moving beyond Kyoto. The Gleneagles 
dialogue meeting in Mexico at the beginning of 
 
 
21 06-53317 
 
October will be one such opportunity, a chance for 
developed and developing countries to work together 
on that shared problem.  
 If we do not act now, an unstable climate will 
undermine our progress in all those other areas that 
matter to us, not least the Millennium Development 
Goals themselves. Take one of the most basic needs of 
all, water. Already perhaps two fifths of the world’s 
population finds it hard to get the water they need. At 
the same time, many in the world rely on affordable 
energy to help lift themselves out of poverty — and, 
indeed, perhaps to give them access to that water. But 
there is a dilemma: if we provide affordable energy by 
burning fossil fuels, we accelerate climate change. That 
means further disrupting water supplies. For some 
people who now have plenty of water it will mean new 
shortages. For those who already have little, it will 
mean less. In turn, everywhere less water means less 
food. 
 Let me give a specific example of that dilemma. 
The whole world, as well as the Chinese people, is 
benefiting from the great success of the Chinese 
economy. No one in China or elsewhere wants that 
growth to stop. But it is based, in China as elsewhere, 
on a rapidly increasing use of the fossil fuels that are 
creating climate change. Yet China is a country already 
vulnerable to climate change. The Chinese Government 
knows that as the Himalayan glaciers melt and 
agricultural land shrinks, crop yields will fall, fresh 
water will become more scarce and the economy itself 
will suffer, and with it the world’s economy. 
 All the nations of the Arctic Circle are being, and 
will be, affected by melting permafrost, with 
disruptions to infrastructure and to investment. The 
Vice-President of Palau has just given us a vivid 
description of what the environment means for his 
nation. We all share, to a greater or lesser extent, that 
same dilemma. If we do not act on climate change, we 
risk undermining the very basis of the prosperity and 
security we are seeking to achieve. That is why we 
must recognize that talk of having either a successful 
economy or a stable climate is a false choice. We must 
work together to find paths for economic growth that 
will protect our climate. The truth is that we already 
have much of the technology we need to move to a 
low-carbon economy. But we must now deploy it very 
much more rapidly. What we do in the next 10 years 
will count the most.  
 The former chief economist of the World Bank, 
Sir Nicholas Stern, will shortly publish one of the most 
significant and wide-reaching analyses so far of the 
economic impacts of climate change itself. One of the 
key emerging findings of his work is that while it will 
not cost the Earth to solve climate change, it will cost 
the Earth, literally as well as financially, if we do not. 
 Moreover, if we learn to tackle climate change 
together, we have an opportunity to build trust between 
nations and to strengthen the multilateral system. But if 
we get it wrong, that trust will be further eroded. It is 
the developed, rich world that bears a large 
responsibility for the present level of greenhouse gas 
emissions, but it is the poorest in our global 
community — those least able to bear it — who will 
bear the brunt of climate insecurity. We all need to do 
more. But the rich world should of course continue to 
lead the effort, applying the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibility, which must continue to be 
our guide. In the joint endeavour which the United 
Nations represents there can be no more stark or more 
urgent warning than that. At the outset, Madam, 
let me join previous speakers in welcoming your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-first session. On India’s behalf, I would like to 
assure you of our constructive support and 
wholehearted commitment to work with you to achieve 
both the larger goals of the Charter and the more 
specific goals of the reform of this Organization that 
were set out in last year’s World Summit Outcome 
Document. 
 The topic of this general debate is “Implementing 
a global partnership for development”. It is difficult to 
contest its relevance or topicality. Today, whether we 
look at issues such as international trade, international 
financial mechanisms, methods to improve economic 
and social well-being, or even the various threats to 
peace and security that challenge our collective 
existence, one common theme that emerges is the lack 
of an effective and equitable global partnership. This is 
an imperative even for achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals. 
 The important annual report of the Secretary-
General highlights several successes in moving ahead 
with United Nations reform. During the previous 
General Assembly session, the Central Emergency 
Response Fund, the Peacebuilding Commission and the 
Human Rights Council were established, and the 
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was 
agreed upon. We have also gradually moved forward 
on management and budgetary reforms. While these 
are certainly important — indeed, critical — if we are 
honest, we must acknowledge that significant 
unfulfilled tasks and challenges lie ahead, particularly 
with regard to unaddressed issues, including the reform 
of the architecture of our multilateral bodies that 
oversee security, trade, financial flows and 
development. Without this reform, the discontent 
associated with globalization will only deepen. Without 
it, there cannot be substantially enhanced and assured 
resource and technology flows to developing countries, 
which are necessary for real economic transformation 
and for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
 It is sometimes argued that private sector 
investment is today replacing the traditional reliance 
on aid and development assistance. While we 
appreciate the important role of private sector 
investment, it cannot replace public investment in 
developing countries, whose absorptive capacities are 
often limited and where the physical and social 
infrastructure is often weak. Official development 
assistance (ODA) remains an important means to 
 
 
7 06-53952 
 
augment public investment in areas such as human 
capital development and rural infrastructure, which 
rarely attract private sector investment. 
 The process of increasing the available pool of 
resources for investment in the social and economic 
infrastructure of developing countries can be promoted 
at one level by developed countries, expeditiously 
reaching the target of setting aside 0.7 per cent of their 
gross domestic product for official development 
assistance. 
 At another level, there is also a need to develop 
innovative sources of financing. We must evolve a 
broader understanding of ways to encourage the least 
developed countries to get out of the debt trap by 
extending debt-cancellation programmes, without 
insisting on conditionalities, such as encouraging 
privatization, which, applied indiscriminately, may 
recreate the original difficulties that necessitated 
recourse to debt in the first place. 
 The impasse in international trade negotiations is 
disappointing, to say the least, considering the hopes 
raised after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference and 
at the Group of Eight Summit in Saint Petersburg in 
July. Early resumption is desirable, but adherence to 
the existing mandate is imperative — the mandate of 
the Doha Declaration, the July framework and the 
Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. When agriculture 
was brought into the ambit of negotiations at the 
creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the 
developing countries were given a clear understanding 
that trade-distorting agricultural subsidies would be 
phased out in a time-bound manner. Minimizing the 
vulnerabilities of poor farmers must be our collective 
priority. Demanding market access from developing 
countries, which displace low-income and subsistence 
farmers to satisfy commercial interests, cannot be 
supported.  
 Proportionately lower overall tariff reduction 
commitments, operable, effective development 
instruments for special products and a special 
safeguard mechanism are essential if we are to ensure 
food and livelihood security and meet the rural 
development needs of developing countries. The 
overarching principle of special and differential 
treatment therefore remains a categorical imperative, 
and is the underlying basis of the position of 
developing countries. 
 In our view, there exists an overwhelming logic 
for giving the United Nations a role in providing 
direction to the comprehensive reform of the 
international financial and trading systems. These 
reforms must be aimed at building an international 
architecture that reflects the realities of the twenty-first 
century and is able to create an environment that 
effectively supports national efforts to eradicate 
poverty. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
have given hope to the poor and the underprivileged of 
the world, and these goals are to be achieved by 2015. 
In this context, the World Bank must remain steadfast 
in its mission to build a world free of poverty, and its 
strategy must remain embedded in the historical 
development-centric approach.  
 The Outcome Document of last year’s World 
Summit emphasized that enhancing the voice and 
participation of developing countries in the Bretton 
Woods institutions remains a continuous concern. The 
bridging of this voice deficit requires fundamental 
reforms in the quota structure which are long overdue 
and absolutely necessary to enhance the credibility and 
legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
The quota reforms have to begin with the revision of 
the formula so as to reflect the relative economic 
strengths of countries in the twenty-first century. The 
United Nations should encourage immediate steps 
being taken to initiate the second stage of IMF quota 
reform, involving a basic revision of the quota formula 
and the subsequent increase of quotas for all under-
represented countries. All of this must be done in a 
time-bound manner. 
 Change is the law of life. The acute 
dissatisfaction heard in many statements is the result of 
institutions having been prevented from changing. 
What is true in the economic field is equally true of the 
architecture of our international security system as 
reflected in this unique Organization that is supposed 
to reflect the collective will of our world, a system 
which remains mired in the past. Recent tragic events 
in Lebanon and the stasis in the peace process in the 
broader Middle East have highlighted the growing 
failure of the institution designated by the Charter as 
having primary responsibility for issues relating to 
peace and security. 
 It is widely accepted that the Security Council 
can no longer be regarded as reflecting the changed 
international environment that has emerged since the 
time of its creation. The Security Council must not 
  
 
06-53952 8 
 
only be more representative but also more effective if it 
is to be able to satisfactorily perform the role mandated 
to it by the Charter. 
 At the same time, the Security Council has 
needlessly diverted its attention to issues and areas that 
go beyond its mandate. For instance, the inclusion of 
items on its agenda which have nothing to do with 
peace and security represents an encroachment on the 
roles mandated to other United Nations bodies. In 
order to ensure that the international community 
exercises real ownership of the process of securing our 
world, it is essential that comprehensive reform of the 
Security Council be undertaken and that its 
membership be expanded in both the permanent and 
the non-permanent categories. It is no accident that the 
Secretary-General’s report refers to the enhancement of 
legitimacy and the urgent need for reform to ensure the 
Security Council’s relevance and credibility. 
 The revitalization of the General Assembly is 
intertwined with the reform of the Security Council. It 
is no coincidence that its reform too has long been 
frustrated. A strengthened and more effective United 
Nations presumes a revitalized General Assembly that 
exercises its role and authority in the areas of 
responsibility assigned to it by the Charter. These 
include its effectively addressing topics such as 
international law and human rights, financial, 
budgetary and administrative matters, as well as the 
global economic architecture and important issues 
related to development. 
 I now turn to one of the most crucial issues of our 
times: the problem of terrorism. While this 
phenomenon has become increasingly global, our 
collective response to it has remained rather 
inadequate. The multiple ways in which terrorism 
challenges the core principles of humanity and the 
mandate of the United Nations are underlined by the 
outrages perpetrated in India over the last few months. 
Barely two months ago, on a single black day, more 
than 200 lives were lost and more than 1,000 were 
injured by dastardly bombings in Mumbai and 
elsewhere in India. These and other such outrageous 
incidents were clearly designed to spread maximum 
terror among ordinary people. Ours is not the only 
country to be singled out for vicious and senseless acts 
of murder. A strong response to terrorism requires 
broad-based international cooperation, denying to 
terrorists the space that has been available to them and 
increasing the capability of States to address terrorist 
threats. It requires sustained and specific cooperation 
by a variety of national, regional and global agencies. 
 Earlier this month, we joined in the adoption of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy 
(resolution 60/288), even though, ideally, we would 
have liked the United Nations to convey a far stronger 
message in order to counter terrorism. We must 
collectively and unanimously reject the notion that any 
cause can justify terrorism. No cause can ever justify 
the targeted killing of innocent men, women and 
children. The international community must signal that 
it will no longer tolerate the actions of the sponsors 
and abettors of terrorism, including States which 
wilfully fail to prevent terrorists from utilizing their 
territory. We hope that the Strategy will provide the 
impetus to unite the international community in its 
fight against terrorism via practical measures that 
facilitate cooperation by way of extradition, 
prosecution, information exchange and capacity-
building. 
 We went along with the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, but the comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism, which remains a work in 
progress, would have provided the requisite legal 
framework upon which a counter-terrorism strategy 
could have been based. It cannot be beyond our 
collective ingenuity to reach an agreement on such a 
comprehensive convention, even though we have 
missed the target of doing so at the sixtieth session of 
the General Assembly. We must work together to 
finalize and adopt the comprehensive convention, at 
least during this session of the General Assembly. 
 The existence of nuclear weapons continues to 
threaten international peace and security. In our view, 
the best non-proliferation measure is universal 
disarmament, and the international community needs to 
take immediate steps to eliminate the threat of the use 
of nuclear weapons. We have to revive momentum for 
achieving what the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
called a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, to 
be achieved, through negotiations, in a time-bound 
manner. India will be presenting a working paper at 
this session of the General Assembly on the issue of 
nuclear disarmament, on which we look forward to 
working with Member States. 
 In recent years, new dangers have emerged due to 
the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction-related materials and technologies to non-
 
 
9 06-53952 
 
State actors and terrorist groups. The international 
community must work together to meet those 
challenges. India’s record in that regard is impeccable, 
and we have instituted effective measures to ensure 
that the technologies we develop are not leaked in any 
way. 
 It is true that the developing countries bear the 
heaviest burden from pandemics, epidemics and 
chronic diseases. The scourge of HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
avian influenza and tuberculosis seriously threatens the 
future of many developing countries by robbing them 
of the most productive segment of their society — their 
young people — thereby affecting the future of those 
countries. An enhanced global collaborative effort is 
called for to confront the proliferation of challenges 
affecting the lives of the majority of our citizens. 
 We also need to address the central issue of the 
special needs of the developing countries, especially in 
Africa, and of the vulnerable small States. On our part, 
we will continue to expand our programme of South-
South cooperation also through the New Partnership 
for Africa’s Development, through Team 9 — our 
special programme for West African countries — and 
by means of the connectivity mission in Africa, as well 
as through assistance, capacity-building and 
technology transfer aimed at reducing the vulnerability 
of small States. 
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who embodied 
our commitment to the United Nations ideals, said that 
 “in a world of incessant and feverish activity, 
men have little time to think, much less to 
consider ideals and objectives. Yet, how are we to 
act, even in the present, unless we know which 
way we are going and what our objectives are?”  
 Confronted as we are by the globalization of 
threats and by the limitations of our international 
system to address such challenges, the need for a 
comprehensive reform of the United Nations has never 
been more imperative. We need to enfranchise the 
United Nations to meet the challenges of our time by 
reinforcing its role and authority as the core of real 
multilateralism. 
 We look forward to working closely with other 
Member States, under your leadership, Madam 
President, to press ahead with essential reforms at the 
United Nations and to implement an effective global 
partnership for development that encompasses 
everyone and enables every individual to live a life of 
dignity in a clean, safe and healthy environment. These days, the days of the 
general debate of the General Assembly, fall this year 
at a time of unique significance for the Jewish people. 
They come on the eve of the Jewish New Year and the 
Day of Atonement and are known as the Days of Awe. 
 In Jewish tradition, these are days of soul-
searching and prayer, of judgement and of renewal. 
That concept of reflection is fitting not just for the 
faithful. It should be a time of reflection for nations as 
well. Let us use this time and this gathering to look 
deeply and honestly at the world in which we live — 
the world as it is and as it might be. The United 
Nations emerged from the horrors of war and offered a 
vision of a new and peaceful world, but we see the 
suffering of the people of Darfur, we see bloodshed and 
violence across the globe, and we know that that is not 
yet the world in which we live. 
 Our planet remains torn by conflict, At its heart, 
this is a conflict about values — a battle of ideas. It is a 
conflict about whether to respect or to reject the 
other — a conflict between tolerance and tyranny, 
between the promise of coexistence and the 
hopelessness of hate. We see it played out in internet 
chat rooms and in houses of prayer, in classrooms and 
newsrooms, on the battlefield and in the corridors of 
power. It is the challenge of our time. 
 We, the people of Israel, have lived for many 
years on the frontlines of this conflict. Our nation has 
felt its fury; our soldiers have fought and died in its 
battles. An ancient people in the heart of the Middle 
East — great in history but small in number — we 
have been a constant target of those that oppose our 
very existence. We face this conflict on different 
fronts — as Jews against the dark forces of anti-
Semitism, as Israelis against the enemies of our 
statehood, and as members of the free world against 
the merchants of global terror. 
 We have been guided in this conflict by two core 
values that are embodied in our declaration of 
independence and shape our national identity. The first 
is that Israel, with Jerusalem at its heart, is the national 
homeland of the Jewish people, their refuge from 
persecution, their first and last line of defence. The 
second is that Israel is a democracy and that the values 
of justice, peace and humanity — first expressed by the 
prophets of Israel — are an integral part of our nation’s 
sense of mission. We share the same values as the 
community of democratic States. We are ready and 
proud to be judged by them. They are our own.  
  
 
06-52885 44 
 
 But too often there is a gap between perception 
and reality. Too often, Israel is not seen for its unique 
creativity and spirit of enterprise, or for its 
contribution — well beyond its size — to the sciences 
and to literature, to human development and 
innovation. In many parts of the world, we are seen 
mainly through the lens of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
And too often, that lens is distorted. To many, this 
conflict is portrayed as a clash of David and Goliath, 
with Israel perceived unjustly as Goliath, but this 
simplistic image ignores the fact that Israel remains a 
threatened democracy in a hostile region. 
 We have, of necessity, the capacity to defend 
ourselves, but we will always be constrained in its use 
by our values. And yet, we face an enemy willing to 
use all the means at its disposal to kill without restraint 
and without distinction. Every innocent casualty in this 
conflict is a tragedy. There is no difference between the 
tears of a grieving Israeli mother and a grieving 
Palestinian mother, but there is a critical moral 
difference between the terrorists who hunt down 
civilians and the soldiers who target terrorists while 
trying to avoid civilian casualties. 
 To protect its integrity, the international 
community must uphold that basic moral distinction. 
Terror is terror, even when it is called resistance. It 
cannot be justified and it cannot be equated with the 
actions of those seeking only to defend themselves 
against it. 
 If we want to protect our values, it is not enough 
to believe in them — we must act according to them. 
There is no greater challenge to our values than that 
posed by the leaders of Iran. They deny and mock the 
Holocaust. They speak proudly and openly of their 
desire to wipe Israel off the map. And now, by their 
actions, they pursue the weapons to achieve that 
objective, to imperil the region and to threaten the 
world. The moment of truth is here. 
 The international community is faced with no 
greater responsibility than to stand against that dark 
and growing danger — not for Israel’s sake, but for its 
own; for the sake of the values it claims to embrace; 
for the sake of the world we all wish our children to 
inherit. What more needs to happen for the world to 
take the threat seriously? What more needs to happen 
to end the hesitation and the excuses? We know the 
lessons of the past. We know the consequences of 
appeasement and indifference. There is no place for 
such leaders in this forum. There is no place for such a 
regime in the family of nations. 
 For any who still had doubts, the Iranian threat 
was exposed to all in the recent conflict in Lebanon. 
Armed, financed and directed by Iran, Hizbullah 
kidnapped Israeli soldiers and targeted Israeli cities, 
but it was the hopes of an entire region that they sought 
to take hostage. Out of the conflict — and because of 
Israel’s response to it — opportunity has emerged, but 
much is needed to turn opportunity into reality. 
Hizbullah can never again be allowed to threaten the 
future of the region. The world faces a critical test — 
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1701 
(2006) and the immediate and safe release of the Israeli 
hostages. 
 As we gather here, we think of anxious families 
that ache for the return of their loved ones — parents 
waiting for a son, a brother for a brother, a wife for a 
husband. Israel will not rest until all the Israeli 
hostages are returned safely to the arms of their 
devoted families and to the embrace of a loving nation. 
Let us all make them the same promise today. 
 Last year, a great leader of Israel, Ariel Sharon, 
stood before this forum and said:  
 “The Palestinians will always be our neighbours. 
We respect them and have no aspirations to rule 
over them. They are also entitled to freedom and 
to a national, sovereign existence in a State of 
their own.” (A/60/PV.5, p.46) 
 That was not only the voice and vision of one 
man. It is the voice and vision of a nation. We do not 
believe that Israeli-Palestinian relations are of 
necessity a zero-sum game. Not every Israeli interest is 
at odds with Palestinian interests. There is, in fact, a 
common vision that binds together Israelis, moderate 
Palestinians and the international community. It serves 
the goals of both peoples and represents the basis of a 
genuine and lasting peace. At its heart is the vision of 
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in 
peace and security. Israel believes in this vision, and 
from this vision we have drawn our principles for 
peace. 
 The first is inherent in the very idea of two 
States. For the Jewish people, Israel was established to 
be our national homeland. It was the solution for 
Jewish refugees and the realization of Jewish rights. 
And this is the true calling of the future State of 
 
 
45 06-52885 
 
Palestine: a national homeland for the Palestinian 
people — the solution to Palestinian claims, the 
fulfilment of Palestinian dreams, the answer for 
Palestinian refugees, wherever they may be. If 
Palestinian leaders are unwilling to say this, the world 
should say it for them. Instead of giving false hope, it 
is time to end the exploitation of the refugee issue and 
to begin to resolve it on the basis of the vision of two 
States, two homelands.  
 That is the real and only meaning of the two-State 
vision. It requires each people to accept that their 
rights are realized through the establishment of their 
own homeland, not in the homeland of others.  
 The second principle for peace is drawn from the 
concept of living in peace and security. On the basis of 
this principle the international community has insisted 
that the State of Palestine that emerges next to Israel 
cannot be a terror State. A terrorist State is the last 
thing our troubled region needs. It is for that reason 
that the road map requires an end to terror. It is for that 
reason that the international community has demanded 
that any Palestinian Government fulfil three basic 
conditions: renounce terrorism, recognize Israel’s right 
to exist and accept existing Israeli-Palestinian 
agreements. Those conditions are not an obstacle to 
peace or to the establishment of a responsible 
Palestinian State; they are a crucial ingredient for the 
realization of those goals.  
 An end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will also 
require agreement on a common boundary. There are 
those who believe that if only we could turn back the 
hands of time to 1967 all would be resolved. But, in 
1967 there was no Palestinian State; there was no link 
between the West Bank and Gaza; and there was no 
commitment to lasting peace. A two-State solution 
requires the creation of a new reality which never 
existed in the past. For it to succeed, both sides will 
need to commit themselves to compromise and to 
believe in coexistence. 
 If only we could end the conflict today. But we 
have learned from bitter experience that to reach 
lasting peace it is not enough to have a vision. Peace 
must be built on the solid foundations of shared values, 
not the shifting sands of false promises. Without this, 
the political horizon will always be out of reach. We 
have seen negotiations doomed by mistrust and 
frustration. We have seen them lay the ground for 
greater violence, not greater understanding. We cannot 
afford to repeat that experience. 
 Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority is 
dominated today by a terrorist organization that teaches 
children to hate and seeks to transform the conflict 
from a resolvable political dispute into an endless 
religious confrontation. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
is the consequence and not the cause of this ideology 
of intolerance and hatred. We cannot reach peace by 
ignoring these realities. We cannot find the solutions 
for tomorrow without addressing the problems of 
today. 
 But we also cannot give up hope, and I refuse to 
do so. In a Middle East where being moderate is often 
the same as being weak, our challenge is to empower 
the peacemakers and disempower their opponents. The 
road map phases and the three international conditions 
are designed precisely for that purpose. But if the 
world hesitates in enforcing these standards, the 
extremists sense opportunity. And if it appeases, they 
sense victory. This is the moment for determination not 
half-measures and vague formulations. It is the 
moment to demand that those Palestinian leaders that 
believe in peace determine the future on these terms, 
not on the terms of terrorists. 
 Unfortunately, there are no shortcuts on the road 
to peace. But stagnation is not in our interest, and it is 
not our policy. 
 It is in this spirit that Israel embarked on the 
painful process of disengagement, to create an 
opportunity for progress. But, sadly, we received terror 
in return. And it is in this spirit that I met with 
Chairman Abbas two days ago, and we agreed to re-
energize the dialogue between us and create a 
permanent channel to pursue ways to advance together. 
The parties do not need another forum to act out their 
differences, and the only forum that will resolve them 
is the bilateral negotiating table. We have no illusions 
about the difficulties before us. We must face them not 
ignore them. But we can advance along the road to 
peace if we have the strength to defend its principles 
and the courage to confront its enemies. 
 In these days, while Jews prepare to welcome a 
new year, Muslims around the world prepare for the 
holy month of Ramadan. As two great faiths begin their 
annual journey of reflection and decision, let the 
nations of the world begin it too. 
  
 
06-52885 46 
 
 The Jewish prayers tell us that this is a time of 
decision not just for individuals but also for States: 
“which for the sword and which for peace, which for 
famine and which for plenty”. 
 Those are sobering words, but they are also 
empowering ones. The message of these special days is 
that no future is predetermined; no conflict is 
inevitable. It is up to us to make the right choices. 
History will judge us by them. In the words of the 
traditional greeting: may the curses of the last year 
end; may the blessing of the new year begin. Shana 
tova: may it be a good year. New Zealand remains 
unwavering in its support for the United Nations. Our 
commitment has not changed since we helped found 
the Organization 61 years ago. This year’s events have 
only reinforced our belief that the world would be 
substantially worse off without the United Nations. 
 It would be remiss of me at this time not to pay 
tribute to Kofi Annan. It is to his vision, determination 
and courage that we must attribute many of the reforms 
achieved thus far. Five years ago, when he was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Nobel Committee 
paid tribute to his efforts on reform. Since then he has 
continued to work tirelessly for a United Nations that 
can live up to the hopes that “we the peoples” have 
invested in it. This is all the more remarkable given 
that, for much of his stewardship, the United Nations 
has been confronted with some of the most difficult 
international crises of its existence.  
 New Zealand is committed to multilateralism. 
This is not some act of faith, but a commitment to a 
multilateralism that really delivers. We need to be 
prepared to work diligently for the good of the global 
community. 
 The United Nations is passing through a period of 
challenge to its relevance and effectiveness. It has 
 
 
19 06-53323 
 
confronted serious political and security shocks — 
fresh hostilities in the Middle East, the tragic and 
worsening situation in Darfur, and, in our own region, 
instability in Timor-Leste. 
 Last year, world leaders agreed to an ambitious 
reform agenda based on the three pillars of peace and 
security, development and human rights. Progress has 
been made, but this is no time to rest. We must press 
on, for much remains to be done. 
 The challenge of development has never been 
higher on the international agenda. Never before has 
the commitment to eradicating poverty been so critical. 
But increasing aid levels will not be enough; we must 
become more effective. We need to make sure that 
every dollar we spend makes a positive difference. 
That means addressing the key threats to our 
success — poor governance, corruption and gender 
inequality. We need to secure fairer international 
trading relationships, and we must work on all of those 
together. 
 The theme of this year’s general debate is the 
implementation of a global partnership for 
development. For New Zealand, collective action is 
imperative. We need participation, ownership and 
responsibility from recipient countries. We seek 
harmonization with larger contributors to align and 
combine our contributions. We seek partnership with 
multilateral development agencies in our campaign to 
eradicate poverty, and we endorse the efforts of the 
United Nations and those agencies to coordinate better, 
country by country. 
 New Zealand, as members are aware, has a 
relationship with the Pacific that is based on history, 
culture and economic and social linkages. Our bonds 
with Pacific States are an important dimension of our 
other relationships. We want nothing less than 
educated, healthy, well-governed, economically 
prosperous and safe communities. 
 In the Auckland Declaration of 2004, Pacific 
leaders committed themselves to a “region that is 
respected for the quality of its governance, the 
sustainable management of its resources, the full 
observance of democratic values and for its defence 
and promotion of human rights”. These are ambitious 
goals, and translating them into reality means hard 
work by all Pacific countries. That is a challenge that 
New Zealand accepts. 
 In facing that challenge, we confront economic, 
environmental, governance, development and security 
issues. Markets are distant. Climate change is a reality. 
Political instability does not help. Threats from 
communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS and 
pandemic influenza must be managed. 
 The Pacific accounts for almost one quarter of the 
surface of the world — an area bigger than Europe and 
the Middle East combined. Its strategic significance 
presents opportunity and challenge. New Zealand is 
determined to seek out the benefits of that significance 
and guard against the threats, among which I include, 
sadly, cheque-book diplomacy. 
 Across the Pacific, we have learned that regional 
problems require regional solutions. Last year, Pacific 
Island Forum leaders adopted the Pacific Plan for 
regional cooperation. Through that plan we will 
strengthen regional cooperation where it can most 
make a difference, and we will use it to promote the 
four goals of the Pacific Islands Forum: sustainable 
development, economic growth, security and good 
governance. 
 At the same time, we do not forget that our 
regional endeavours depend on strong international 
frameworks. The Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is an essential example. Another example is the 
United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement on the 
conservation and management of straddling and highly 
migratory fish stocks. 
 We are proud of our achievements in regional 
fisheries management. The Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission, with its headquarters in 
Pohnpei, manages the region’s migratory fish species. 
We are in the midst of developing new regional 
arrangements for non-migratory fish stocks. 
 These mechanisms are central to the region’s 
ability to ensure the sustainable management of its 
most important natural resources. They are at the 
leading edge in establishing best-practice management 
norms. 
 There have been profound political and security 
shocks over the past year — in the Middle East and in 
Darfur, as well as instability in Timor-Leste — those 
and more are testing the United Nations system. 
 It is a sad reality that the situation in the Middle 
East has been on the agenda of the United Nations for 
60 years, ever since its inception. The lack of sustained 
  
 
06-53323 20 
 
political will to see through more than a handful of 
decisions on the Middle East has undermined 
confidence. It has contributed to an unstable 
environment where extremism, injustice and despair 
flourish. 
 These issues must be tackled with a new resolve, 
using the international multilateral system as a tool for 
peace and progress. The international response to the 
Security Council’s call for an expanded United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) shows that the 
international community can react to conflict and 
provide basic stabilization. But such responses are 
doomed to failure unless the underlying political and 
security issues are addressed. It is therefore imperative 
to relaunch the Middle East peace process covering all 
issues, on the basis of the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. 
 The Organization’s efforts to introduce a United 
Nations force into Darfur is being cynically thwarted 
by the Government of the Sudan. That is simply 
unconscionable. The Government of the Sudan must, in 
the name of basic humanity, accept the need for a 
United Nations force as the best chance for the security 
of the people of Darfur. 
 New and fragile States face enormous challenges. 
Recent unrest in Timor-Leste demonstrates that fact. 
New Zealand responded quickly to Timor-Leste’s 
needs with a military and police contribution to help 
restore stability. The regional response has been swift 
and robust. The United Nations played an important 
role in facilitating Timor-Leste’s independence, and it 
is clear the United Nations will continue to be involved 
in Timor-Leste for many years to come. The 
deployment of a substantial United Nations police 
force is vital if peace and stability is to be maintained 
even in the medium term. The nature of the expanded 
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste reflects the 
deep and broad engagement required to build a lasting 
peace. Timor-Leste encapsulates the principle that 
peace and security cannot be separated from economic 
development, social reconciliation and the protection 
of basic human rights. The Security Council’s mandate 
for Timor-Leste endorses that truth. 
 New Zealand fully supported the renewed focus 
on human rights at last year’s World Summit. We 
strongly campaigned for the new Human Rights 
Council, and we worked hard to bring it into being. We 
have high ambitions for it and will follow its activities 
closely. It must remain strong, focused and effective. It 
must be able to deal swiftly with emerging situations of 
human rights concern, in a balanced way, with 
scrupulous attention to verifiable facts. It must be 
aspirational, inspirational and practical. Its working 
methods must be transparent and inclusive. Above all, 
there must be genuine political will to make it work. 
 A few weeks ago, encouraged all the way by 
energetic non-governmental organizations, Member 
States agreed on the first new comprehensive human 
rights instrument of the twenty-first century: a draft 
convention relating to persons with disabilities. We are 
proud in New Zealand of the role we played in those 
negotiations on the text. The draft convention stands to 
make a real difference to the lives of approximately 
650 million of the world’s most disadvantaged citizens. 
 New Zealand is also conscious of the 
disadvantages faced by indigenous peoples in many 
parts of the world. We were closely engaged in the 
lengthy negotiations towards a declaration on the rights 
of indigenous peoples. We had hoped that the 
declaration would be a new standard of achievement 
for Governments that could be implemented to really 
improve the lives of indigenous peoples. Therefore, we 
are disappointed that that was not to be so. The draft 
declaration that emerged with less than conclusive 
support from the Human Rights Council is deeply 
flawed and represents a lost opportunity for the world’s 
indigenous peoples. 
 At the beginning of his term, the Secretary-
General set an important goal for the United Nations: 
to perfect “the triangle of development, freedom and 
peace” (A/51/PV.88, p. 13). The Secretary-General’s 
words still ring true today. We have travelled only part 
of the journey towards that goal. Considering our 
achievements over the past year, we can be satisfied 
with progress made in setting up the Human Rights 
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. The 
challenge now is to make those two new bodies truly 
effective. The welcome adoption of the United Nations 
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) 
reminds us of the efforts we must continue to make at 
regional and national levels. 
 New Zealand wants to see continuing reform high 
on the list of priorities for the sixty-first session in 
order to ensure that the United Nations can be as 
responsive as possible to the needs of Member States, 
 
 
21 06-53323 
 
and efficient in getting the best from the resources 
available to it. 
 Sixty years ago, New Zealand had high hopes for 
the United Nations. In 2006, we still do. New Zealand 
is a country that engages with the United Nations with 
no hidden agenda. What we say is what we mean. We 
engage with no other or hidden agenda. But those that 
do so pervert and weaken this Organization.  
 In 2006, at this meeting, New Zealand declares 
that we will continue to put our efforts behind the 
principles and policies that will make the United 
Nations strong. Traditionally, the General Assembly session 
provides an opportunity to conduct a review of the 
current situation in the world, identify major 
international issues and determine the role that the 
United Nations could play in resolving them.  
 I believe that we have every reason to conclude 
that there is a prevailing trend of growing awareness of 
the need to strengthen the collective foundations of 
international politics, as well as of the fact that there is 
no alternative to tackling problems through multilateral 
diplomacy. That trend is based on objective facts, for it 
reflects the realities of an emerging multipolar 
architecture of international relations. It is logical, 
because answers to global challenges and threats can 
only be found collectively. Finally, it is a manifestation 
of historical continuity, because we are revisiting the 
same objective as the founding fathers of the United 
Nations were determined to pursue by enshrining in the 
Charter the principles for a system of collective 
security.  
 It is precisely such an approach, firmly grounded 
in international law, that can ensure the world’s 
sustainable development in this era of globalization. 
That requires a strengthened central role for the 
universal Organization in every area of international 
life. 
 We must of course continue to adapt the 
mechanisms and methods of the United Nations to the 
new environment. Much has been done as follow-up to 
the decisions of the 2005 World Summit: The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council have been established, and the reform process 
has been extended to management.  
 It is important that all our further work be based 
upon the fundamental principle of the universality of 
the United Nations. Patterns contrary to the Charter of 
the United Nations that exclude individual States or 
groups of States from participating meaningfully in the 
activities of the Organization or that introduce a single 
system of values into the work of the Secretariat are 
unsustainable. Let us not forget that the United Nations 
belongs to us all. Moreover, administrative reform 
should not lead to the bureaucracy taking over the 
management of the Organization, thereby jeopardizing 
the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. 
 A trend towards collective action has also spread 
beyond the structures of the United Nations. During 
Russia’s presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8), there 
was greater interaction between the G-8 and other 
leading countries and international organizations. Over 
  
 
06-53005 28 
 
the past 12 months our dialogue partners have actively 
contributed to Saint Petersburg summit documents on 
every main agenda item, including global energy 
security, education and controlling infectious diseases.  
 A new and genuinely collaborative type of 
interaction between the G-8 and Africa is now 
emerging in this era of globalization, as the needs of 
the continent are reflected in the mainstream of world 
development rather than being viewed as issues 
divorced from overall trends.  
 The G-8 does not have a monopoly over the 
decisions taken at Saint Petersburg. All States are 
invited to participate in their implementation. 
 Regional organizations and cooperation and 
coordination between those organizations and the 
United Nations have also strengthened in maintaining 
international peace and security. Issues pertaining to 
that were discussed yesterday at the special ministerial 
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.5529). Once 
again, we are dealing here with an important dimension 
of collective action by the international community. 
 The Commonwealth of Independent States has 
made a significant contribution to such interaction. To 
address common problems, specific actions have been 
taken within the Commonwealth area, primarily within 
the Eurasian Economic Community and the Collective 
Security Treaty Organization. Further substantive and 
resolute efforts are being made in the context of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which developed 
and launched and initiative to establish a partnership 
network for multilateral organizations in the Asia-
Pacific region. Development patterns in that region 
will largely determine the future contours of our planet.  
 Multilateral institutions in Latin America have 
also become stronger, and the development of the 
African Union is gaining momentum. 
 At their recent Summit in Havana, heads of State 
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement 
expressed their support for a collective search — 
within the context of the central role of the United 
Nations — for agreed solutions to problems 
confronting the world community. 
 Europe, of course, is not outside the common 
trend towards collective examination and resolution of 
common problems. In that connection, we also see 
growing awareness of the fact that security and 
prosperity are indivisible. We expect NATO to 
transform itself from a defence alliance into something 
more contemporary that would be in line with 
principles of transparency and collective response and 
based upon a universal legal foundation.  
 We have been watching with keen interest the 
emerging foreign policy and security mechanisms of 
the European Union. Russia is prepared to cooperate 
with multilateral structures in the Euro-Atlantic space 
and other regions of the world. In fact, we already have 
effective common mechanisms with many of them. 
 Collective efforts are also needed to further 
develop international law, primarily within the context 
of countering new threats. The United Nations Global 
Counter-terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288), which 
was recently adopted by consensus, is an important 
contribution in terms of strengthening the legal basis 
for the anti-terrorist coalition and ensuring a 
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. It is not 
only about countering all terrorist manifestations and 
ideologies, it is also about eliminating the problems 
that give rise to terrorism. The next step will be to 
agree upon a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention. 
 It is necessary to secure the achievements that 
have been made by taking practical steps. In the course 
of Russia’s presidency of the G-8, the Second 
Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes 
From Afghanistan was held, where additional measures 
were approved aimed at mobilizing the international 
community to counter the terrorism-related drug threat 
originating from Afghanistan. Another international 
meeting will be held in Moscow next November to 
focus on developing modalities for government-
business partnerships in countering terrorism. 
 What is needed today are more proactive 
measures to prevent lethal weapons from falling into 
the hands of non-State actors, as well as the consistent 
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 
(2004) and other counter-terrorism resolutions of the 
Council. The Russia-United States global initiative to 
combat nuclear terrorism, which was launched at Saint 
Petersburg by Presidents Vladimir V. Putin and George 
W. Bush last July, should be an important tool in 
preventing a linkage between weapons of mass 
destruction and terrorism. That initiative invites 
interested States to act collectively. 
 The ever-growing demand for the unique 
peacekeeping capabilities of the United Nations also 
calls for a collective effort. Not all of those capabilities 
 
 
29 06-53005 
 
have been utilized to the fullest. Utilizing the 
capabilities of the Military Staff Committee, as well as 
those of regional organizations, on the basis of the 
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter 
would be helpful. 
 It is encouraging to see a more active role being 
played by Africans themselves in peacemaking 
operations in Africa — an undertaking spearheaded by 
the African Union and supported by the United 
Nations.  
 In a number of crisis situations conditions are 
gradually emerging for a transition to post-conflict 
reconstruction. It is our hope that the Declaration on 
Cooperation and Future Action in Stabilization and 
Reconstruction adopted at the Saint Petersburg G-8 
Summit will help us complement the efforts of the 
United Nations and regional organizations at this 
critically important period of transition to 
peacebuilding. 
 A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli 
conflict remains a central task for the world 
community. Many of today’s threats have come 
together in that region, and the key to resolving them is 
most often to be found there. In that connection, I 
should first like to mention the truly global challenge 
posed by the need to prevent a schism between 
civilizations.  
 We welcome the emerging prospects for a 
national agreement in the Palestinian territories, as 
well as for the resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli 
talks. It is important to continue to encourage the 
parties to meet their respective obligations, with the 
clear understanding that any progress towards the 
objectives set out by the international community will 
inevitably be gradual and that any attempt to act in an 
all-or-nothing spirit will be counterproductive and 
could once again plunge the region into confrontation. 
 The recent war in Lebanon demonstrated the 
great fragility of the situation in the Middle East and 
the acute need for a comprehensive approach along all 
tracks. That presupposes the involvement of all 
countries and parties. Without their participation it will 
be impossible to reach any viable negotiated solution. 
It is also clear that the road to comprehensive peace 
will not be an easy one, but now is the time. The 
initiative of the League of Arab States to convene an 
international conference should contribute to finding 
the proper framework for that undertaking. The Quartet 
of international mediators should also make a key 
contribution to the process. 
 A breakthrough on a Middle East settlement 
could provide the positive momentum so wanting in 
the region. It could also facilitate the solution of other 
burning problems in the region and in neighbouring 
countries. That is particularly true as regards efforts 
aimed at stabilizing the situation in Iraq, where 
attempts to contain wanton violence and chaos have 
thus far proved unsuccessful. Dozens of people, mainly 
civilians, continue to die in Iraq every day. Five 
officials of the Russian embassy in Baghdad have also 
fallen victim to that barbarous massacre. A resolution 
in Iraq will be possible only through concerted efforts. 
That requires the involvement in the political process 
of all major Iraqi interests and the implementation of 
the plans of that country’s Government to reach 
genuine national accord, with the concerted support of 
the international community, including all of Iraq’s 
neighbours. 
 We are, unfortunately, now witnessing growing 
significance of the use of force in world affairs; that 
undermines non-proliferation regimes. The feeling of a 
lack of predictability and stability in the area of 
security is becoming ever more pronounced. Against 
that background, the growing interest of many States in 
nuclear energy may give rise to concerns, given the 
trend towards the global proliferation of sensitive 
technologies.  
 Apart from current resolute steps to find 
negotiated solutions to individual problems — such as 
the Iranian nuclear programme and the problem of the 
Korean peninsula — there is a need for an urgent effort 
by the entire international community to systematically 
strengthen non-proliferation regimes on a generally 
acceptable basis, while ensuring that the benefits of 
peaceful atomic energy are legitimately accessible to 
all States.  
 President Vladimir V. Putin’s initiative to 
establish multilateral centres for nuclear fuel-cycle 
services, along with similar ideas proposed by the 
leadership of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) and proposals put forth by United States 
President George W. Bush, have found support among 
G-8 leaders. We are confident that the development and 
practical implementation of such approaches — in 
cooperation with all countries with an interest in 
modern and safe nuclear energy — will make it 
  
 
06-53005 30 
 
possible to resolve non-proliferation issues in a non-
confrontational manner. 
 As in other areas, the obsession with sanctions — 
applied without calculating their consequences — 
might produce unpredictable results. It is absolutely 
necessary to eliminate the loopholes in the non-
proliferation regimes, but that should be done through 
clear and non-discriminatory approaches, without 
creating grounds for suspicion regarding the existence 
of some hidden agenda. 
 Stagnation in the international disarmament 
process does not help to resolve non-proliferation 
problems. Here again, we need concerted action, for 
this is a matter of collective security. 
 In the area of strategic arms, the United States-
Russian agreements play an enormously important role. 
Their significance goes far beyond the framework of 
bilateral relations, considering that virtually all 
members of the international community benefit from 
strategic stability. We support the consistent 
development of the United States-Russian bilateral 
disarmament process, as was stated by our Presidents 
in Saint Petersburg in July.  
 Closely related to that are issues related to anti-
ballistic missiles, in particular within the context of the 
existing plans of the United States. In that context, 
there is a need for complete transparency and for an 
analysis of the consequences for strategic stability. 
 The situation surrounding the Treaty on 
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe continues to 
cause grave concern. The old Treaty, based on the 
realities of confrontation between military blocs, has 
lost its relevance, while NATO is blocking the entry 
into force of the Agreement on its adaptation. 
 At the same time, reconfiguration of the military 
architecture on the European continent is under way. At 
its heart is an expanding military alliance. Such virtual 
arms control becomes meaningless as it turns into a 
one-way street.  
 It is also necessary to revitalize multilateral 
disarmament approaches. That agenda should include 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, non-deployment of weapons in outer 
space, conclusion of a fissile material cut-off treaty and 
ensuring information security. Nuclear-weapon-free 
zones play an important role, and we welcome the 
creation of such a zone in Central Asia. 
 The overall task is to reinvigorate the efforts of 
the international community in the area of disarmament 
and arms control, within the framework of the 
Conference on Disarmament and other relevant United 
Nations bodies.  
 The 2005 World Summit unanimously reaffirmed 
that peace, security and development are inseparable. 
With that in mind, we are prepared to engage in 
collective discussions and support further joint 
pragmatic steps with a view to improving the 
efficiency of the social and economic activities of the 
entire United Nations system. 
 The Russian Federation realizes its responsibility 
as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, 
and is devoting increasing attention to development 
assistance. Thus far, Russia has written off or has 
undertaken to write off $11.3 billion of the debt of 
African countries, including more than $2.2 billion 
within the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt 
Initiative. New steps are planned in that area. Russia 
now ranks third in absolute figures of debt relief and 
first in terms of the ratio of debt relief to gross 
domestic product. We have also increased our 
contributions to other international development 
assistance mechanisms, including through United 
Nations institutions and funds and the Bretton Woods 
institutions. 
 Today, I cannot fail to express my sincere 
appreciation and praise to the Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan. For many years, during the most difficult times 
for world politics, he has carried out his duties with 
dignity. Thanks largely to the efforts of Kofi Annan 
and to his ability to take the lead while remaining a 
realist in the face of severe challenges, we have 
managed to make progress in strengthening the United 
Nations. 
 Today the United Nations is relevant as never 
before. We do not have to create it anew. In the course 
of reforming the United Nations in accordance with the 
dictates of the time, it is incumbent upon us all to 
reaffirm by action our commitment to the world 
Organization, which draws its strength from our trust 
in it and in its unique legitimacy. Without the United 
Nations and its Charter to rely upon, it would prove 
impossible to ensure a more reliable and democratic 
system of collective security that would respond to the 
dictates of our time. I am grateful for the privilege of 
speaking to the General Assembly. 
 Last week, America and the world marked the 
fifth anniversary of the attacks that filled another 
September morning with death and suffering. On that 
terrible day, extremists killed nearly 3,000 innocent 
people, including citizens of dozens of nations 
represented right here in this Hall. Since then, the 
enemies of humanity have continued their campaign of 
murder. Al-Qaida and those inspired by its extremist 
ideology have attacked more than two dozen nations. 
And recently, a different group of extremists 
deliberately provoked a terrible conflict in Lebanon. At 
the start of the twenty-first century, it is clear that the 
world is engaged in a great ideological struggle 
between extremists who use terror as a weapon to 
create fear and moderate people who work for peace. 
 Five years ago, I stood at this rostrum and called 
on the community of nations to defend civilization and 
build a more hopeful future. This is still the great 
challenge of our time. It is the calling of our 
generation. This morning, I want to speak about the 
more hopeful world that is within our reach — a world 
beyond terror, where ordinary men and women are free 
to determine their own destiny, where the voices of 
moderation are empowered and where the extremists 
are marginalized by the peaceful majority. This world 
can be ours if we seek it and if we work together. 
 The principles of this world beyond terror can be 
found in the very first sentence of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. This document declares 
that the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of 
the human family [are] the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world”. One of the authors of 
this document was a Lebanese diplomat named Charles 
Malik, who would go on to become President of this 
Assembly. Mr. Malik insisted that these principles 
apply equally to all people, of all religions, in all 
regions — including the men and women of the Arab 
world that was his home. 
 In the nearly six decades since that document was 
approved, we have seen the forces of freedom and 
moderation transform entire continents. Sixty years 
after a terrible war, Europe is now whole, free and at 
peace, and Asia has seen freedom progress and 
hundreds of millions of people lifted out of desperate 
poverty. The words of the Universal Declaration are as 
true today as they were when they were written. As 
liberty flourishes, nations grow in tolerance, and hope, 
and peace. And we are seeing the bright future begin to 
take root in the broader Middle East. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East have 
been dramatic, and we see the results in this Hall. Five 
years ago, Afghanistan was ruled by the brutal Taliban 
regime, and its seat in this body was contested. Now 
this seat is held by the freely elected Government of 
Afghanistan, which is represented today by President 
Karzai. Five years ago, Iraq’s seat in this body was 
 
 
9 06-52731 
 
held by a dictator who killed his citizens, invaded his 
neighbours and showed his contempt for the world by 
defying more than a dozen Security Council 
resolutions. Now Iraq’s seat is held by a democratic 
Government that embodies the aspirations of the Iraqi 
people, represented today by President Talabani. With 
these changes, more than 50 million people have been 
given a voice in this Hall for the first time in decades. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East are 
happening gradually, but they are real. Algeria has held 
its first competitive presidential election, and the 
military remained neutral. The United Arab Emirates 
recently announced that half of its seats in the Federal 
National Council will be chosen by elections. Kuwait 
held elections in which women were allowed to vote 
and run for office for the first time. Citizens have voted 
in municipal elections in Saudi Arabia, in 
parliamentary elections in Jordan and Bahrain and in 
multiparty presidential elections in Yemen and in 
Egypt. These are important steps, and the Governments 
should continue to move forward with other reforms 
that show that they trust their people. Every nation that 
travels the road to freedom moves at a different pace, 
and the democracies they build will reflect their own 
cultures and traditions. But the destination is the same: 
a free society where people live at peace with each 
other and at peace with the world. 
 Some have argued that the democratic changes 
we are seeing in the Middle East are destabilizing the 
region. This argument rests on a false assumption: that 
the Middle East was stable to begin with. The reality is 
that the stability we thought we saw in the Middle East 
was a mirage. For decades, millions of men and women 
in the region have been trapped in oppression and 
hopelessness. And these conditions left a generation 
disillusioned and made this region a breeding ground 
for extremism. 
 Imagine what it is like to be a young person 
living in a country that is not moving toward reform. 
You are 21 years old, and while your peers in other 
parts of the world are casting their ballots for the first 
time, you are powerless to change the course of your 
Government. While your peers in other parts of the 
world have received educations that prepare them for 
the opportunities of a global economy, you have been 
fed propaganda and conspiracy theories that blame 
others for your country’s shortcomings. And 
everywhere you turn, you hear extremists who tell you 
that you can escape your misery and regain your 
dignity through violence and terror and martyrdom. For 
many across the broader Middle East, this is the dismal 
choice presented every day. 
 Every civilized nation, including those in the 
Muslim world, must support those in the region who 
are offering a more hopeful alternative. We know that 
when people have a voice in their future they are less 
likely to blow themselves up in suicide attacks. We 
know that when leaders are accountable to their people, 
they are more likely to seek national greatness in the 
achievements of their citizens, rather than in terror and 
conquest. So we must stand with democratic leaders 
and moderate reformers across the broader Middle 
East. We must give voice to the hopes of decent men 
and women who want for their children the same things 
we want for ours. We must seek stability through a free 
and just Middle East where the extremists are 
marginalized by millions of citizens in control of their 
own destinies. 
 Today, I would like to speak directly to the 
people across the broader Middle East. My country 
desires peace. Extremists in your midst spread 
propaganda claiming that the West is engaged in a war 
against Islam. This propaganda is false, and its purpose 
is to confuse you and justify acts of terror. We respect 
Islam, but we will protect our people from those who 
pervert Islam to sow death and destruction. Our goal is 
to help you build a more tolerant and hopeful society 
that honours people of all faiths and promotes peace. 
 To the people of Iraq: nearly 12 million of you 
braved the car bombers and assassins last December to 
vote in free elections. The world saw you hold up 
purple ink-stained fingers, and your courage filled us 
with admiration. You have stood firm in the face of 
horrendous acts of terror and sectarian violence, and 
we will not abandon you in your struggle to build a 
free nation. America and our coalition partners will 
continue to stand with the democratic Government you 
elected. We will continue to help you secure the 
international assistance and investment you need to 
create jobs and opportunity, working with the United 
Nations and through the International Compact with 
Iraq endorsed here in New York yesterday. We will 
continue to train those of you who stepped forward to 
fight the enemies of freedom. We will not yield the 
future of your country to terrorists and extremists. In 
return, your leaders must rise to the challenges your 
country is facing and make difficult choices to bring 
security and prosperity. Working together, we will help 
  
 
06-52731 10 
 
your democracy succeed, so that it can become a 
beacon of hope for millions in the Muslim world. 
 To the people of Afghanistan: together, we 
overthrew the Taliban regime that brought misery into 
your lives and harboured terrorists who brought death 
to the citizens of many nations. Since then, we have 
watched you choose your leaders in free elections and 
build a democratic Government. You can be proud of 
these achievements. We respect your courage and your 
determination to live in peace and freedom. We will 
continue to stand with you to defend your democratic 
gains. 
 Today, forces from more than 40 countries, 
including members of the NATO alliance, are bravely 
serving side by side with you against the extremists 
who want to bring down the free Government you have 
established. We will help you defeat these enemies and 
build a free Afghanistan that will never again oppress 
you or be a safe haven for terrorists. 
 To the people of Lebanon: last year, you inspired 
the world when you came out into the streets to 
demand your independence from Syrian dominance. 
You drove Syrian forces from your country and you 
re-established democracy. Since then, you have been 
tested by the fighting that began with Hizbollah’s 
unprovoked attacks on Israel. Many of you have seen 
your homes and your communities caught in crossfire. 
We see your suffering, and the world is helping you to 
rebuild your country and helping you deal with the 
armed extremists who are undermining your 
democracy by acting as a State within a State. 
 The United Nations has passed a good resolution 
that has authorized an international force, led by 
France and Italy, to help you restore Lebanese 
sovereignty over Lebanese soil. For many years, 
Lebanon was a model of democracy and pluralism and 
openness in the region — and it will be again. 
 To the people of Iran: the United States respects 
you. We respect your country. We admire your rich 
history, your vibrant culture and your many 
contributions to civilization. You deserve an 
opportunity to determine your own future, an economy 
that rewards your intelligence and your talents and a 
society that allows you to fulfil your tremendous 
potential. The greatest obstacle to this future is that 
your rulers have chosen to deny you liberty and to use 
your nation’s resources to fund terrorism, and fuel 
extremism, and pursue nuclear weapons. 
 The United Nations has passed a clear resolution 
requiring that the regime in Tehran meet its 
international obligations. Iran must abandon its nuclear 
weapons ambitions. Despite what the regime tells you, 
we have no objection to Iran’s pursuit of a truly 
peaceful nuclear power programme. We are working 
toward a diplomatic solution to this crisis, and as we 
do, we look to the day when you can live in freedom 
and America and Iran can be good friends and close 
partners in the cause of peace. 
 To the people of Syria: your land is home to a 
great people with a proud tradition of learning and 
commerce. Today your rulers have allowed your 
country to become a crossroad for terrorism. In your 
midst, Hamas and Hizbollah are working to destabilize 
the region, and your Government is turning your 
country into a tool of Iran. This is increasing your 
country’s isolation from the world. Your Government 
must choose a better way forward by ending its support 
for terror, and living in peace with your neighbours, 
and opening the way to a better life for you and your 
families. 
 To the people of Darfur: you have suffered 
unspeakable violence, and my nation has called these 
atrocities what they are: genocide. For the last two 
years, America joined with the international 
community to provide emergency food aid and support 
for an African Union peacekeeping force. Yet your 
suffering continues. The world must step forward to 
provide additional humanitarian aid, and we must 
strengthen the African Union force that has done good 
work but is not strong enough to protect you. The 
Security Council has approved a resolution that would 
transform the African Union force into a blue-helmeted 
force that is larger and more robust. To increase its 
strength and effectiveness, NATO nations should 
provide logistics and other support. The regime in 
Khartoum is stopping the deployment of this force. If 
the Sudanese Government does not approve this 
peacekeeping force quickly, the United Nations must 
act. Your lives and the credibility of the United Nations 
are at stake. So today I am announcing that I am 
naming a presidential Special Envoy — former 
Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, Andrew Natsios — to lead 
America’s efforts to resolve the outstanding disputes 
and help bring peace to your land. 
 The world must also stand up for peace in the 
Holy Land. I am committed to two democratic States, 
 
 
11 06-52731 
 
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and 
security. I am committed to a Palestinian State that has 
territorial integrity and will live peacefully with the 
Jewish State of Israel. This is the vision set forth in the 
road map, and helping the parties to reach this goal is 
one of the great objectives of my presidency. The 
Palestinian people have suffered from decades of 
corruption and violence and the daily humiliation of 
occupation. Israeli citizens have endured brutal acts of 
terrorism and constant fear of attack since the birth of 
their nation. Many brave men and women have made 
the commitment to peace. Yet extremists in the region 
are stirring up hatred and trying to prevent these 
moderate voices from prevailing. 
 This struggle is unfolding in the Palestinian 
territories. Earlier this year, the Palestinian people 
voted in a free election. The leaders of Hamas 
campaigned on a platform of ending corruption and 
improving the lives of the Palestinian people, and they 
prevailed. The world is waiting to see whether the 
Hamas Government will follow through on its 
promises or pursue an extremist agenda. The world has 
sent a clear message to the leaders of Hamas: serve the 
interests of the Palestinian people, abandon terror, 
recognize Israel’s right to exist, honour agreements and 
work for peace. 
 President Abbas is committed to peace and to his 
people’s aspirations for a State of their own. Prime 
Minister Olmert is committed to peace, and has said he 
intends to meet with President Abbas to make real 
progress on the outstanding issues between them. I 
believe that peace can be achieved and that a 
democratic Palestinian State is possible. I hear from 
leaders in the region who want to help. I have directed 
Secretary of State Rice to lead a diplomatic effort to 
engage moderate leaders across the region to help the 
Palestinians reform their security services and support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come 
together to resolve their differences. 
 Prime Minister Blair has indicated that his 
country will work with partners in Europe to help 
strengthen the governing institutions of the Palestinian 
administration. We welcome his initiative. Countries 
like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt have made clear 
that they are willing to contribute the diplomatic and 
financial assistance necessary to help these efforts 
succeed. I am optimistic that, by supporting the forces 
of democracy and moderation, we can help Israelis and 
Palestinians build a more hopeful future and achieve 
the peace in the Holy Land that we all want. 
 Freedom, by its nature, cannot be imposed; it 
must be chosen. From Beirut to Baghdad, people are 
making the choice for freedom. And the nations 
gathered in this Hall must make a choice as well. Will 
we support the moderates and reformers who are 
working for change across the Middle East, or will we 
yield the future to the terrorists and extremists? 
America has made its choice: we will stand with the 
moderates and reformers. 
 Recently, a courageous group of Arab and 
Muslim intellectuals wrote me a letter. In it, they said 
this: “The shore of reform is the only one on which any 
lights appear, even though the journey demands 
courage, patience and perseverance”. The United 
Nations was created to make that journey possible. 
Together we must support the dreams of good and 
decent people who are working to transform a troubled 
region. And by doing so, we will advance the high 
ideals on which this institution was founded. Once again, we have convened 
at this seat of the Organization of the peoples of the 
world, representing the whole of humanity and coming 
from all corners of the world. Our pilgrimage this year 
is tinged with sadness, because we are also paying 
  
 
06-52731 12 
 
homage to one of the most outstanding servants of the 
United Nations, a native son of Africa, Kofi Annan, 
whose term of office will soon come to an end. 
 The Group of 77 and China, as well as my own 
country, South Africa, sincerely thanks the Secretary-
General for the selfless and dedicated work he carried 
out during one of the most challenging periods in the 
history of this Organization. In the midst of increasing 
poverty and underdevelopment during an era of 
unprecedented wealth accumulation and technological 
advances, and as the river that divides the rich and the 
poor zones of the metaphorical global village ever 
widened, the Secretary-General never lost focus on the 
imperatives of our time. 
 We thank him for never losing sight of the fact 
that poverty and underdevelopment remain the biggest 
threats to the progress that has been achieved, and that 
equality among nations big and small is central to the 
survival, relevance and credibility of this global 
Organization. 
 We are only six years into the twenty-first 
century. Those who populate the poorest of the regions 
of the world — that is, Africa — have boldly declared 
that it will be an African century. It is a century that 
billions of citizens of the developing world and other 
poor and marginalized people want to transform into a 
century for all humanity. 
 If the wishes of the majority of the world could 
turn into reality, this would be a century free of wars, 
free of internecine conflicts, free of hunger, free of 
preventable disease, free of want, free of 
environmental degradation and free of greed and 
corruption. Indeed, we began the century with great 
hopes for a better, peaceful and more humane world. 
 Together, we crafted comprehensive plans and 
bold declarations to defeat the scourge of poverty and 
underdevelopment. Together, we committed ourselves, 
with what seemed like renewed vigour, to transform 
the United Nations to reflect the modern reality that is 
defined by free, sovereign and equal nations. 
 However, six years into the twenty-first century, 
dispassionate observers might well challenge us to 
achieve our noble and lofty objectives, pointing to the 
terrorists’ acts that welcomed us into the new century. 
They might emphasize the unilateralism that threatens 
to negate the democratic advances of the last decades 
of the twentieth century and draw attention to renewed 
conflicts and wars that seem to compete with the 
destructive fury of the conflicts of the last century. 
 They would remind us that for a decade and 
more, some of the developed nations have consistently 
refused to implement the outcomes and agreements of 
this world body that would help to alleviate the 
wretchedness of the poor. Thus, Madam President, 
when you correctly urge us to implement a global 
partnership for development, we, the members of the 
Group of 77 and China, who represent the poor people 
of the world, understand you to be communicating a 
message that we should give substance to the common 
commitments we solemnly made at this supreme 
Organization of the nations of the world. 
 Yet, this common commitment for a global 
partnership for development cannot be transformed 
into reality when the rich and powerful insist on an 
unequal relationship with the poor. A global 
partnership for development is impossible in the 
absence of a pact of mutual responsibility between the 
giver and the recipient. It is impossible when the rich 
unilaterally demand the right to set the agenda and 
conditions for the implementation of commonly agreed 
programmes. 
 We who represent the poor know as a matter of 
fact that these billions of poor people are increasingly 
becoming impatient, because every year they hear us 
adopt declaration after declaration and yet nothing 
practical is done to assuage the hunger pains that keep 
them awake at night. Only few and selected agreements 
are implemented, with outcomes that are clearly 
insufficient to alleviate the excruciating pain of their 
children who cannot cry anymore because to do so is to 
invite more pain. 
 Those of us who were at the 14th Summit of the 
Non-Aligned Movement in Havana heard this message 
very clearly emanating from all the countries and 
organizations that spoke. Those who are capable of 
listening should take note of what that great son of 
India and South Africa, Mahatma Gandhi, said on this 
matter: 
 “The test of friendship is assistance in adversity, 
and that too, unconditional assistance. 
Cooperation which needs consideration is a 
commercial contract and not friendship. 
Conditional cooperation is like adulterated cement 
which does not bind.” 
 
 
13 06-52731 
 
 Precisely because of the absence of a global 
partnership for development, the Doha Development 
Round has almost collapsed. Indeed, because the rich 
implicitly invoked the slogan of an over-confident 
European political party of the 1960s, and directed this 
uncaring declaration to the poor of today — “I’m 
alright, Jack!” — we have not implemented the 
Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development, 
thus making it difficult for the majority of the 
developing countries, especially those in Africa, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
and we have reduced the Johannesburg Plan of 
Implementation to an insignificant, and perhaps 
forgotten, piece of paper. 
 Part of the problem with this unequal relationship 
is the imposition of conditions on developing countries 
and the constant shifting of the goalposts, whenever the 
poor adhere to each and every one of those conditions. 
 Among other things, we have recently seen an 
outbreak of great social instability across Europe and 
other reactions of the poor to their miserable conditions 
in different parts of the world, which calls into 
question the image of a seemingly harmonious well-
woven tapestry of diverse groups, because we continue 
to fail to implement our own decisions as taken at the 
United Nations World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance. Those who coined the slogan: “I’m alright, 
Jack!” were communicating, whether consciously or 
not, a message and an attitude that said “I don’t care 
about my neighbour as long as my family and I eat 
well and sleep peacefully” and that “It is not my 
responsibility to ensure that my poor neighbour also 
eats well and sleeps peacefully.” 
 Today, the attitude among some of the rich also 
communicates the same message to the rest of the 
world, namely, “I’m alright, Jack!”, even when they are 
acutely aware that many in their neighbourhood are 
dying from hunger, preventable diseases and abject 
poverty. 
 This happens also in the cruelly ironic situation 
where resources flow from those who have little to 
those who have plenty. Although the rich and powerful 
know the miserable life circumstances of the poor and 
have solemnly committed themselves to the collective 
effort to reverse those conditions, their attitude and 
response resembles that of the Biblical Cain, who, after 
he killed his brother, Abel, and the Lord asked him 
“Where is Abel, your brother?”, replied: “I do not 
know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” 
 Perhaps, all of us, especially the rich, should heed 
the words of one of the great sons of the United States 
of America, who perished because of his belief in 
equality and justice for all human beings and whose 
civil rights movement is currently marking its golden 
jubilee. Martin Luther King Jr. warned that 
 “As long as there is poverty in the world I can 
never be rich, even if I have a billion dollars. As 
long as diseases are rampant and millions of 
people in this world cannot expect to live more 
than 28 or 30 years, I can never be totally healthy 
even if I just got a good check-up at the Mayo 
Clinic. I can never be what I ought to be until you 
are what you ought to be. This is the way our 
world is made. No individual or nation can stand 
out boasting of being independent. We are 
interdependent.” 
 The majority of the human race is entitled to ask 
the question whether the rich respond the way they do 
because further impoverishment of the poor is to the 
advantage of the rich, giving meaning to the old 
observation that the rich get richer as the poor get 
poorer. As the divide between the rich and the poor 
widens and becomes a serious global crisis, we see an 
increase in the concentration of economic, military, 
technological, media and other power. 
 Something is seriously wrong when people risk 
life and limb travelling in suffocating containers to 
Western Europe in search of a better life. Something is 
wrong when many Africans traverse, on foot, the harsh, 
hot and hostile Sahara Desert to reach European 
shores. Something is wrong when walls are built to 
prevent poor neighbours from entering those countries 
where they seek better opportunities. Something is 
indeed wrong when all these people, whose fault is 
merely the fact that their lives are defined by poverty, 
try desperately to reach countries where they believe 
the conditions of their existence could improve, only to 
meet hostile, and at times, barbaric and inhuman 
receptions. 
 In part, the United Nations is unable to fulfil 
some of the objectives set by the founders in San 
Francisco because, in truth, it does not reflect the 
expansion of the global family of free nations. Because 
this Organization of the peoples of the world has 
grown to encompass the entire world, many had 
  
 
06-52731 14 
 
thought that it would be logical that this custodian of 
global democracy would itself serve as a beacon in our 
continuing quest for democracy in all our countries. 
 Clearly, for the United Nations to continue 
occupying its moral high ground, it has to reform itself 
urgently and lead by practical example, showing what 
it means to be democratic. Even as we face the cold 
reality of the indifference of many among the rich and 
powerful, this Organization of the peoples of the world 
has continued to offer hope and the possibility of the 
fulfilment of the aspirations of the majority of the 
peoples of the world. 
 All of us, including those who hesitate to 
implement the commonly agreed positions, agree that 
this Organization has entrenched the correct 
understanding that development is a right and is central 
to the advancement of humanity. All of us, individually 
and collectively and as Members of the United 
Nations, must do whatever is necessary to develop and 
implement policies and strategies aimed at the 
achievement of sustainable development. It is 
important that international organizations such as the 
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) and others should, without any 
equivocation, seriously embark on the implementation 
of all the commitments that we have made as the 
international community. 
 This Organization of the peoples of the world 
cannot merely note the unacceptable situation that 
Africa will not achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals by 2015. We need further programmes, focused 
and concrete, to accelerate development in Africa and 
avoid the possibility of that continent sinking further 
into the morass of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 Because we are our brothers’ and sisters’ keepers, 
we have the responsibility to end the rhetoric and 
implement programmes that ensure that all human 
beings live decent, humane and prosperous lives. 
 On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well 
as my own country, South Africa, I take this 
opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, 
for the great work he did in steering this Organization 
during this past year as President of the General 
Assembly. 
 We are honoured to welcome Her Excellency 
Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-first session, and we 
wish her well in her important work. Madam President, 
we pledge to do whatever is necessary to make your 
work easier, so that through your efforts, the poor can 
regain full confidence in the ability of the United 
Nations to improve their conditions of life. 
 Every day the masses cry out in pain, frustration 
and anger. Every day they ask whether there is 
anybody who stops to hear their voices, anybody who 
listens and who is ready to respond to their heartfelt 
plea for the restoration of their dignity. I 
wish to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, 
on your election as President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. I am confident that, under your 
guidance, this session will achieve full success. I also 
wish to pay tribute to Mr. Jan Eliasson, President of the 
last session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan. I 
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
the Republic of Montenegro on becoming a Member of 
the United Nations. 
 The world is experiencing profound and complex 
changes. Peace, development and cooperation have 
become trends of our times and represent the common 
aspirations of all countries and peoples in the world. 
However, the world is not tranquil and the issue of 
development remains prominent. There is still a long 
way to go in the pursuit of durable peace and common 
development. Recently, the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, the Iranian nuclear issue and the Lebanese-
Israeli conflict have flared up, adversely affecting 
regional and global stability and testing the wisdom, 
unity and patience of the international community. 
  
 
06-53317 22 
 
 To maintain peace is the shared mission of the 
entire international community. Consultations based on 
equality and peaceful negotiations are the only 
effective means to resolve disputes. China, as a 
permanent member of the Security Council and a 
member of the international community, will continue 
to make every effort to achieve a peaceful resolution of 
hotspot issues. 
 As regards the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, China is committed to maintaining peace 
and stability on the Peninsula, making it free of nuclear 
weapons and promoting the six-party talks. During the 
Security Council’s deliberations in July regarding the 
missile tests by the Democratic People’s Republic of 
Korea and the related resolution, China made strenuous 
efforts to engage the parties concerned, in an effort to 
maintain peace on the Peninsula and in North-East Asia 
and preserve the unity and authority of the Security 
Council and safeguard the progress already made in the 
six-party talks. 
 Long-standing antagonism and mistrust between 
the parties concerned is the main cause of the current 
difficulty. All parties should be patient and pragmatic 
and act with vision to reduce differences and remove 
obstacles through dialogue. The six-party talks remain 
an effective mechanism to enhance understanding and 
trust and resolve the Korean nuclear issue. We hope 
that the parties involved will be cool-headed and more 
flexible, expand common ground, meet each other 
halfway and work together for the early resumption of 
the six-party talks and progressive implementation of 
the joint statement. That is the only viable solution to 
the Korean nuclear issue. 
 With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, China 
calls for upholding the integrity of the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, and is opposed to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It has worked for a 
peaceful resolution of the issue in order to promote 
peace and stability in the Middle East. At the same 
time, the legitimate right of countries to the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy should be fully respected, 
provided they fulfil their relevant international 
obligations. 
 Diplomatic negotiation represents the best chance 
to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue and serve the 
interests of all parties. China hopes that the parties 
involved will exercise patience and restraint, continue 
to take a flexible approach and remain committed to 
the right course of pursuing a peaceful resolution. 
China will continue to play a constructive role in 
working for an appropriate settlement of the Iranian 
nuclear issue. 
 As regards the Lebanese-Israeli conflict, China 
opposes any move that will undermine peace and 
stability in the region, and calls for a comprehensive 
cessation of hostilities. China welcomes Security 
Council resolution 1701 (2006) and hopes that it will 
be strictly observed. China hopes that the parties 
concerned will reach an early agreement on a 
framework of political settlement that is both just and 
durable. 
 The question of Palestine is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. The peace process should be re-
started in keeping with the relevant resolutions of the 
United Nations and the principle of land for peace, in 
the interest of reaching an early and comprehensive 
settlement of the Middle East issue, including the 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, so that the countries 
involved can live in harmony and the region can enjoy 
durable peace. 
 The United Nations has played an instrumental 
role in resolving regional flashpoints this year. But the 
Organization also faces major challenges. In the new 
international environment, to enhance its role through 
reform is in the common interest of humankind. The 
United Nations needs to take resolute steps in carrying 
out reform. The United Nations should develop in a 
way that promotes the purposes and principles of its 
Charter, upholds the unity and cooperation of the 
Organization and serves the collective interests of its 
Members. The reform of the United Nations should be 
comprehensive in coverage, and progress should be 
made in security, development, human rights and other 
fields. More should be done to promote development 
and facilitate the realization of the Millennium 
Development Goals. The reform of the Organization 
should, as far as possible, satisfy the needs of its 
Member States, particularly those from the developing 
world. The reform should be a democratic process and 
full consultations should be conducted to reach 
widespread consensus. Major controversial issues 
should be handled with caution and dealt with through 
in-depth consultations. 
 China welcomes the progress made in reforming 
the United Nations, in particular the progress in 
implementing the World Summit Outcome. We will 
 
 
23 06-53317 
 
pledge $3 million to the United Nations Peacebuilding 
Fund. We will continue to work with other countries to 
make progress in the reform of the United Nations, 
strengthen the unity and authority of the Organization 
and increase its efficiency and capacity to respond to 
challenges. 
 As the chief administrator of the United Nations, 
the Secretary-General has an important role to play. In 
the election of the next Secretary-General, China will 
firmly support an Asian candidate. We are convinced 
that Asia can produce a competent and well-respected 
Secretary-General acceptable to all Member States. 
 The scale of assessments for the apportionment of 
the expenses of the United Nations involves the 
interests of all Member States and constitutes the 
financial foundation of the Organization. All Member 
States have an obligation to pay their assessments on 
time and in full. The ability to pay is the basic 
principle governing the scale of assessments. It should 
be adhered to, as it has proved effective and represents 
the general consensus of Member States. Over the 
years, China has honoured its financial obligations in 
good faith and has made appropriate contributions to 
the budget of the United Nations. As China’s economy 
grows, we are prepared to increase our contributions to 
the Organization’s budget in accordance with the 
principle of ability to pay. We are ready to take part in 
relevant discussions in a constructive way, and hope 
that a fair and equitable formula will be reached on the 
basis of extensive consultations. 
 Without overall development, global peace and 
progress cannot be sustained. In addition to developing 
the concept of partnership and improving its 
modalities, all countries should honour our 
commitment to the global partnership for development 
set out in the Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey 
Consensus, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation 
and last year’s World Summit Outcome.  
 Countries should shoulder the primary 
responsibility for their own development and 
implement comprehensive development strategies in 
keeping with the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). 
 The international community — and developed 
countries in particular — should increase development 
assistance, promote international trade, technology 
transfers and investment, offer more extensive debt 
relief, provide more support to developing countries 
and respect their ownership of national development 
strategies. 
 The United Nations should play a bigger role in 
the field of development. It should create a fair and 
equitable framework to assess progress in meeting the 
MDGs and ensure that the United Nations Foundation 
and the various United Nations programmes and 
specialized agencies provide greater support for 
capacity-building programmes in developing countries. 
It should enhance coordination between international 
development policy and monetary, financial and 
trading regimes and create an enabling international 
environment for developing countries. 
 The suspension of the Doha round serves 
nobody’s interests. Members of the World Trade 
Organization should demonstrate political will, 
speedily resume the Doha development round and 
work towards a comprehensive and balanced outcome. 
 Non-governmental organizations should be 
encouraged to be more extensively and deeply involved 
in development cooperation. Their efforts and those of 
Governments should complement each other. 
 The establishment of the Human Rights Council 
echoes the calling of our times. Member States have a 
common responsibility to make the Council a dynamic 
and effective body. The Council should give greater 
attention to massive and gross violations of human 
rights caused by armed conflicts and should support 
the international community in its efforts to prevent 
conflicts, restore peace and combat terrorism in all its 
forms and manifestations. 
 The Council should attach equal importance to 
economic, social and cultural rights and encourage the 
international community and United Nations agencies 
to take effective measures to support countries in their 
efforts to realize their right to development.  
 The Council should continue to give special 
attention to the rights of women, children, persons with 
disabilities, migrant workers, ethnic minorities and 
other vulnerable groups to ensure that they enjoy the 
same level of respect as others. 
 The Council should promote dialogue and 
cooperation on an equal footing between countries of 
different social systems and levels of development, 
address human rights issues properly and reject double 
standards and politicization. 
  
 
06-53317 24 
 
 For decades, relations between China and African 
countries have been characterized by sincerity and 
mutual support. We have conducted our cooperation on 
the basis of equality and mutual benefit, while 
safeguarding sovereignty and independence and 
promoting social and economic development in our 
respective countries. All that has served to bring about 
significant benefits for the Chinese and African peoples 
alike. 
 China and Africa will hold a summit and the third 
ministerial meeting of the Forum on China-Africa 
Cooperation in Beijing from 3 to 5 November. 
Focusing on the theme of friendship, peace, 
cooperation and development, Chinese and African 
leaders will discuss ways to establish and foster a new 
type of strategic partnership featuring political equality 
and mutual trust, win-win economic cooperation and 
cultural exchanges. They will also draft a blueprint to 
enhance China-Africa cooperation. China is committed 
to peaceful development. Africa, which is home to the 
largest number of developing countries, is committed 
to achieving stability and renewal. Stronger ties 
between China and Africa will contribute to South-
South cooperation and international peace and 
development. 
 The conduct of China’s diplomacy aims to 
safeguard world peace and promote common 
development. China is committed to developing itself 
through safeguarding and promoting world peace 
through its own development. We are pursuing 
development that is peaceful, inclusive, cooperative 
and harmonious in nature. We will endeavour to 
promote the fundamental interests of our own people in 
harmony with the common interests of other peoples 
and to pursue peace, promote development and resolve 
disputes through cooperation. 
 China is dedicated to building a harmonious 
world. It hopes to increase mutual respect and 
understanding with other countries and to live in 
harmony with them. China respects the right of a 
country to choose its own path to development. It 
supports equal participation by different countries in 
international affairs and democracy in international 
relations. It works to enhance mutual benefits, win-win 
outcomes and global prosperity through sharing the 
benefits of economic globalization and technological 
progress. China seeks to promote a diversified world 
and advance human civilization by furthering dialogue, 
understanding and mutual enrichment between 
different cultures. China is committed to advancing 
human progress by enhancing dialogue, building 
mutual trust with other countries and working with 
them to address global issues. 
 China will continue to demonstrate to the world 
that it is an important force for global peace and 
development and that the Chinese people will remain 
trustworthy friends and cooperation partners to the 
world’s peoples. Please accept 
my congratulations, Madam, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first 
session. I wish you every success. I should also like to 
express my sincere thanks to the President of the 
General Assembly at its sixtieth session for his 
dedicated work and to wish him every success in his 
future endeavours. 
 The world events that have taken place over the 
past 60 years are reflected more graphically in 
Germany than in almost any other country. Until 1989, 
the wall and the barbed wire across our country 
symbolized the division of Europe and the rest of the 
world into two blocs. Since then, Germany has become 
the embodiment of the successful overcoming of that 
division. 
 Both division and the overcoming of division 
have influenced our view of the world. For 45 years, 
peace in Germany was due largely to the friendship and 
the political and military protection of partner 
countries, which took their responsibility seriously. 
That experience shaped the political outlook of 
Germans. That is why we, too, are now shouldering our 
responsibility, both in Europe and in other parts of the 
world. In the context of the United Nations, that means 
that a reunited Germany believes it has an obligation to 
do everything it can to support the Organization in 
creating a more peaceful and more equitable world. 
 German soldiers and police officers are taking 
part in numerous peace missions that are either led or 
mandated by the United Nations. In the Western 
Balkans, Germany has provided the largest contingent 
of peacekeeping troops in Kosovo and in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Germany is playing a prominent role in 
the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Germany is leading 
the European operation in the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo and is supporting the first free elections 
there in 40 years. Germany is engaged in the Sudan 
through its support for the African Union Mission in 
the Sudan and the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan. And, at this very moment, German navy vessels 
 
 
29 06-53317 
 
are on their way to the Lebanese coast, where they will 
reinforce the United Nations peacekeeping force. 
Germany will contribute up to 2,400 troops to that 
peace mission. 
 Germany supports a policy of dialogue and the 
peaceful reconciliation of differing interests. We firmly 
believe that political conflicts cannot be resolved 
through military force or military victories. Peace is 
brought about by engaging in political dialogue, 
establishing economic ties and giving people tangible 
hope for the future. If the parties to a conflict are 
unable to overcome political divisions on their own, 
the international community, represented by the United 
Nations, has an obligation to help. That is the guiding 
principle of our foreign policy. 
 As Minister for Foreign Affairs of a reunited 
Germany, I have been profoundly influenced by 
German and European history. On that basis, I have a 
concrete mandate for German foreign policy: we must 
do everything in our power to prevent the world from 
dividing once again into hostile blocs. Politicians in 
every country have a responsibility in that regard. 
Everyone can — and, I believe, everyone must — 
make a contribution. It is my firm conviction that 
anyone who instigates antagonism between people of 
different cultures and religions is not living up to his or 
her responsibility. 
 No one should interpret the involvement of 
Germany and its partners in the Balkans, in 
Afghanistan, in the Sudan and in Lebanon as an 
aggressive global campaign waged by the West against 
Islam. In a world that has grown closer together than 
ever before, we do not need exclusion or polarization. 
Rather, we need the courage to promote understanding 
and to engage in dialogue. 
 In the Middle East, it is crucial, following 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), on Lebanon, 
that we seize the opportunity to promote 
understanding. I call on all parties to the conflict in the 
region to act responsibly. Those who want their 
children and grandchildren to live in peace instead of 
violence, in safety instead of fear, in prosperity instead 
of poverty, must have the courage to embark on new 
paths rather than simply cultivating long-standing 
enmities.  
 The principles for a settlement are clear: Israel’s 
right to exist, on the one hand, and the establishment of 
a Palestinian State, on the other. Those were the core 
concerns of the Road Map, to which, I am firmly 
convinced, we must return. However, if we are to 
ensure lasting success, we must do everything we can 
to include everyone involved, even if that seems a 
roundabout way to achieve our goal. Therefore, I hope 
that we will succeed in persuading Syria to engage in a 
constructive dialogue. We need stronger engagement 
on the part of the international community, particularly 
the Middle East Quartet. I welcome the Quartet’s 
recent meeting. 
 In Afghanistan, the international community is 
demonstrating how the principle of responsibility can 
be put into practice in concrete terms. After 23 years of 
civil war, political structures are now being developed. 
Millions of refugees have returned to their home 
country. Just as important, young people — including 
girls — can go to school again. However, drug 
cultivation and the security situation pose a threat to 
the progress that has been made, at least in certain 
regions of the country. We, the international 
community cannot allow the successes to date to be 
brought to naught. 
 In the Western Balkans, too, war is a thing of the 
past; I am very pleased to note that that is so. The 
political and military commitment of the United 
Nations, the United States of America, Russia and the 
European Union has played a key role in this. In 
Kosovo, the task now is to ensure that the two parties 
to the conflict take their responsibility for peace and 
stability seriously. A solution to the status of Kosovo, 
which has remained unresolved for many years, is 
overdue. Germany staunchly backs the efforts of the 
United Nations Special Envoy, President Martti 
Ahtisaari. We believe that stability cannot be achieved 
if the will of only the majority population of Kosovo is 
expressed. Kosovo Serbs must be guaranteed adequate 
protections as a minority. 
 We need only glance at a map of Africa to 
understand how important the peace and stability of the 
Sudan and the Congo are for the African continent as a 
whole. I believe that instability and conflicts in Africa 
also have a direct impact on Europe. For this reason, 
too, Germany is supporting the United Nations in its 
efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in those two 
countries. 
 While the United Nations peace mission in 
southern Sudan — the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan (UNMIS) — has made an effective contribution 
  
 
06-53317 30 
 
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement 
between northern and southern Sudan, peace in Darfur 
is still a long way off. Neither the Sudanese 
Government nor rebel groups can be absolved of 
responsibility for the humanitarian disaster in the west 
of the country. Nevertheless, I am firmly convinced 
that a lasting solution to the conflict will be possible 
only if we work with, not against, them. 
 As members are aware, over the past few years 
Germany, together with France and Britain, supported 
by the United States of America, Russia and China, has 
been intensively seeking a solution to the conflict 
regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. Let me state 
clearly that no one wants to deny Iran the right to use 
nuclear energy peacefully. Nor is isolating Iran the 
objective of the diplomatic effort. On the contrary, we 
hope that Iran will become a reliable and responsible 
partner in the crisis-stricken Middle East. That is why, 
on 6 June, we offered Iran a package aimed at far-
reaching cooperation. The package includes proposals 
for closer diplomatic, economic and security 
cooperation, and expressly acknowledges Iran’s right 
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
 However, the international community also 
rightly expects cooperation and transparency from Iran. 
If Iran were to prove that the suspicions of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are 
unfounded and if it sent a clear sign that it truly intends 
to use its nuclear programme for peaceful purposes 
only, that could open the door to a development which 
benefits the people of Iran and the entire region. 
 It is now up to the Government in Tehran to face 
up to its responsibility. The decision in favour of peace 
and stability in the entire Middle East requires courage. 
I call upon Iran to end the current phase of 
procrastination and give a clear sign of trust so that we 
can look to the future together and can finally sit down 
at the negotiating table. 
 Resolution of the nuclear dispute with Iran is 
urgent. However, the challenges of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons go far beyond that. We must act now 
if we want to halt the erosion of the non-proliferation 
regime. The next attempt to implement the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must not 
fail. 
 Not only Iran but also other countries are 
thinking about developing enrichment technology. We 
will have to develop new instruments if we want to 
prevent such risks from arising. 
 I am therefore strongly in favour of not merely 
exchanging ideas on the multilateralization of the fuel 
cycle and transferring responsibility for uranium 
enrichment to the international community, but of 
further developing such ideas into concrete options. I 
therefore appeal for greater efforts to find solutions, 
working together with the IAEA. 
 The conflicts in the Middle East, Afghanistan, the 
Western Balkans and the Sudan, and the dispute with 
Iran, as well as the fight against international terrorism, 
have one thing in common: in none of those cases is 
the West taking a hostile stance against Islam. Nor do 
they involve a clash of civilizations. Rather, they are 
very diverse conflicts involving diverse interests. 
 I believe that there is just one link, albeit a very 
different one: each one of those conflicts can be 
resolved only with a willingness and ability to engage 
in dialogue. That is because dialogue gets everyone 
concerned involved, engages them and does not allow 
them to shirk their responsibility for resolving a 
conflict. However, a policy of cooperation and 
dialogue does not mean talking at any cost. Those who 
want to engage in dialogue must meet some basic 
prerequisites. In my view, these include a readiness to 
bring about a peaceful reconciliation of interests — 
that is to say, they must be prepared to renounce 
violence and respect the position of the other side — 
and their own position must be consistent and credible. 
If these prerequisites are not met, then no dialogue 
with any chance of success can get off the ground. 
 I am firmly convinced that a dialogue beyond 
cultural borders can succeed because, despite all of our 
differences, we are living in one world. The various 
cultures of the world have more in common than 
political rabble-rousers would have us believe. People 
everywhere have the same fundamental interests: they 
want to live in peace and security, free from poverty. 
They want good health care and good schools for their 
children. No responsible Government would ever want 
to withhold these from its people — nor should they 
ever be allowed to try to do so. 
 The United Nations and its agencies and 
programmes embody this vision — and it is this vision 
that makes the United Nations so indispensable. I am 
convinced that we will need the United Nations more 
than ever in the coming decades. The number and the 
 
 
31 06-53317 
 
scale of crises in the world are increasing. That could 
bring about a renaissance of the United Nations even in 
countries that are sometimes still sceptical about the 
world Organization. 
 The effectiveness of the United Nations, its 
ability to act and the confidence it inspires as the 
international community’s main multilateral 
Organization are closely connected. Everyone can see 
how necessary transparent structures and effective 
institutions are for the United Nations. The reform of 
the United Nations — the entire Organization, not just 
the Security Council — should not, therefore, simply 
remain on the agenda; concrete progress must be made. 
 We see the expectations placed on the United 
Nations rising. This is especially urgent in the case of 
the review of mandates, as well as management and 
financial reform. Germany pledges to support this 
endeavour, because we must reform if we, as members 
of the international community, wish to remain 
effective. We owe that not only to the United Nations 
but, above all, to the people in whose name we 
shoulder responsibility together. Lebanon 
has again been set ablaze by war, a further 
manifestation of the interminable conflict in the Middle 
East whose tragedies have, for 60 years now, 
punctuated the life of the United Nations. 
 By endlessly deferring its settlement, this 
confrontation has become the epicentre of international 
instability, the main source of incomprehension 
between the different worlds and an easy alibi for all 
forms of terrorism. 
 This situation is not a foregone conclusion. With 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), the United 
Nations is shouldering its responsibilities. The 
unanimous adoption of this resolution has brought the 
fighting to an end. France, Europe and Asia have 
contributed to the strengthening of United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). 
 But the fire is still smouldering. It is now up to 
all the parties to work towards the consolidation of 
peace and the recovery of Lebanon. 
 It is now up to Israel to complete the withdrawal 
of its forces. It is up to the Lebanese Government to 
affirm its sovereignty throughout its territory. And it is 
up to the countries in the region to cooperate fully in 
order to ensure the success of resolution 1701 (2006), 
to cooperate with the United Nations. 
 In this highly sensitive region where divides 
meet, the status quo has become unbearable. Because 
the conflict in the Middle East is a threat to global 
peace and security, the world has no option but to be 
the guarantor of peace. Let us tread off the beaten track 
of habit. Let us define a global strategy the key to 
which is an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. 
 The parameters for that settlement are well-
known, namely, the secure coexistence of two viable 
States, as has already been widely accepted by both 
peoples; safe and recognized borders; and a fair 
solution for refugees and for Jerusalem. All that still 
stands between Israelis and Palestinians and the peace 
to which they aspire is the deep-seated, mutual distrust 
of two peoples shattered by history and reeling from 
their sufferings and ordeals. Let us now stop extremists 
from laying down the law! Let us help peoples and 
leaders bold enough to seek peace! Like, before them, 
Sadat and Begin, Rabin and Arafat! Before this 
Assembly, I call on the world to commit itself to 
restoring the conditions for confidence. 
 The Quartet should meet shortly to start preparing 
an international conference. I propose that the 
conference define in advance the guarantees that we 
are prepared to provide to the parties as soon as they 
reach an agreement. I also propose that the conference 
pave the way for a new future in the Middle East 
through a regional framework for collective security, 
economic integration and dialogue among cultures. 
 Building peace means fighting terrorism. It 
means preventing proliferation. It means shouldering 
the “responsibility to protect” that we enshrined here 
last year. 
 International legality must prevail over the threats 
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In the 
crisis with Iran, confidence has been impaired by the 
existence of hidden programmes. We have extended 
ambitious offers of cooperation to that major country, 
 
 
21 06-52731 
 
provided it restores confidence by suspending its 
contentious activities. Dialogue must prevail. Let us 
talk in order to enter into negotiations. 
 Given the seriousness of what is at stake, the 
international community must stand firm and united. 
We do not aim to call regimes into question. We aim to 
ensure security in accordance with international law 
and with due regard for the sovereignty of all 
countries. 
 The “responsibility to protect” — that was what 
we affirmed here. In Darfur, millions of people are 
threatened. A crime against humanity looms. 
Bloodshed and turmoil are about to convulse the very 
heart of Africa again. 
 France entreats the international community to 
ward off a further humanitarian catastrophe. I solemnly 
call on Sudan to accept the United Nations peace 
mission without delay. I call on the International 
Criminal Court to bring to justice those responsible for 
these crimes. 
 The time has come for the immense continent of 
Africa, with its wealth of peoples and vibrant youth, 
which has embarked on the road to growth and reform, 
to find, at long last, a destiny worthy of it and of the 
cradle of humanity it represents. Humanity must be 
united and there must be solidarity among its diverse 
peoples. Humanity needs, more than ever, a strong and 
respected United Nations, the irreplaceable tool for 
shared sovereignty and responsibility. 
 It is here that universal and sacred human rights 
must be defended and protected. With the new Human 
Rights Council and the International Criminal Court, 
the United Nations returns to this primary vocation. Let 
us not disappoint the hopes of all those who love 
freedom and justice. 
 At a time when the world’s wealth is increasing 
as never before, the separation between the rich and 
poor is becoming intolerable. From its inception, the 
United Nations has stood for the moral imperatives of 
fairness and solidarity. For this reason France wishes to 
submit to the United Nations the idea of innovative 
development financing mechanisms such as the 
international solidarity levy on airplane tickets, a 
modern, pragmatic and experimental response to the 
need to fight poverty and pandemics. In this spirit we 
will be launching the International Drug Purchase 
Facility (UNITAID) initiative this afternoon. Let us 
overcome selfishness and dogmatism and give the 
generous idea of a world united for human progress a 
chance. 
 Finally, we all know that uncontrolled human 
activity is bringing about a sort of slow collective 
suicide. Disaster can only be averted if nations can 
come together to support jointly agreed commitments. 
Let us create a United Nations for the environment, as 
the expression of the world’s ecological conscience and 
the premier forum in which we take common action for 
future generations. France will host an international 
conference next year to bring together all those who 
want to make progress on this project, which is crucial 
to the future of the planet. 
 For 10 years now, a man has held high the torch 
of the United Nations and our universal values. Today, 
I wish to pay Kofi Annan the solemn and merited 
honour of our profound admiration, of our respect and 
of our recognition. 
 In a few weeks’ time, we will appoint a new 
Secretary-General, who will be faced with immense 
challenges. He will be able to count on the support of 
France, on its unswerving commitment to serving 
peace and justice, fraternity and progress. First, I would 
like to pay tribute to the work of the Secretary-General. 
A former British Minister once said of the NATO 
Secretary General that he should be more of a secretary 
and less of a general. Kofi Annan has been more of 
everything: more of a diplomat, more of a reformer and 
more of a moral voice of leadership in the world. 
 In a world shattered by conflict, the founders of 
the United Nations saw that only by coming together, 
united in support of larger freedom, could we build our 
shared future. Today, when the world’s nations are 
even more interdependent than they were in 1945, what 
does it mean to stand, as they intended, united? At one 
level it means taking action when things go wrong, 
where there is an actual breakdown of security or a 
descent into violence or chaos. Today in particular, the 
United Nations faces the challenges posed by multiple 
upheavals and crises across the world. 
 In the Middle East the United Nations is playing 
a vital role in establishing stability in southern 
Lebanon. Troops from the European Union are 
deploying alongside those from the Middle East, Asia 
and Africa. All Member States must meet their 
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1701 
(2006), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), if we are to 
enable Lebanon to be the proud, democratic and 
diverse nation that its people want it to be. 
 But we are all aware that this most recent conflict 
in Lebanon had its roots in the continuing failure to 
achieve a just solution to the Palestinian question. That 
is why the United Kingdom has consistently argued 
that there can be no higher priority than reinvigorating 
the Middle East peace process. 
 In Iraq, Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s national 
reconciliation plan can help leaders from all 
communities come together. At this crucial juncture, 
we must all intensify our support. The International 
Compact provides the right vehicle. It allows the Iraqi 
Government to set its own vision and shows us how we 
can help turn that vision into a reality. 
 In Afghanistan, real progress has been made, with 
the United Nations taking a leading role in 
coordinating the international effort. But real 
challenges still lie ahead. NATO’s task of securing the 
south of the country is far from easy. Soldiers from 
many NATO countries, not least my own, have given 
their lives to provide a better future for the people of 
Afghanistan. The Afghan Government and people, too, 
want security, development and good governance. The 
United Kingdom and the international community are 
determined to help them to achieve them. 
 We must show a similar shared determination in 
urging the Government of Iran to address international 
concerns over its nuclear ambitions and its support for 
terrorism. The proposals put forward by Britain, France 
and Germany with China, Russia and the United States 
offer a path for the Iranian Government to develop a 
more constructive relationship with the rest of the 
world and give Iran’s talented population the 
opportunities and prosperity that is their right, 
including, if they wish, a modern nuclear power 
industry. We want to be able to resume negotiations. 
  
 
06-53317 20 
 
Iran knows what is required, and that the alternative is 
increasing isolation. 
 Darfur remains in crisis. I pay tribute to the 
efforts of the African Union and its peacekeepers. 
Wednesday’s decision to extend their mandate averted 
a security vacuum. We must now strengthen the force 
of the African Union Mission in the Sudan. But it can 
only be a temporary reprieve. We also need action 
immediately on the political and humanitarian front. 
Those who have not signed the Darfur Peace 
Agreement must do so. Those who have must abide by 
its provisions. 
 To underpin that Agreement, we urgently need a 
greatly strengthened international presence on the 
ground, with the active engagement and support of 
Asian and Muslim, as well as African, countries. That 
is why the Security Council authorized the deployment 
of United Nations peacekeepers to Darfur. I urge 
President Bashir to extend the Sudan’s relations with 
the United Nations in a common purpose to bring 
lasting peace and genuine stability to the whole of the 
Sudan. It is, above all, his responsibility. 
 The security challenges the world faces are real. 
As an international community we must deal with 
them. But standing united also requires us to take up a 
second, deeper level of global responsibility, namely, 
tackling the underlying problems that promote conflict 
and underdevelopment. We must strive to promote 
sound global values and to build multilateral systems 
within which nations and individuals can cooperate, 
co-exist and each achieve their potential. 
 Many representatives to the Assembly have 
already spoken of the need to accelerate progress 
towards the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals. Progress on those Goals is a moral 
imperative rooted in a concern for, and an 
understanding of, our common humanity. But it is also 
a political imperative, because there will be no stability 
and security in our global community while so many 
millions of men, women and children in that 
community face only a life of hunger, poverty, 
inequality and disease. 
 The same is true for those whose lives are 
shattered by conflict or blighted by injustice. The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council are new structures that give us new 
opportunities and new impetus. At the same time, we 
must see a step change in efforts towards an 
international arms trade treaty that will end the 
irresponsible transfer of arms that fuel conflict and 
facilitate the abuse of human rights. That is why the 
United Kingdom, with six other countries, will 
introduce a draft resolution in the First Committee to 
establish a process to work towards a legally binding 
treaty on the trade in all conventional arms. 
 Collectively, we have a responsibility to protect 
human life and a duty to defend the international 
institutions that help us as a community to achieve that 
goal. The answers lie not in division or in personal 
attacks, but in the earnest and consistent pursuit of 
justice and peace.  
 Our collective responsibility to each other is 
nowhere more evident than in the huge challenge posed 
by climate change. The British Prime Minister, Tony 
Blair, made climate change one of our two G8 
priorities last year, alongside poverty reduction in 
Africa. When the Prime Minister appointed me as his 
Foreign Secretary, in May, he specifically charged me 
with putting climate security at the heart of our foreign 
policy. We will not solve that problem if we do not 
each assume our share of the responsibility for tackling 
it. Nobody can protect themselves from climate change 
unless we protect each other by building a global basis 
for climate security. That goes to the heart of the 
United Nations mission, and the United Nations must 
be at the heart of the solution. 
 To put it starkly, if we all try to freeride, we will 
all end up in free fall, with accelerating climate change 
the result of our collective failure to respond in time to 
that shared threat that faces us all. Look just at the 
danger posed by rising sea levels. Potentially, that 
could cause massive damage to some of the key urban 
centres of our global civilization. London, Shanghai, 
Dhaka, Singapore, Amsterdam, Cairo and, yes, 
Manhattan are all at risk. That is why we must all — as 
foreign ministers, heads of Government and heads of 
State — be ready to do more, and do it more quickly. 
Our climate presents us with an ever-growing threat to 
international security. Dealing with climate change, by 
both adapting to what is now inevitable and acting to 
avert still greater damage, is no longer a choice, it is an 
imperative. 
 We need common commitment and genuine 
action. We must all be ready to find a way to get the 
agenda moving beyond Kyoto. The Gleneagles 
dialogue meeting in Mexico at the beginning of 
 
 
21 06-53317 
 
October will be one such opportunity, a chance for 
developed and developing countries to work together 
on that shared problem.  
 If we do not act now, an unstable climate will 
undermine our progress in all those other areas that 
matter to us, not least the Millennium Development 
Goals themselves. Take one of the most basic needs of 
all, water. Already perhaps two fifths of the world’s 
population finds it hard to get the water they need. At 
the same time, many in the world rely on affordable 
energy to help lift themselves out of poverty — and, 
indeed, perhaps to give them access to that water. But 
there is a dilemma: if we provide affordable energy by 
burning fossil fuels, we accelerate climate change. That 
means further disrupting water supplies. For some 
people who now have plenty of water it will mean new 
shortages. For those who already have little, it will 
mean less. In turn, everywhere less water means less 
food. 
 Let me give a specific example of that dilemma. 
The whole world, as well as the Chinese people, is 
benefiting from the great success of the Chinese 
economy. No one in China or elsewhere wants that 
growth to stop. But it is based, in China as elsewhere, 
on a rapidly increasing use of the fossil fuels that are 
creating climate change. Yet China is a country already 
vulnerable to climate change. The Chinese Government 
knows that as the Himalayan glaciers melt and 
agricultural land shrinks, crop yields will fall, fresh 
water will become more scarce and the economy itself 
will suffer, and with it the world’s economy. 
 All the nations of the Arctic Circle are being, and 
will be, affected by melting permafrost, with 
disruptions to infrastructure and to investment. The 
Vice-President of Palau has just given us a vivid 
description of what the environment means for his 
nation. We all share, to a greater or lesser extent, that 
same dilemma. If we do not act on climate change, we 
risk undermining the very basis of the prosperity and 
security we are seeking to achieve. That is why we 
must recognize that talk of having either a successful 
economy or a stable climate is a false choice. We must 
work together to find paths for economic growth that 
will protect our climate. The truth is that we already 
have much of the technology we need to move to a 
low-carbon economy. But we must now deploy it very 
much more rapidly. What we do in the next 10 years 
will count the most.  
 The former chief economist of the World Bank, 
Sir Nicholas Stern, will shortly publish one of the most 
significant and wide-reaching analyses so far of the 
economic impacts of climate change itself. One of the 
key emerging findings of his work is that while it will 
not cost the Earth to solve climate change, it will cost 
the Earth, literally as well as financially, if we do not. 
 Moreover, if we learn to tackle climate change 
together, we have an opportunity to build trust between 
nations and to strengthen the multilateral system. But if 
we get it wrong, that trust will be further eroded. It is 
the developed, rich world that bears a large 
responsibility for the present level of greenhouse gas 
emissions, but it is the poorest in our global 
community — those least able to bear it — who will 
bear the brunt of climate insecurity. We all need to do 
more. But the rich world should of course continue to 
lead the effort, applying the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibility, which must continue to be 
our guide. In the joint endeavour which the United 
Nations represents there can be no more stark or more 
urgent warning than that. At the outset, Madam, 
let me join previous speakers in welcoming your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-first session. On India’s behalf, I would like to 
assure you of our constructive support and 
wholehearted commitment to work with you to achieve 
both the larger goals of the Charter and the more 
specific goals of the reform of this Organization that 
were set out in last year’s World Summit Outcome 
Document. 
 The topic of this general debate is “Implementing 
a global partnership for development”. It is difficult to 
contest its relevance or topicality. Today, whether we 
look at issues such as international trade, international 
financial mechanisms, methods to improve economic 
and social well-being, or even the various threats to 
peace and security that challenge our collective 
existence, one common theme that emerges is the lack 
of an effective and equitable global partnership. This is 
an imperative even for achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals. 
 The important annual report of the Secretary-
General highlights several successes in moving ahead 
with United Nations reform. During the previous 
General Assembly session, the Central Emergency 
Response Fund, the Peacebuilding Commission and the 
Human Rights Council were established, and the 
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was 
agreed upon. We have also gradually moved forward 
on management and budgetary reforms. While these 
are certainly important — indeed, critical — if we are 
honest, we must acknowledge that significant 
unfulfilled tasks and challenges lie ahead, particularly 
with regard to unaddressed issues, including the reform 
of the architecture of our multilateral bodies that 
oversee security, trade, financial flows and 
development. Without this reform, the discontent 
associated with globalization will only deepen. Without 
it, there cannot be substantially enhanced and assured 
resource and technology flows to developing countries, 
which are necessary for real economic transformation 
and for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
 It is sometimes argued that private sector 
investment is today replacing the traditional reliance 
on aid and development assistance. While we 
appreciate the important role of private sector 
investment, it cannot replace public investment in 
developing countries, whose absorptive capacities are 
often limited and where the physical and social 
infrastructure is often weak. Official development 
assistance (ODA) remains an important means to 
 
 
7 06-53952 
 
augment public investment in areas such as human 
capital development and rural infrastructure, which 
rarely attract private sector investment. 
 The process of increasing the available pool of 
resources for investment in the social and economic 
infrastructure of developing countries can be promoted 
at one level by developed countries, expeditiously 
reaching the target of setting aside 0.7 per cent of their 
gross domestic product for official development 
assistance. 
 At another level, there is also a need to develop 
innovative sources of financing. We must evolve a 
broader understanding of ways to encourage the least 
developed countries to get out of the debt trap by 
extending debt-cancellation programmes, without 
insisting on conditionalities, such as encouraging 
privatization, which, applied indiscriminately, may 
recreate the original difficulties that necessitated 
recourse to debt in the first place. 
 The impasse in international trade negotiations is 
disappointing, to say the least, considering the hopes 
raised after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference and 
at the Group of Eight Summit in Saint Petersburg in 
July. Early resumption is desirable, but adherence to 
the existing mandate is imperative — the mandate of 
the Doha Declaration, the July framework and the 
Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. When agriculture 
was brought into the ambit of negotiations at the 
creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the 
developing countries were given a clear understanding 
that trade-distorting agricultural subsidies would be 
phased out in a time-bound manner. Minimizing the 
vulnerabilities of poor farmers must be our collective 
priority. Demanding market access from developing 
countries, which displace low-income and subsistence 
farmers to satisfy commercial interests, cannot be 
supported.  
 Proportionately lower overall tariff reduction 
commitments, operable, effective development 
instruments for special products and a special 
safeguard mechanism are essential if we are to ensure 
food and livelihood security and meet the rural 
development needs of developing countries. The 
overarching principle of special and differential 
treatment therefore remains a categorical imperative, 
and is the underlying basis of the position of 
developing countries. 
 In our view, there exists an overwhelming logic 
for giving the United Nations a role in providing 
direction to the comprehensive reform of the 
international financial and trading systems. These 
reforms must be aimed at building an international 
architecture that reflects the realities of the twenty-first 
century and is able to create an environment that 
effectively supports national efforts to eradicate 
poverty. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
have given hope to the poor and the underprivileged of 
the world, and these goals are to be achieved by 2015. 
In this context, the World Bank must remain steadfast 
in its mission to build a world free of poverty, and its 
strategy must remain embedded in the historical 
development-centric approach.  
 The Outcome Document of last year’s World 
Summit emphasized that enhancing the voice and 
participation of developing countries in the Bretton 
Woods institutions remains a continuous concern. The 
bridging of this voice deficit requires fundamental 
reforms in the quota structure which are long overdue 
and absolutely necessary to enhance the credibility and 
legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
The quota reforms have to begin with the revision of 
the formula so as to reflect the relative economic 
strengths of countries in the twenty-first century. The 
United Nations should encourage immediate steps 
being taken to initiate the second stage of IMF quota 
reform, involving a basic revision of the quota formula 
and the subsequent increase of quotas for all under-
represented countries. All of this must be done in a 
time-bound manner. 
 Change is the law of life. The acute 
dissatisfaction heard in many statements is the result of 
institutions having been prevented from changing. 
What is true in the economic field is equally true of the 
architecture of our international security system as 
reflected in this unique Organization that is supposed 
to reflect the collective will of our world, a system 
which remains mired in the past. Recent tragic events 
in Lebanon and the stasis in the peace process in the 
broader Middle East have highlighted the growing 
failure of the institution designated by the Charter as 
having primary responsibility for issues relating to 
peace and security. 
 It is widely accepted that the Security Council 
can no longer be regarded as reflecting the changed 
international environment that has emerged since the 
time of its creation. The Security Council must not 
  
 
06-53952 8 
 
only be more representative but also more effective if it 
is to be able to satisfactorily perform the role mandated 
to it by the Charter. 
 At the same time, the Security Council has 
needlessly diverted its attention to issues and areas that 
go beyond its mandate. For instance, the inclusion of 
items on its agenda which have nothing to do with 
peace and security represents an encroachment on the 
roles mandated to other United Nations bodies. In 
order to ensure that the international community 
exercises real ownership of the process of securing our 
world, it is essential that comprehensive reform of the 
Security Council be undertaken and that its 
membership be expanded in both the permanent and 
the non-permanent categories. It is no accident that the 
Secretary-General’s report refers to the enhancement of 
legitimacy and the urgent need for reform to ensure the 
Security Council’s relevance and credibility. 
 The revitalization of the General Assembly is 
intertwined with the reform of the Security Council. It 
is no coincidence that its reform too has long been 
frustrated. A strengthened and more effective United 
Nations presumes a revitalized General Assembly that 
exercises its role and authority in the areas of 
responsibility assigned to it by the Charter. These 
include its effectively addressing topics such as 
international law and human rights, financial, 
budgetary and administrative matters, as well as the 
global economic architecture and important issues 
related to development. 
 I now turn to one of the most crucial issues of our 
times: the problem of terrorism. While this 
phenomenon has become increasingly global, our 
collective response to it has remained rather 
inadequate. The multiple ways in which terrorism 
challenges the core principles of humanity and the 
mandate of the United Nations are underlined by the 
outrages perpetrated in India over the last few months. 
Barely two months ago, on a single black day, more 
than 200 lives were lost and more than 1,000 were 
injured by dastardly bombings in Mumbai and 
elsewhere in India. These and other such outrageous 
incidents were clearly designed to spread maximum 
terror among ordinary people. Ours is not the only 
country to be singled out for vicious and senseless acts 
of murder. A strong response to terrorism requires 
broad-based international cooperation, denying to 
terrorists the space that has been available to them and 
increasing the capability of States to address terrorist 
threats. It requires sustained and specific cooperation 
by a variety of national, regional and global agencies. 
 Earlier this month, we joined in the adoption of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy 
(resolution 60/288), even though, ideally, we would 
have liked the United Nations to convey a far stronger 
message in order to counter terrorism. We must 
collectively and unanimously reject the notion that any 
cause can justify terrorism. No cause can ever justify 
the targeted killing of innocent men, women and 
children. The international community must signal that 
it will no longer tolerate the actions of the sponsors 
and abettors of terrorism, including States which 
wilfully fail to prevent terrorists from utilizing their 
territory. We hope that the Strategy will provide the 
impetus to unite the international community in its 
fight against terrorism via practical measures that 
facilitate cooperation by way of extradition, 
prosecution, information exchange and capacity-
building. 
 We went along with the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, but the comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism, which remains a work in 
progress, would have provided the requisite legal 
framework upon which a counter-terrorism strategy 
could have been based. It cannot be beyond our 
collective ingenuity to reach an agreement on such a 
comprehensive convention, even though we have 
missed the target of doing so at the sixtieth session of 
the General Assembly. We must work together to 
finalize and adopt the comprehensive convention, at 
least during this session of the General Assembly. 
 The existence of nuclear weapons continues to 
threaten international peace and security. In our view, 
the best non-proliferation measure is universal 
disarmament, and the international community needs to 
take immediate steps to eliminate the threat of the use 
of nuclear weapons. We have to revive momentum for 
achieving what the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
called a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, to 
be achieved, through negotiations, in a time-bound 
manner. India will be presenting a working paper at 
this session of the General Assembly on the issue of 
nuclear disarmament, on which we look forward to 
working with Member States. 
 In recent years, new dangers have emerged due to 
the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction-related materials and technologies to non-
 
 
9 06-53952 
 
State actors and terrorist groups. The international 
community must work together to meet those 
challenges. India’s record in that regard is impeccable, 
and we have instituted effective measures to ensure 
that the technologies we develop are not leaked in any 
way. 
 It is true that the developing countries bear the 
heaviest burden from pandemics, epidemics and 
chronic diseases. The scourge of HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
avian influenza and tuberculosis seriously threatens the 
future of many developing countries by robbing them 
of the most productive segment of their society — their 
young people — thereby affecting the future of those 
countries. An enhanced global collaborative effort is 
called for to confront the proliferation of challenges 
affecting the lives of the majority of our citizens. 
 We also need to address the central issue of the 
special needs of the developing countries, especially in 
Africa, and of the vulnerable small States. On our part, 
we will continue to expand our programme of South-
South cooperation also through the New Partnership 
for Africa’s Development, through Team 9 — our 
special programme for West African countries — and 
by means of the connectivity mission in Africa, as well 
as through assistance, capacity-building and 
technology transfer aimed at reducing the vulnerability 
of small States. 
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who embodied 
our commitment to the United Nations ideals, said that 
 “in a world of incessant and feverish activity, 
men have little time to think, much less to 
consider ideals and objectives. Yet, how are we to 
act, even in the present, unless we know which 
way we are going and what our objectives are?”  
 Confronted as we are by the globalization of 
threats and by the limitations of our international 
system to address such challenges, the need for a 
comprehensive reform of the United Nations has never 
been more imperative. We need to enfranchise the 
United Nations to meet the challenges of our time by 
reinforcing its role and authority as the core of real 
multilateralism. 
 We look forward to working closely with other 
Member States, under your leadership, Madam 
President, to press ahead with essential reforms at the 
United Nations and to implement an effective global 
partnership for development that encompasses 
everyone and enables every individual to live a life of 
dignity in a clean, safe and healthy environment. These days, the days of the 
general debate of the General Assembly, fall this year 
at a time of unique significance for the Jewish people. 
They come on the eve of the Jewish New Year and the 
Day of Atonement and are known as the Days of Awe. 
 In Jewish tradition, these are days of soul-
searching and prayer, of judgement and of renewal. 
That concept of reflection is fitting not just for the 
faithful. It should be a time of reflection for nations as 
well. Let us use this time and this gathering to look 
deeply and honestly at the world in which we live — 
the world as it is and as it might be. The United 
Nations emerged from the horrors of war and offered a 
vision of a new and peaceful world, but we see the 
suffering of the people of Darfur, we see bloodshed and 
violence across the globe, and we know that that is not 
yet the world in which we live. 
 Our planet remains torn by conflict, At its heart, 
this is a conflict about values — a battle of ideas. It is a 
conflict about whether to respect or to reject the 
other — a conflict between tolerance and tyranny, 
between the promise of coexistence and the 
hopelessness of hate. We see it played out in internet 
chat rooms and in houses of prayer, in classrooms and 
newsrooms, on the battlefield and in the corridors of 
power. It is the challenge of our time. 
 We, the people of Israel, have lived for many 
years on the frontlines of this conflict. Our nation has 
felt its fury; our soldiers have fought and died in its 
battles. An ancient people in the heart of the Middle 
East — great in history but small in number — we 
have been a constant target of those that oppose our 
very existence. We face this conflict on different 
fronts — as Jews against the dark forces of anti-
Semitism, as Israelis against the enemies of our 
statehood, and as members of the free world against 
the merchants of global terror. 
 We have been guided in this conflict by two core 
values that are embodied in our declaration of 
independence and shape our national identity. The first 
is that Israel, with Jerusalem at its heart, is the national 
homeland of the Jewish people, their refuge from 
persecution, their first and last line of defence. The 
second is that Israel is a democracy and that the values 
of justice, peace and humanity — first expressed by the 
prophets of Israel — are an integral part of our nation’s 
sense of mission. We share the same values as the 
community of democratic States. We are ready and 
proud to be judged by them. They are our own.  
  
 
06-52885 44 
 
 But too often there is a gap between perception 
and reality. Too often, Israel is not seen for its unique 
creativity and spirit of enterprise, or for its 
contribution — well beyond its size — to the sciences 
and to literature, to human development and 
innovation. In many parts of the world, we are seen 
mainly through the lens of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
And too often, that lens is distorted. To many, this 
conflict is portrayed as a clash of David and Goliath, 
with Israel perceived unjustly as Goliath, but this 
simplistic image ignores the fact that Israel remains a 
threatened democracy in a hostile region. 
 We have, of necessity, the capacity to defend 
ourselves, but we will always be constrained in its use 
by our values. And yet, we face an enemy willing to 
use all the means at its disposal to kill without restraint 
and without distinction. Every innocent casualty in this 
conflict is a tragedy. There is no difference between the 
tears of a grieving Israeli mother and a grieving 
Palestinian mother, but there is a critical moral 
difference between the terrorists who hunt down 
civilians and the soldiers who target terrorists while 
trying to avoid civilian casualties. 
 To protect its integrity, the international 
community must uphold that basic moral distinction. 
Terror is terror, even when it is called resistance. It 
cannot be justified and it cannot be equated with the 
actions of those seeking only to defend themselves 
against it. 
 If we want to protect our values, it is not enough 
to believe in them — we must act according to them. 
There is no greater challenge to our values than that 
posed by the leaders of Iran. They deny and mock the 
Holocaust. They speak proudly and openly of their 
desire to wipe Israel off the map. And now, by their 
actions, they pursue the weapons to achieve that 
objective, to imperil the region and to threaten the 
world. The moment of truth is here. 
 The international community is faced with no 
greater responsibility than to stand against that dark 
and growing danger — not for Israel’s sake, but for its 
own; for the sake of the values it claims to embrace; 
for the sake of the world we all wish our children to 
inherit. What more needs to happen for the world to 
take the threat seriously? What more needs to happen 
to end the hesitation and the excuses? We know the 
lessons of the past. We know the consequences of 
appeasement and indifference. There is no place for 
such leaders in this forum. There is no place for such a 
regime in the family of nations. 
 For any who still had doubts, the Iranian threat 
was exposed to all in the recent conflict in Lebanon. 
Armed, financed and directed by Iran, Hizbullah 
kidnapped Israeli soldiers and targeted Israeli cities, 
but it was the hopes of an entire region that they sought 
to take hostage. Out of the conflict — and because of 
Israel’s response to it — opportunity has emerged, but 
much is needed to turn opportunity into reality. 
Hizbullah can never again be allowed to threaten the 
future of the region. The world faces a critical test — 
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1701 
(2006) and the immediate and safe release of the Israeli 
hostages. 
 As we gather here, we think of anxious families 
that ache for the return of their loved ones — parents 
waiting for a son, a brother for a brother, a wife for a 
husband. Israel will not rest until all the Israeli 
hostages are returned safely to the arms of their 
devoted families and to the embrace of a loving nation. 
Let us all make them the same promise today. 
 Last year, a great leader of Israel, Ariel Sharon, 
stood before this forum and said:  
 “The Palestinians will always be our neighbours. 
We respect them and have no aspirations to rule 
over them. They are also entitled to freedom and 
to a national, sovereign existence in a State of 
their own.” (A/60/PV.5, p.46) 
 That was not only the voice and vision of one 
man. It is the voice and vision of a nation. We do not 
believe that Israeli-Palestinian relations are of 
necessity a zero-sum game. Not every Israeli interest is 
at odds with Palestinian interests. There is, in fact, a 
common vision that binds together Israelis, moderate 
Palestinians and the international community. It serves 
the goals of both peoples and represents the basis of a 
genuine and lasting peace. At its heart is the vision of 
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in 
peace and security. Israel believes in this vision, and 
from this vision we have drawn our principles for 
peace. 
 The first is inherent in the very idea of two 
States. For the Jewish people, Israel was established to 
be our national homeland. It was the solution for 
Jewish refugees and the realization of Jewish rights. 
And this is the true calling of the future State of 
 
 
45 06-52885 
 
Palestine: a national homeland for the Palestinian 
people — the solution to Palestinian claims, the 
fulfilment of Palestinian dreams, the answer for 
Palestinian refugees, wherever they may be. If 
Palestinian leaders are unwilling to say this, the world 
should say it for them. Instead of giving false hope, it 
is time to end the exploitation of the refugee issue and 
to begin to resolve it on the basis of the vision of two 
States, two homelands.  
 That is the real and only meaning of the two-State 
vision. It requires each people to accept that their 
rights are realized through the establishment of their 
own homeland, not in the homeland of others.  
 The second principle for peace is drawn from the 
concept of living in peace and security. On the basis of 
this principle the international community has insisted 
that the State of Palestine that emerges next to Israel 
cannot be a terror State. A terrorist State is the last 
thing our troubled region needs. It is for that reason 
that the road map requires an end to terror. It is for that 
reason that the international community has demanded 
that any Palestinian Government fulfil three basic 
conditions: renounce terrorism, recognize Israel’s right 
to exist and accept existing Israeli-Palestinian 
agreements. Those conditions are not an obstacle to 
peace or to the establishment of a responsible 
Palestinian State; they are a crucial ingredient for the 
realization of those goals.  
 An end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will also 
require agreement on a common boundary. There are 
those who believe that if only we could turn back the 
hands of time to 1967 all would be resolved. But, in 
1967 there was no Palestinian State; there was no link 
between the West Bank and Gaza; and there was no 
commitment to lasting peace. A two-State solution 
requires the creation of a new reality which never 
existed in the past. For it to succeed, both sides will 
need to commit themselves to compromise and to 
believe in coexistence. 
 If only we could end the conflict today. But we 
have learned from bitter experience that to reach 
lasting peace it is not enough to have a vision. Peace 
must be built on the solid foundations of shared values, 
not the shifting sands of false promises. Without this, 
the political horizon will always be out of reach. We 
have seen negotiations doomed by mistrust and 
frustration. We have seen them lay the ground for 
greater violence, not greater understanding. We cannot 
afford to repeat that experience. 
 Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority is 
dominated today by a terrorist organization that teaches 
children to hate and seeks to transform the conflict 
from a resolvable political dispute into an endless 
religious confrontation. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
is the consequence and not the cause of this ideology 
of intolerance and hatred. We cannot reach peace by 
ignoring these realities. We cannot find the solutions 
for tomorrow without addressing the problems of 
today. 
 But we also cannot give up hope, and I refuse to 
do so. In a Middle East where being moderate is often 
the same as being weak, our challenge is to empower 
the peacemakers and disempower their opponents. The 
road map phases and the three international conditions 
are designed precisely for that purpose. But if the 
world hesitates in enforcing these standards, the 
extremists sense opportunity. And if it appeases, they 
sense victory. This is the moment for determination not 
half-measures and vague formulations. It is the 
moment to demand that those Palestinian leaders that 
believe in peace determine the future on these terms, 
not on the terms of terrorists. 
 Unfortunately, there are no shortcuts on the road 
to peace. But stagnation is not in our interest, and it is 
not our policy. 
 It is in this spirit that Israel embarked on the 
painful process of disengagement, to create an 
opportunity for progress. But, sadly, we received terror 
in return. And it is in this spirit that I met with 
Chairman Abbas two days ago, and we agreed to re-
energize the dialogue between us and create a 
permanent channel to pursue ways to advance together. 
The parties do not need another forum to act out their 
differences, and the only forum that will resolve them 
is the bilateral negotiating table. We have no illusions 
about the difficulties before us. We must face them not 
ignore them. But we can advance along the road to 
peace if we have the strength to defend its principles 
and the courage to confront its enemies. 
 In these days, while Jews prepare to welcome a 
new year, Muslims around the world prepare for the 
holy month of Ramadan. As two great faiths begin their 
annual journey of reflection and decision, let the 
nations of the world begin it too. 
  
 
06-52885 46 
 
 The Jewish prayers tell us that this is a time of 
decision not just for individuals but also for States: 
“which for the sword and which for peace, which for 
famine and which for plenty”. 
 Those are sobering words, but they are also 
empowering ones. The message of these special days is 
that no future is predetermined; no conflict is 
inevitable. It is up to us to make the right choices. 
History will judge us by them. In the words of the 
traditional greeting: may the curses of the last year 
end; may the blessing of the new year begin. Shana 
tova: may it be a good year. New Zealand remains 
unwavering in its support for the United Nations. Our 
commitment has not changed since we helped found 
the Organization 61 years ago. This year’s events have 
only reinforced our belief that the world would be 
substantially worse off without the United Nations. 
 It would be remiss of me at this time not to pay 
tribute to Kofi Annan. It is to his vision, determination 
and courage that we must attribute many of the reforms 
achieved thus far. Five years ago, when he was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Nobel Committee 
paid tribute to his efforts on reform. Since then he has 
continued to work tirelessly for a United Nations that 
can live up to the hopes that “we the peoples” have 
invested in it. This is all the more remarkable given 
that, for much of his stewardship, the United Nations 
has been confronted with some of the most difficult 
international crises of its existence.  
 New Zealand is committed to multilateralism. 
This is not some act of faith, but a commitment to a 
multilateralism that really delivers. We need to be 
prepared to work diligently for the good of the global 
community. 
 The United Nations is passing through a period of 
challenge to its relevance and effectiveness. It has 
 
 
19 06-53323 
 
confronted serious political and security shocks — 
fresh hostilities in the Middle East, the tragic and 
worsening situation in Darfur, and, in our own region, 
instability in Timor-Leste. 
 Last year, world leaders agreed to an ambitious 
reform agenda based on the three pillars of peace and 
security, development and human rights. Progress has 
been made, but this is no time to rest. We must press 
on, for much remains to be done. 
 The challenge of development has never been 
higher on the international agenda. Never before has 
the commitment to eradicating poverty been so critical. 
But increasing aid levels will not be enough; we must 
become more effective. We need to make sure that 
every dollar we spend makes a positive difference. 
That means addressing the key threats to our 
success — poor governance, corruption and gender 
inequality. We need to secure fairer international 
trading relationships, and we must work on all of those 
together. 
 The theme of this year’s general debate is the 
implementation of a global partnership for 
development. For New Zealand, collective action is 
imperative. We need participation, ownership and 
responsibility from recipient countries. We seek 
harmonization with larger contributors to align and 
combine our contributions. We seek partnership with 
multilateral development agencies in our campaign to 
eradicate poverty, and we endorse the efforts of the 
United Nations and those agencies to coordinate better, 
country by country. 
 New Zealand, as members are aware, has a 
relationship with the Pacific that is based on history, 
culture and economic and social linkages. Our bonds 
with Pacific States are an important dimension of our 
other relationships. We want nothing less than 
educated, healthy, well-governed, economically 
prosperous and safe communities. 
 In the Auckland Declaration of 2004, Pacific 
leaders committed themselves to a “region that is 
respected for the quality of its governance, the 
sustainable management of its resources, the full 
observance of democratic values and for its defence 
and promotion of human rights”. These are ambitious 
goals, and translating them into reality means hard 
work by all Pacific countries. That is a challenge that 
New Zealand accepts. 
 In facing that challenge, we confront economic, 
environmental, governance, development and security 
issues. Markets are distant. Climate change is a reality. 
Political instability does not help. Threats from 
communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS and 
pandemic influenza must be managed. 
 The Pacific accounts for almost one quarter of the 
surface of the world — an area bigger than Europe and 
the Middle East combined. Its strategic significance 
presents opportunity and challenge. New Zealand is 
determined to seek out the benefits of that significance 
and guard against the threats, among which I include, 
sadly, cheque-book diplomacy. 
 Across the Pacific, we have learned that regional 
problems require regional solutions. Last year, Pacific 
Island Forum leaders adopted the Pacific Plan for 
regional cooperation. Through that plan we will 
strengthen regional cooperation where it can most 
make a difference, and we will use it to promote the 
four goals of the Pacific Islands Forum: sustainable 
development, economic growth, security and good 
governance. 
 At the same time, we do not forget that our 
regional endeavours depend on strong international 
frameworks. The Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is an essential example. Another example is the 
United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement on the 
conservation and management of straddling and highly 
migratory fish stocks. 
 We are proud of our achievements in regional 
fisheries management. The Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission, with its headquarters in 
Pohnpei, manages the region’s migratory fish species. 
We are in the midst of developing new regional 
arrangements for non-migratory fish stocks. 
 These mechanisms are central to the region’s 
ability to ensure the sustainable management of its 
most important natural resources. They are at the 
leading edge in establishing best-practice management 
norms. 
 There have been profound political and security 
shocks over the past year — in the Middle East and in 
Darfur, as well as instability in Timor-Leste — those 
and more are testing the United Nations system. 
 It is a sad reality that the situation in the Middle 
East has been on the agenda of the United Nations for 
60 years, ever since its inception. The lack of sustained 
  
 
06-53323 20 
 
political will to see through more than a handful of 
decisions on the Middle East has undermined 
confidence. It has contributed to an unstable 
environment where extremism, injustice and despair 
flourish. 
 These issues must be tackled with a new resolve, 
using the international multilateral system as a tool for 
peace and progress. The international response to the 
Security Council’s call for an expanded United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) shows that the 
international community can react to conflict and 
provide basic stabilization. But such responses are 
doomed to failure unless the underlying political and 
security issues are addressed. It is therefore imperative 
to relaunch the Middle East peace process covering all 
issues, on the basis of the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. 
 The Organization’s efforts to introduce a United 
Nations force into Darfur is being cynically thwarted 
by the Government of the Sudan. That is simply 
unconscionable. The Government of the Sudan must, in 
the name of basic humanity, accept the need for a 
United Nations force as the best chance for the security 
of the people of Darfur. 
 New and fragile States face enormous challenges. 
Recent unrest in Timor-Leste demonstrates that fact. 
New Zealand responded quickly to Timor-Leste’s 
needs with a military and police contribution to help 
restore stability. The regional response has been swift 
and robust. The United Nations played an important 
role in facilitating Timor-Leste’s independence, and it 
is clear the United Nations will continue to be involved 
in Timor-Leste for many years to come. The 
deployment of a substantial United Nations police 
force is vital if peace and stability is to be maintained 
even in the medium term. The nature of the expanded 
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste reflects the 
deep and broad engagement required to build a lasting 
peace. Timor-Leste encapsulates the principle that 
peace and security cannot be separated from economic 
development, social reconciliation and the protection 
of basic human rights. The Security Council’s mandate 
for Timor-Leste endorses that truth. 
 New Zealand fully supported the renewed focus 
on human rights at last year’s World Summit. We 
strongly campaigned for the new Human Rights 
Council, and we worked hard to bring it into being. We 
have high ambitions for it and will follow its activities 
closely. It must remain strong, focused and effective. It 
must be able to deal swiftly with emerging situations of 
human rights concern, in a balanced way, with 
scrupulous attention to verifiable facts. It must be 
aspirational, inspirational and practical. Its working 
methods must be transparent and inclusive. Above all, 
there must be genuine political will to make it work. 
 A few weeks ago, encouraged all the way by 
energetic non-governmental organizations, Member 
States agreed on the first new comprehensive human 
rights instrument of the twenty-first century: a draft 
convention relating to persons with disabilities. We are 
proud in New Zealand of the role we played in those 
negotiations on the text. The draft convention stands to 
make a real difference to the lives of approximately 
650 million of the world’s most disadvantaged citizens. 
 New Zealand is also conscious of the 
disadvantages faced by indigenous peoples in many 
parts of the world. We were closely engaged in the 
lengthy negotiations towards a declaration on the rights 
of indigenous peoples. We had hoped that the 
declaration would be a new standard of achievement 
for Governments that could be implemented to really 
improve the lives of indigenous peoples. Therefore, we 
are disappointed that that was not to be so. The draft 
declaration that emerged with less than conclusive 
support from the Human Rights Council is deeply 
flawed and represents a lost opportunity for the world’s 
indigenous peoples. 
 At the beginning of his term, the Secretary-
General set an important goal for the United Nations: 
to perfect “the triangle of development, freedom and 
peace” (A/51/PV.88, p. 13). The Secretary-General’s 
words still ring true today. We have travelled only part 
of the journey towards that goal. Considering our 
achievements over the past year, we can be satisfied 
with progress made in setting up the Human Rights 
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. The 
challenge now is to make those two new bodies truly 
effective. The welcome adoption of the United Nations 
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) 
reminds us of the efforts we must continue to make at 
regional and national levels. 
 New Zealand wants to see continuing reform high 
on the list of priorities for the sixty-first session in 
order to ensure that the United Nations can be as 
responsive as possible to the needs of Member States, 
 
 
21 06-53323 
 
and efficient in getting the best from the resources 
available to it. 
 Sixty years ago, New Zealand had high hopes for 
the United Nations. In 2006, we still do. New Zealand 
is a country that engages with the United Nations with 
no hidden agenda. What we say is what we mean. We 
engage with no other or hidden agenda. But those that 
do so pervert and weaken this Organization.  
 In 2006, at this meeting, New Zealand declares 
that we will continue to put our efforts behind the 
principles and policies that will make the United 
Nations strong. Traditionally, the General Assembly session 
provides an opportunity to conduct a review of the 
current situation in the world, identify major 
international issues and determine the role that the 
United Nations could play in resolving them.  
 I believe that we have every reason to conclude 
that there is a prevailing trend of growing awareness of 
the need to strengthen the collective foundations of 
international politics, as well as of the fact that there is 
no alternative to tackling problems through multilateral 
diplomacy. That trend is based on objective facts, for it 
reflects the realities of an emerging multipolar 
architecture of international relations. It is logical, 
because answers to global challenges and threats can 
only be found collectively. Finally, it is a manifestation 
of historical continuity, because we are revisiting the 
same objective as the founding fathers of the United 
Nations were determined to pursue by enshrining in the 
Charter the principles for a system of collective 
security.  
 It is precisely such an approach, firmly grounded 
in international law, that can ensure the world’s 
sustainable development in this era of globalization. 
That requires a strengthened central role for the 
universal Organization in every area of international 
life. 
 We must of course continue to adapt the 
mechanisms and methods of the United Nations to the 
new environment. Much has been done as follow-up to 
the decisions of the 2005 World Summit: The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council have been established, and the reform process 
has been extended to management.  
 It is important that all our further work be based 
upon the fundamental principle of the universality of 
the United Nations. Patterns contrary to the Charter of 
the United Nations that exclude individual States or 
groups of States from participating meaningfully in the 
activities of the Organization or that introduce a single 
system of values into the work of the Secretariat are 
unsustainable. Let us not forget that the United Nations 
belongs to us all. Moreover, administrative reform 
should not lead to the bureaucracy taking over the 
management of the Organization, thereby jeopardizing 
the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. 
 A trend towards collective action has also spread 
beyond the structures of the United Nations. During 
Russia’s presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8), there 
was greater interaction between the G-8 and other 
leading countries and international organizations. Over 
  
 
06-53005 28 
 
the past 12 months our dialogue partners have actively 
contributed to Saint Petersburg summit documents on 
every main agenda item, including global energy 
security, education and controlling infectious diseases.  
 A new and genuinely collaborative type of 
interaction between the G-8 and Africa is now 
emerging in this era of globalization, as the needs of 
the continent are reflected in the mainstream of world 
development rather than being viewed as issues 
divorced from overall trends.  
 The G-8 does not have a monopoly over the 
decisions taken at Saint Petersburg. All States are 
invited to participate in their implementation. 
 Regional organizations and cooperation and 
coordination between those organizations and the 
United Nations have also strengthened in maintaining 
international peace and security. Issues pertaining to 
that were discussed yesterday at the special ministerial 
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.5529). Once 
again, we are dealing here with an important dimension 
of collective action by the international community. 
 The Commonwealth of Independent States has 
made a significant contribution to such interaction. To 
address common problems, specific actions have been 
taken within the Commonwealth area, primarily within 
the Eurasian Economic Community and the Collective 
Security Treaty Organization. Further substantive and 
resolute efforts are being made in the context of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which developed 
and launched and initiative to establish a partnership 
network for multilateral organizations in the Asia-
Pacific region. Development patterns in that region 
will largely determine the future contours of our planet.  
 Multilateral institutions in Latin America have 
also become stronger, and the development of the 
African Union is gaining momentum. 
 At their recent Summit in Havana, heads of State 
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement 
expressed their support for a collective search — 
within the context of the central role of the United 
Nations — for agreed solutions to problems 
confronting the world community. 
 Europe, of course, is not outside the common 
trend towards collective examination and resolution of 
common problems. In that connection, we also see 
growing awareness of the fact that security and 
prosperity are indivisible. We expect NATO to 
transform itself from a defence alliance into something 
more contemporary that would be in line with 
principles of transparency and collective response and 
based upon a universal legal foundation.  
 We have been watching with keen interest the 
emerging foreign policy and security mechanisms of 
the European Union. Russia is prepared to cooperate 
with multilateral structures in the Euro-Atlantic space 
and other regions of the world. In fact, we already have 
effective common mechanisms with many of them. 
 Collective efforts are also needed to further 
develop international law, primarily within the context 
of countering new threats. The United Nations Global 
Counter-terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288), which 
was recently adopted by consensus, is an important 
contribution in terms of strengthening the legal basis 
for the anti-terrorist coalition and ensuring a 
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. It is not 
only about countering all terrorist manifestations and 
ideologies, it is also about eliminating the problems 
that give rise to terrorism. The next step will be to 
agree upon a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention. 
 It is necessary to secure the achievements that 
have been made by taking practical steps. In the course 
of Russia’s presidency of the G-8, the Second 
Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes 
From Afghanistan was held, where additional measures 
were approved aimed at mobilizing the international 
community to counter the terrorism-related drug threat 
originating from Afghanistan. Another international 
meeting will be held in Moscow next November to 
focus on developing modalities for government-
business partnerships in countering terrorism. 
 What is needed today are more proactive 
measures to prevent lethal weapons from falling into 
the hands of non-State actors, as well as the consistent 
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 
(2004) and other counter-terrorism resolutions of the 
Council. The Russia-United States global initiative to 
combat nuclear terrorism, which was launched at Saint 
Petersburg by Presidents Vladimir V. Putin and George 
W. Bush last July, should be an important tool in 
preventing a linkage between weapons of mass 
destruction and terrorism. That initiative invites 
interested States to act collectively. 
 The ever-growing demand for the unique 
peacekeeping capabilities of the United Nations also 
calls for a collective effort. Not all of those capabilities 
 
 
29 06-53005 
 
have been utilized to the fullest. Utilizing the 
capabilities of the Military Staff Committee, as well as 
those of regional organizations, on the basis of the 
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter 
would be helpful. 
 It is encouraging to see a more active role being 
played by Africans themselves in peacemaking 
operations in Africa — an undertaking spearheaded by 
the African Union and supported by the United 
Nations.  
 In a number of crisis situations conditions are 
gradually emerging for a transition to post-conflict 
reconstruction. It is our hope that the Declaration on 
Cooperation and Future Action in Stabilization and 
Reconstruction adopted at the Saint Petersburg G-8 
Summit will help us complement the efforts of the 
United Nations and regional organizations at this 
critically important period of transition to 
peacebuilding. 
 A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli 
conflict remains a central task for the world 
community. Many of today’s threats have come 
together in that region, and the key to resolving them is 
most often to be found there. In that connection, I 
should first like to mention the truly global challenge 
posed by the need to prevent a schism between 
civilizations.  
 We welcome the emerging prospects for a 
national agreement in the Palestinian territories, as 
well as for the resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli 
talks. It is important to continue to encourage the 
parties to meet their respective obligations, with the 
clear understanding that any progress towards the 
objectives set out by the international community will 
inevitably be gradual and that any attempt to act in an 
all-or-nothing spirit will be counterproductive and 
could once again plunge the region into confrontation. 
 The recent war in Lebanon demonstrated the 
great fragility of the situation in the Middle East and 
the acute need for a comprehensive approach along all 
tracks. That presupposes the involvement of all 
countries and parties. Without their participation it will 
be impossible to reach any viable negotiated solution. 
It is also clear that the road to comprehensive peace 
will not be an easy one, but now is the time. The 
initiative of the League of Arab States to convene an 
international conference should contribute to finding 
the proper framework for that undertaking. The Quartet 
of international mediators should also make a key 
contribution to the process. 
 A breakthrough on a Middle East settlement 
could provide the positive momentum so wanting in 
the region. It could also facilitate the solution of other 
burning problems in the region and in neighbouring 
countries. That is particularly true as regards efforts 
aimed at stabilizing the situation in Iraq, where 
attempts to contain wanton violence and chaos have 
thus far proved unsuccessful. Dozens of people, mainly 
civilians, continue to die in Iraq every day. Five 
officials of the Russian embassy in Baghdad have also 
fallen victim to that barbarous massacre. A resolution 
in Iraq will be possible only through concerted efforts. 
That requires the involvement in the political process 
of all major Iraqi interests and the implementation of 
the plans of that country’s Government to reach 
genuine national accord, with the concerted support of 
the international community, including all of Iraq’s 
neighbours. 
 We are, unfortunately, now witnessing growing 
significance of the use of force in world affairs; that 
undermines non-proliferation regimes. The feeling of a 
lack of predictability and stability in the area of 
security is becoming ever more pronounced. Against 
that background, the growing interest of many States in 
nuclear energy may give rise to concerns, given the 
trend towards the global proliferation of sensitive 
technologies.  
 Apart from current resolute steps to find 
negotiated solutions to individual problems — such as 
the Iranian nuclear programme and the problem of the 
Korean peninsula — there is a need for an urgent effort 
by the entire international community to systematically 
strengthen non-proliferation regimes on a generally 
acceptable basis, while ensuring that the benefits of 
peaceful atomic energy are legitimately accessible to 
all States.  
 President Vladimir V. Putin’s initiative to 
establish multilateral centres for nuclear fuel-cycle 
services, along with similar ideas proposed by the 
leadership of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) and proposals put forth by United States 
President George W. Bush, have found support among 
G-8 leaders. We are confident that the development and 
practical implementation of such approaches — in 
cooperation with all countries with an interest in 
modern and safe nuclear energy — will make it 
  
 
06-53005 30 
 
possible to resolve non-proliferation issues in a non-
confrontational manner. 
 As in other areas, the obsession with sanctions — 
applied without calculating their consequences — 
might produce unpredictable results. It is absolutely 
necessary to eliminate the loopholes in the non-
proliferation regimes, but that should be done through 
clear and non-discriminatory approaches, without 
creating grounds for suspicion regarding the existence 
of some hidden agenda. 
 Stagnation in the international disarmament 
process does not help to resolve non-proliferation 
problems. Here again, we need concerted action, for 
this is a matter of collective security. 
 In the area of strategic arms, the United States-
Russian agreements play an enormously important role. 
Their significance goes far beyond the framework of 
bilateral relations, considering that virtually all 
members of the international community benefit from 
strategic stability. We support the consistent 
development of the United States-Russian bilateral 
disarmament process, as was stated by our Presidents 
in Saint Petersburg in July.  
 Closely related to that are issues related to anti-
ballistic missiles, in particular within the context of the 
existing plans of the United States. In that context, 
there is a need for complete transparency and for an 
analysis of the consequences for strategic stability. 
 The situation surrounding the Treaty on 
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe continues to 
cause grave concern. The old Treaty, based on the 
realities of confrontation between military blocs, has 
lost its relevance, while NATO is blocking the entry 
into force of the Agreement on its adaptation. 
 At the same time, reconfiguration of the military 
architecture on the European continent is under way. At 
its heart is an expanding military alliance. Such virtual 
arms control becomes meaningless as it turns into a 
one-way street.  
 It is also necessary to revitalize multilateral 
disarmament approaches. That agenda should include 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, non-deployment of weapons in outer 
space, conclusion of a fissile material cut-off treaty and 
ensuring information security. Nuclear-weapon-free 
zones play an important role, and we welcome the 
creation of such a zone in Central Asia. 
 The overall task is to reinvigorate the efforts of 
the international community in the area of disarmament 
and arms control, within the framework of the 
Conference on Disarmament and other relevant United 
Nations bodies.  
 The 2005 World Summit unanimously reaffirmed 
that peace, security and development are inseparable. 
With that in mind, we are prepared to engage in 
collective discussions and support further joint 
pragmatic steps with a view to improving the 
efficiency of the social and economic activities of the 
entire United Nations system. 
 The Russian Federation realizes its responsibility 
as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, 
and is devoting increasing attention to development 
assistance. Thus far, Russia has written off or has 
undertaken to write off $11.3 billion of the debt of 
African countries, including more than $2.2 billion 
within the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt 
Initiative. New steps are planned in that area. Russia 
now ranks third in absolute figures of debt relief and 
first in terms of the ratio of debt relief to gross 
domestic product. We have also increased our 
contributions to other international development 
assistance mechanisms, including through United 
Nations institutions and funds and the Bretton Woods 
institutions. 
 Today, I cannot fail to express my sincere 
appreciation and praise to the Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan. For many years, during the most difficult times 
for world politics, he has carried out his duties with 
dignity. Thanks largely to the efforts of Kofi Annan 
and to his ability to take the lead while remaining a 
realist in the face of severe challenges, we have 
managed to make progress in strengthening the United 
Nations. 
 Today the United Nations is relevant as never 
before. We do not have to create it anew. In the course 
of reforming the United Nations in accordance with the 
dictates of the time, it is incumbent upon us all to 
reaffirm by action our commitment to the world 
Organization, which draws its strength from our trust 
in it and in its unique legitimacy. Without the United 
Nations and its Charter to rely upon, it would prove 
impossible to ensure a more reliable and democratic 
system of collective security that would respond to the 
dictates of our time. I am grateful for the privilege of 
speaking to the General Assembly. 
 Last week, America and the world marked the 
fifth anniversary of the attacks that filled another 
September morning with death and suffering. On that 
terrible day, extremists killed nearly 3,000 innocent 
people, including citizens of dozens of nations 
represented right here in this Hall. Since then, the 
enemies of humanity have continued their campaign of 
murder. Al-Qaida and those inspired by its extremist 
ideology have attacked more than two dozen nations. 
And recently, a different group of extremists 
deliberately provoked a terrible conflict in Lebanon. At 
the start of the twenty-first century, it is clear that the 
world is engaged in a great ideological struggle 
between extremists who use terror as a weapon to 
create fear and moderate people who work for peace. 
 Five years ago, I stood at this rostrum and called 
on the community of nations to defend civilization and 
build a more hopeful future. This is still the great 
challenge of our time. It is the calling of our 
generation. This morning, I want to speak about the 
more hopeful world that is within our reach — a world 
beyond terror, where ordinary men and women are free 
to determine their own destiny, where the voices of 
moderation are empowered and where the extremists 
are marginalized by the peaceful majority. This world 
can be ours if we seek it and if we work together. 
 The principles of this world beyond terror can be 
found in the very first sentence of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. This document declares 
that the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of 
the human family [are] the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world”. One of the authors of 
this document was a Lebanese diplomat named Charles 
Malik, who would go on to become President of this 
Assembly. Mr. Malik insisted that these principles 
apply equally to all people, of all religions, in all 
regions — including the men and women of the Arab 
world that was his home. 
 In the nearly six decades since that document was 
approved, we have seen the forces of freedom and 
moderation transform entire continents. Sixty years 
after a terrible war, Europe is now whole, free and at 
peace, and Asia has seen freedom progress and 
hundreds of millions of people lifted out of desperate 
poverty. The words of the Universal Declaration are as 
true today as they were when they were written. As 
liberty flourishes, nations grow in tolerance, and hope, 
and peace. And we are seeing the bright future begin to 
take root in the broader Middle East. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East have 
been dramatic, and we see the results in this Hall. Five 
years ago, Afghanistan was ruled by the brutal Taliban 
regime, and its seat in this body was contested. Now 
this seat is held by the freely elected Government of 
Afghanistan, which is represented today by President 
Karzai. Five years ago, Iraq’s seat in this body was 
 
 
9 06-52731 
 
held by a dictator who killed his citizens, invaded his 
neighbours and showed his contempt for the world by 
defying more than a dozen Security Council 
resolutions. Now Iraq’s seat is held by a democratic 
Government that embodies the aspirations of the Iraqi 
people, represented today by President Talabani. With 
these changes, more than 50 million people have been 
given a voice in this Hall for the first time in decades. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East are 
happening gradually, but they are real. Algeria has held 
its first competitive presidential election, and the 
military remained neutral. The United Arab Emirates 
recently announced that half of its seats in the Federal 
National Council will be chosen by elections. Kuwait 
held elections in which women were allowed to vote 
and run for office for the first time. Citizens have voted 
in municipal elections in Saudi Arabia, in 
parliamentary elections in Jordan and Bahrain and in 
multiparty presidential elections in Yemen and in 
Egypt. These are important steps, and the Governments 
should continue to move forward with other reforms 
that show that they trust their people. Every nation that 
travels the road to freedom moves at a different pace, 
and the democracies they build will reflect their own 
cultures and traditions. But the destination is the same: 
a free society where people live at peace with each 
other and at peace with the world. 
 Some have argued that the democratic changes 
we are seeing in the Middle East are destabilizing the 
region. This argument rests on a false assumption: that 
the Middle East was stable to begin with. The reality is 
that the stability we thought we saw in the Middle East 
was a mirage. For decades, millions of men and women 
in the region have been trapped in oppression and 
hopelessness. And these conditions left a generation 
disillusioned and made this region a breeding ground 
for extremism. 
 Imagine what it is like to be a young person 
living in a country that is not moving toward reform. 
You are 21 years old, and while your peers in other 
parts of the world are casting their ballots for the first 
time, you are powerless to change the course of your 
Government. While your peers in other parts of the 
world have received educations that prepare them for 
the opportunities of a global economy, you have been 
fed propaganda and conspiracy theories that blame 
others for your country’s shortcomings. And 
everywhere you turn, you hear extremists who tell you 
that you can escape your misery and regain your 
dignity through violence and terror and martyrdom. For 
many across the broader Middle East, this is the dismal 
choice presented every day. 
 Every civilized nation, including those in the 
Muslim world, must support those in the region who 
are offering a more hopeful alternative. We know that 
when people have a voice in their future they are less 
likely to blow themselves up in suicide attacks. We 
know that when leaders are accountable to their people, 
they are more likely to seek national greatness in the 
achievements of their citizens, rather than in terror and 
conquest. So we must stand with democratic leaders 
and moderate reformers across the broader Middle 
East. We must give voice to the hopes of decent men 
and women who want for their children the same things 
we want for ours. We must seek stability through a free 
and just Middle East where the extremists are 
marginalized by millions of citizens in control of their 
own destinies. 
 Today, I would like to speak directly to the 
people across the broader Middle East. My country 
desires peace. Extremists in your midst spread 
propaganda claiming that the West is engaged in a war 
against Islam. This propaganda is false, and its purpose 
is to confuse you and justify acts of terror. We respect 
Islam, but we will protect our people from those who 
pervert Islam to sow death and destruction. Our goal is 
to help you build a more tolerant and hopeful society 
that honours people of all faiths and promotes peace. 
 To the people of Iraq: nearly 12 million of you 
braved the car bombers and assassins last December to 
vote in free elections. The world saw you hold up 
purple ink-stained fingers, and your courage filled us 
with admiration. You have stood firm in the face of 
horrendous acts of terror and sectarian violence, and 
we will not abandon you in your struggle to build a 
free nation. America and our coalition partners will 
continue to stand with the democratic Government you 
elected. We will continue to help you secure the 
international assistance and investment you need to 
create jobs and opportunity, working with the United 
Nations and through the International Compact with 
Iraq endorsed here in New York yesterday. We will 
continue to train those of you who stepped forward to 
fight the enemies of freedom. We will not yield the 
future of your country to terrorists and extremists. In 
return, your leaders must rise to the challenges your 
country is facing and make difficult choices to bring 
security and prosperity. Working together, we will help 
  
 
06-52731 10 
 
your democracy succeed, so that it can become a 
beacon of hope for millions in the Muslim world. 
 To the people of Afghanistan: together, we 
overthrew the Taliban regime that brought misery into 
your lives and harboured terrorists who brought death 
to the citizens of many nations. Since then, we have 
watched you choose your leaders in free elections and 
build a democratic Government. You can be proud of 
these achievements. We respect your courage and your 
determination to live in peace and freedom. We will 
continue to stand with you to defend your democratic 
gains. 
 Today, forces from more than 40 countries, 
including members of the NATO alliance, are bravely 
serving side by side with you against the extremists 
who want to bring down the free Government you have 
established. We will help you defeat these enemies and 
build a free Afghanistan that will never again oppress 
you or be a safe haven for terrorists. 
 To the people of Lebanon: last year, you inspired 
the world when you came out into the streets to 
demand your independence from Syrian dominance. 
You drove Syrian forces from your country and you 
re-established democracy. Since then, you have been 
tested by the fighting that began with Hizbollah’s 
unprovoked attacks on Israel. Many of you have seen 
your homes and your communities caught in crossfire. 
We see your suffering, and the world is helping you to 
rebuild your country and helping you deal with the 
armed extremists who are undermining your 
democracy by acting as a State within a State. 
 The United Nations has passed a good resolution 
that has authorized an international force, led by 
France and Italy, to help you restore Lebanese 
sovereignty over Lebanese soil. For many years, 
Lebanon was a model of democracy and pluralism and 
openness in the region — and it will be again. 
 To the people of Iran: the United States respects 
you. We respect your country. We admire your rich 
history, your vibrant culture and your many 
contributions to civilization. You deserve an 
opportunity to determine your own future, an economy 
that rewards your intelligence and your talents and a 
society that allows you to fulfil your tremendous 
potential. The greatest obstacle to this future is that 
your rulers have chosen to deny you liberty and to use 
your nation’s resources to fund terrorism, and fuel 
extremism, and pursue nuclear weapons. 
 The United Nations has passed a clear resolution 
requiring that the regime in Tehran meet its 
international obligations. Iran must abandon its nuclear 
weapons ambitions. Despite what the regime tells you, 
we have no objection to Iran’s pursuit of a truly 
peaceful nuclear power programme. We are working 
toward a diplomatic solution to this crisis, and as we 
do, we look to the day when you can live in freedom 
and America and Iran can be good friends and close 
partners in the cause of peace. 
 To the people of Syria: your land is home to a 
great people with a proud tradition of learning and 
commerce. Today your rulers have allowed your 
country to become a crossroad for terrorism. In your 
midst, Hamas and Hizbollah are working to destabilize 
the region, and your Government is turning your 
country into a tool of Iran. This is increasing your 
country’s isolation from the world. Your Government 
must choose a better way forward by ending its support 
for terror, and living in peace with your neighbours, 
and opening the way to a better life for you and your 
families. 
 To the people of Darfur: you have suffered 
unspeakable violence, and my nation has called these 
atrocities what they are: genocide. For the last two 
years, America joined with the international 
community to provide emergency food aid and support 
for an African Union peacekeeping force. Yet your 
suffering continues. The world must step forward to 
provide additional humanitarian aid, and we must 
strengthen the African Union force that has done good 
work but is not strong enough to protect you. The 
Security Council has approved a resolution that would 
transform the African Union force into a blue-helmeted 
force that is larger and more robust. To increase its 
strength and effectiveness, NATO nations should 
provide logistics and other support. The regime in 
Khartoum is stopping the deployment of this force. If 
the Sudanese Government does not approve this 
peacekeeping force quickly, the United Nations must 
act. Your lives and the credibility of the United Nations 
are at stake. So today I am announcing that I am 
naming a presidential Special Envoy — former 
Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, Andrew Natsios — to lead 
America’s efforts to resolve the outstanding disputes 
and help bring peace to your land. 
 The world must also stand up for peace in the 
Holy Land. I am committed to two democratic States, 
 
 
11 06-52731 
 
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and 
security. I am committed to a Palestinian State that has 
territorial integrity and will live peacefully with the 
Jewish State of Israel. This is the vision set forth in the 
road map, and helping the parties to reach this goal is 
one of the great objectives of my presidency. The 
Palestinian people have suffered from decades of 
corruption and violence and the daily humiliation of 
occupation. Israeli citizens have endured brutal acts of 
terrorism and constant fear of attack since the birth of 
their nation. Many brave men and women have made 
the commitment to peace. Yet extremists in the region 
are stirring up hatred and trying to prevent these 
moderate voices from prevailing. 
 This struggle is unfolding in the Palestinian 
territories. Earlier this year, the Palestinian people 
voted in a free election. The leaders of Hamas 
campaigned on a platform of ending corruption and 
improving the lives of the Palestinian people, and they 
prevailed. The world is waiting to see whether the 
Hamas Government will follow through on its 
promises or pursue an extremist agenda. The world has 
sent a clear message to the leaders of Hamas: serve the 
interests of the Palestinian people, abandon terror, 
recognize Israel’s right to exist, honour agreements and 
work for peace. 
 President Abbas is committed to peace and to his 
people’s aspirations for a State of their own. Prime 
Minister Olmert is committed to peace, and has said he 
intends to meet with President Abbas to make real 
progress on the outstanding issues between them. I 
believe that peace can be achieved and that a 
democratic Palestinian State is possible. I hear from 
leaders in the region who want to help. I have directed 
Secretary of State Rice to lead a diplomatic effort to 
engage moderate leaders across the region to help the 
Palestinians reform their security services and support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come 
together to resolve their differences. 
 Prime Minister Blair has indicated that his 
country will work with partners in Europe to help 
strengthen the governing institutions of the Palestinian 
administration. We welcome his initiative. Countries 
like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt have made clear 
that they are willing to contribute the diplomatic and 
financial assistance necessary to help these efforts 
succeed. I am optimistic that, by supporting the forces 
of democracy and moderation, we can help Israelis and 
Palestinians build a more hopeful future and achieve 
the peace in the Holy Land that we all want. 
 Freedom, by its nature, cannot be imposed; it 
must be chosen. From Beirut to Baghdad, people are 
making the choice for freedom. And the nations 
gathered in this Hall must make a choice as well. Will 
we support the moderates and reformers who are 
working for change across the Middle East, or will we 
yield the future to the terrorists and extremists? 
America has made its choice: we will stand with the 
moderates and reformers. 
 Recently, a courageous group of Arab and 
Muslim intellectuals wrote me a letter. In it, they said 
this: “The shore of reform is the only one on which any 
lights appear, even though the journey demands 
courage, patience and perseverance”. The United 
Nations was created to make that journey possible. 
Together we must support the dreams of good and 
decent people who are working to transform a troubled 
region. And by doing so, we will advance the high 
ideals on which this institution was founded. Once again, we have convened 
at this seat of the Organization of the peoples of the 
world, representing the whole of humanity and coming 
from all corners of the world. Our pilgrimage this year 
is tinged with sadness, because we are also paying 
  
 
06-52731 12 
 
homage to one of the most outstanding servants of the 
United Nations, a native son of Africa, Kofi Annan, 
whose term of office will soon come to an end. 
 The Group of 77 and China, as well as my own 
country, South Africa, sincerely thanks the Secretary-
General for the selfless and dedicated work he carried 
out during one of the most challenging periods in the 
history of this Organization. In the midst of increasing 
poverty and underdevelopment during an era of 
unprecedented wealth accumulation and technological 
advances, and as the river that divides the rich and the 
poor zones of the metaphorical global village ever 
widened, the Secretary-General never lost focus on the 
imperatives of our time. 
 We thank him for never losing sight of the fact 
that poverty and underdevelopment remain the biggest 
threats to the progress that has been achieved, and that 
equality among nations big and small is central to the 
survival, relevance and credibility of this global 
Organization. 
 We are only six years into the twenty-first 
century. Those who populate the poorest of the regions 
of the world — that is, Africa — have boldly declared 
that it will be an African century. It is a century that 
billions of citizens of the developing world and other 
poor and marginalized people want to transform into a 
century for all humanity. 
 If the wishes of the majority of the world could 
turn into reality, this would be a century free of wars, 
free of internecine conflicts, free of hunger, free of 
preventable disease, free of want, free of 
environmental degradation and free of greed and 
corruption. Indeed, we began the century with great 
hopes for a better, peaceful and more humane world. 
 Together, we crafted comprehensive plans and 
bold declarations to defeat the scourge of poverty and 
underdevelopment. Together, we committed ourselves, 
with what seemed like renewed vigour, to transform 
the United Nations to reflect the modern reality that is 
defined by free, sovereign and equal nations. 
 However, six years into the twenty-first century, 
dispassionate observers might well challenge us to 
achieve our noble and lofty objectives, pointing to the 
terrorists’ acts that welcomed us into the new century. 
They might emphasize the unilateralism that threatens 
to negate the democratic advances of the last decades 
of the twentieth century and draw attention to renewed 
conflicts and wars that seem to compete with the 
destructive fury of the conflicts of the last century. 
 They would remind us that for a decade and 
more, some of the developed nations have consistently 
refused to implement the outcomes and agreements of 
this world body that would help to alleviate the 
wretchedness of the poor. Thus, Madam President, 
when you correctly urge us to implement a global 
partnership for development, we, the members of the 
Group of 77 and China, who represent the poor people 
of the world, understand you to be communicating a 
message that we should give substance to the common 
commitments we solemnly made at this supreme 
Organization of the nations of the world. 
 Yet, this common commitment for a global 
partnership for development cannot be transformed 
into reality when the rich and powerful insist on an 
unequal relationship with the poor. A global 
partnership for development is impossible in the 
absence of a pact of mutual responsibility between the 
giver and the recipient. It is impossible when the rich 
unilaterally demand the right to set the agenda and 
conditions for the implementation of commonly agreed 
programmes. 
 We who represent the poor know as a matter of 
fact that these billions of poor people are increasingly 
becoming impatient, because every year they hear us 
adopt declaration after declaration and yet nothing 
practical is done to assuage the hunger pains that keep 
them awake at night. Only few and selected agreements 
are implemented, with outcomes that are clearly 
insufficient to alleviate the excruciating pain of their 
children who cannot cry anymore because to do so is to 
invite more pain. 
 Those of us who were at the 14th Summit of the 
Non-Aligned Movement in Havana heard this message 
very clearly emanating from all the countries and 
organizations that spoke. Those who are capable of 
listening should take note of what that great son of 
India and South Africa, Mahatma Gandhi, said on this 
matter: 
 “The test of friendship is assistance in adversity, 
and that too, unconditional assistance. 
Cooperation which needs consideration is a 
commercial contract and not friendship. 
Conditional cooperation is like adulterated cement 
which does not bind.” 
 
 
13 06-52731 
 
 Precisely because of the absence of a global 
partnership for development, the Doha Development 
Round has almost collapsed. Indeed, because the rich 
implicitly invoked the slogan of an over-confident 
European political party of the 1960s, and directed this 
uncaring declaration to the poor of today — “I’m 
alright, Jack!” — we have not implemented the 
Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development, 
thus making it difficult for the majority of the 
developing countries, especially those in Africa, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
and we have reduced the Johannesburg Plan of 
Implementation to an insignificant, and perhaps 
forgotten, piece of paper. 
 Part of the problem with this unequal relationship 
is the imposition of conditions on developing countries 
and the constant shifting of the goalposts, whenever the 
poor adhere to each and every one of those conditions. 
 Among other things, we have recently seen an 
outbreak of great social instability across Europe and 
other reactions of the poor to their miserable conditions 
in different parts of the world, which calls into 
question the image of a seemingly harmonious well-
woven tapestry of diverse groups, because we continue 
to fail to implement our own decisions as taken at the 
United Nations World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance. Those who coined the slogan: “I’m alright, 
Jack!” were communicating, whether consciously or 
not, a message and an attitude that said “I don’t care 
about my neighbour as long as my family and I eat 
well and sleep peacefully” and that “It is not my 
responsibility to ensure that my poor neighbour also 
eats well and sleeps peacefully.” 
 Today, the attitude among some of the rich also 
communicates the same message to the rest of the 
world, namely, “I’m alright, Jack!”, even when they are 
acutely aware that many in their neighbourhood are 
dying from hunger, preventable diseases and abject 
poverty. 
 This happens also in the cruelly ironic situation 
where resources flow from those who have little to 
those who have plenty. Although the rich and powerful 
know the miserable life circumstances of the poor and 
have solemnly committed themselves to the collective 
effort to reverse those conditions, their attitude and 
response resembles that of the Biblical Cain, who, after 
he killed his brother, Abel, and the Lord asked him 
“Where is Abel, your brother?”, replied: “I do not 
know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” 
 Perhaps, all of us, especially the rich, should heed 
the words of one of the great sons of the United States 
of America, who perished because of his belief in 
equality and justice for all human beings and whose 
civil rights movement is currently marking its golden 
jubilee. Martin Luther King Jr. warned that 
 “As long as there is poverty in the world I can 
never be rich, even if I have a billion dollars. As 
long as diseases are rampant and millions of 
people in this world cannot expect to live more 
than 28 or 30 years, I can never be totally healthy 
even if I just got a good check-up at the Mayo 
Clinic. I can never be what I ought to be until you 
are what you ought to be. This is the way our 
world is made. No individual or nation can stand 
out boasting of being independent. We are 
interdependent.” 
 The majority of the human race is entitled to ask 
the question whether the rich respond the way they do 
because further impoverishment of the poor is to the 
advantage of the rich, giving meaning to the old 
observation that the rich get richer as the poor get 
poorer. As the divide between the rich and the poor 
widens and becomes a serious global crisis, we see an 
increase in the concentration of economic, military, 
technological, media and other power. 
 Something is seriously wrong when people risk 
life and limb travelling in suffocating containers to 
Western Europe in search of a better life. Something is 
wrong when many Africans traverse, on foot, the harsh, 
hot and hostile Sahara Desert to reach European 
shores. Something is wrong when walls are built to 
prevent poor neighbours from entering those countries 
where they seek better opportunities. Something is 
indeed wrong when all these people, whose fault is 
merely the fact that their lives are defined by poverty, 
try desperately to reach countries where they believe 
the conditions of their existence could improve, only to 
meet hostile, and at times, barbaric and inhuman 
receptions. 
 In part, the United Nations is unable to fulfil 
some of the objectives set by the founders in San 
Francisco because, in truth, it does not reflect the 
expansion of the global family of free nations. Because 
this Organization of the peoples of the world has 
grown to encompass the entire world, many had 
  
 
06-52731 14 
 
thought that it would be logical that this custodian of 
global democracy would itself serve as a beacon in our 
continuing quest for democracy in all our countries. 
 Clearly, for the United Nations to continue 
occupying its moral high ground, it has to reform itself 
urgently and lead by practical example, showing what 
it means to be democratic. Even as we face the cold 
reality of the indifference of many among the rich and 
powerful, this Organization of the peoples of the world 
has continued to offer hope and the possibility of the 
fulfilment of the aspirations of the majority of the 
peoples of the world. 
 All of us, including those who hesitate to 
implement the commonly agreed positions, agree that 
this Organization has entrenched the correct 
understanding that development is a right and is central 
to the advancement of humanity. All of us, individually 
and collectively and as Members of the United 
Nations, must do whatever is necessary to develop and 
implement policies and strategies aimed at the 
achievement of sustainable development. It is 
important that international organizations such as the 
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) and others should, without any 
equivocation, seriously embark on the implementation 
of all the commitments that we have made as the 
international community. 
 This Organization of the peoples of the world 
cannot merely note the unacceptable situation that 
Africa will not achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals by 2015. We need further programmes, focused 
and concrete, to accelerate development in Africa and 
avoid the possibility of that continent sinking further 
into the morass of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 Because we are our brothers’ and sisters’ keepers, 
we have the responsibility to end the rhetoric and 
implement programmes that ensure that all human 
beings live decent, humane and prosperous lives. 
 On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well 
as my own country, South Africa, I take this 
opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, 
for the great work he did in steering this Organization 
during this past year as President of the General 
Assembly. 
 We are honoured to welcome Her Excellency 
Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-first session, and we 
wish her well in her important work. Madam President, 
we pledge to do whatever is necessary to make your 
work easier, so that through your efforts, the poor can 
regain full confidence in the ability of the United 
Nations to improve their conditions of life. 
 Every day the masses cry out in pain, frustration 
and anger. Every day they ask whether there is 
anybody who stops to hear their voices, anybody who 
listens and who is ready to respond to their heartfelt 
plea for the restoration of their dignity. I 
wish to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, 
on your election as President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. I am confident that, under your 
guidance, this session will achieve full success. I also 
wish to pay tribute to Mr. Jan Eliasson, President of the 
last session, and to Secretary-General Kofi Annan. I 
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
the Republic of Montenegro on becoming a Member of 
the United Nations. 
 The world is experiencing profound and complex 
changes. Peace, development and cooperation have 
become trends of our times and represent the common 
aspirations of all countries and peoples in the world. 
However, the world is not tranquil and the issue of 
development remains prominent. There is still a long 
way to go in the pursuit of durable peace and common 
development. Recently, the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, the Iranian nuclear issue and the Lebanese-
Israeli conflict have flared up, adversely affecting 
regional and global stability and testing the wisdom, 
unity and patience of the international community. 
  
 
06-53317 22 
 
 To maintain peace is the shared mission of the 
entire international community. Consultations based on 
equality and peaceful negotiations are the only 
effective means to resolve disputes. China, as a 
permanent member of the Security Council and a 
member of the international community, will continue 
to make every effort to achieve a peaceful resolution of 
hotspot issues. 
 As regards the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula, China is committed to maintaining peace 
and stability on the Peninsula, making it free of nuclear 
weapons and promoting the six-party talks. During the 
Security Council’s deliberations in July regarding the 
missile tests by the Democratic People’s Republic of 
Korea and the related resolution, China made strenuous 
efforts to engage the parties concerned, in an effort to 
maintain peace on the Peninsula and in North-East Asia 
and preserve the unity and authority of the Security 
Council and safeguard the progress already made in the 
six-party talks. 
 Long-standing antagonism and mistrust between 
the parties concerned is the main cause of the current 
difficulty. All parties should be patient and pragmatic 
and act with vision to reduce differences and remove 
obstacles through dialogue. The six-party talks remain 
an effective mechanism to enhance understanding and 
trust and resolve the Korean nuclear issue. We hope 
that the parties involved will be cool-headed and more 
flexible, expand common ground, meet each other 
halfway and work together for the early resumption of 
the six-party talks and progressive implementation of 
the joint statement. That is the only viable solution to 
the Korean nuclear issue. 
 With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, China 
calls for upholding the integrity of the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, and is opposed to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It has worked for a 
peaceful resolution of the issue in order to promote 
peace and stability in the Middle East. At the same 
time, the legitimate right of countries to the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy should be fully respected, 
provided they fulfil their relevant international 
obligations. 
 Diplomatic negotiation represents the best chance 
to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue and serve the 
interests of all parties. China hopes that the parties 
involved will exercise patience and restraint, continue 
to take a flexible approach and remain committed to 
the right course of pursuing a peaceful resolution. 
China will continue to play a constructive role in 
working for an appropriate settlement of the Iranian 
nuclear issue. 
 As regards the Lebanese-Israeli conflict, China 
opposes any move that will undermine peace and 
stability in the region, and calls for a comprehensive 
cessation of hostilities. China welcomes Security 
Council resolution 1701 (2006) and hopes that it will 
be strictly observed. China hopes that the parties 
concerned will reach an early agreement on a 
framework of political settlement that is both just and 
durable. 
 The question of Palestine is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. The peace process should be re-
started in keeping with the relevant resolutions of the 
United Nations and the principle of land for peace, in 
the interest of reaching an early and comprehensive 
settlement of the Middle East issue, including the 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, so that the countries 
involved can live in harmony and the region can enjoy 
durable peace. 
 The United Nations has played an instrumental 
role in resolving regional flashpoints this year. But the 
Organization also faces major challenges. In the new 
international environment, to enhance its role through 
reform is in the common interest of humankind. The 
United Nations needs to take resolute steps in carrying 
out reform. The United Nations should develop in a 
way that promotes the purposes and principles of its 
Charter, upholds the unity and cooperation of the 
Organization and serves the collective interests of its 
Members. The reform of the United Nations should be 
comprehensive in coverage, and progress should be 
made in security, development, human rights and other 
fields. More should be done to promote development 
and facilitate the realization of the Millennium 
Development Goals. The reform of the Organization 
should, as far as possible, satisfy the needs of its 
Member States, particularly those from the developing 
world. The reform should be a democratic process and 
full consultations should be conducted to reach 
widespread consensus. Major controversial issues 
should be handled with caution and dealt with through 
in-depth consultations. 
 China welcomes the progress made in reforming 
the United Nations, in particular the progress in 
implementing the World Summit Outcome. We will 
 
 
23 06-53317 
 
pledge $3 million to the United Nations Peacebuilding 
Fund. We will continue to work with other countries to 
make progress in the reform of the United Nations, 
strengthen the unity and authority of the Organization 
and increase its efficiency and capacity to respond to 
challenges. 
 As the chief administrator of the United Nations, 
the Secretary-General has an important role to play. In 
the election of the next Secretary-General, China will 
firmly support an Asian candidate. We are convinced 
that Asia can produce a competent and well-respected 
Secretary-General acceptable to all Member States. 
 The scale of assessments for the apportionment of 
the expenses of the United Nations involves the 
interests of all Member States and constitutes the 
financial foundation of the Organization. All Member 
States have an obligation to pay their assessments on 
time and in full. The ability to pay is the basic 
principle governing the scale of assessments. It should 
be adhered to, as it has proved effective and represents 
the general consensus of Member States. Over the 
years, China has honoured its financial obligations in 
good faith and has made appropriate contributions to 
the budget of the United Nations. As China’s economy 
grows, we are prepared to increase our contributions to 
the Organization’s budget in accordance with the 
principle of ability to pay. We are ready to take part in 
relevant discussions in a constructive way, and hope 
that a fair and equitable formula will be reached on the 
basis of extensive consultations. 
 Without overall development, global peace and 
progress cannot be sustained. In addition to developing 
the concept of partnership and improving its 
modalities, all countries should honour our 
commitment to the global partnership for development 
set out in the Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey 
Consensus, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation 
and last year’s World Summit Outcome.  
 Countries should shoulder the primary 
responsibility for their own development and 
implement comprehensive development strategies in 
keeping with the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs). 
 The international community — and developed 
countries in particular — should increase development 
assistance, promote international trade, technology 
transfers and investment, offer more extensive debt 
relief, provide more support to developing countries 
and respect their ownership of national development 
strategies. 
 The United Nations should play a bigger role in 
the field of development. It should create a fair and 
equitable framework to assess progress in meeting the 
MDGs and ensure that the United Nations Foundation 
and the various United Nations programmes and 
specialized agencies provide greater support for 
capacity-building programmes in developing countries. 
It should enhance coordination between international 
development policy and monetary, financial and 
trading regimes and create an enabling international 
environment for developing countries. 
 The suspension of the Doha round serves 
nobody’s interests. Members of the World Trade 
Organization should demonstrate political will, 
speedily resume the Doha development round and 
work towards a comprehensive and balanced outcome. 
 Non-governmental organizations should be 
encouraged to be more extensively and deeply involved 
in development cooperation. Their efforts and those of 
Governments should complement each other. 
 The establishment of the Human Rights Council 
echoes the calling of our times. Member States have a 
common responsibility to make the Council a dynamic 
and effective body. The Council should give greater 
attention to massive and gross violations of human 
rights caused by armed conflicts and should support 
the international community in its efforts to prevent 
conflicts, restore peace and combat terrorism in all its 
forms and manifestations. 
 The Council should attach equal importance to 
economic, social and cultural rights and encourage the 
international community and United Nations agencies 
to take effective measures to support countries in their 
efforts to realize their right to development.  
 The Council should continue to give special 
attention to the rights of women, children, persons with 
disabilities, migrant workers, ethnic minorities and 
other vulnerable groups to ensure that they enjoy the 
same level of respect as others. 
 The Council should promote dialogue and 
cooperation on an equal footing between countries of 
different social systems and levels of development, 
address human rights issues properly and reject double 
standards and politicization. 
  
 
06-53317 24 
 
 For decades, relations between China and African 
countries have been characterized by sincerity and 
mutual support. We have conducted our cooperation on 
the basis of equality and mutual benefit, while 
safeguarding sovereignty and independence and 
promoting social and economic development in our 
respective countries. All that has served to bring about 
significant benefits for the Chinese and African peoples 
alike. 
 China and Africa will hold a summit and the third 
ministerial meeting of the Forum on China-Africa 
Cooperation in Beijing from 3 to 5 November. 
Focusing on the theme of friendship, peace, 
cooperation and development, Chinese and African 
leaders will discuss ways to establish and foster a new 
type of strategic partnership featuring political equality 
and mutual trust, win-win economic cooperation and 
cultural exchanges. They will also draft a blueprint to 
enhance China-Africa cooperation. China is committed 
to peaceful development. Africa, which is home to the 
largest number of developing countries, is committed 
to achieving stability and renewal. Stronger ties 
between China and Africa will contribute to South-
South cooperation and international peace and 
development. 
 The conduct of China’s diplomacy aims to 
safeguard world peace and promote common 
development. China is committed to developing itself 
through safeguarding and promoting world peace 
through its own development. We are pursuing 
development that is peaceful, inclusive, cooperative 
and harmonious in nature. We will endeavour to 
promote the fundamental interests of our own people in 
harmony with the common interests of other peoples 
and to pursue peace, promote development and resolve 
disputes through cooperation. 
 China is dedicated to building a harmonious 
world. It hopes to increase mutual respect and 
understanding with other countries and to live in 
harmony with them. China respects the right of a 
country to choose its own path to development. It 
supports equal participation by different countries in 
international affairs and democracy in international 
relations. It works to enhance mutual benefits, win-win 
outcomes and global prosperity through sharing the 
benefits of economic globalization and technological 
progress. China seeks to promote a diversified world 
and advance human civilization by furthering dialogue, 
understanding and mutual enrichment between 
different cultures. China is committed to advancing 
human progress by enhancing dialogue, building 
mutual trust with other countries and working with 
them to address global issues. 
 China will continue to demonstrate to the world 
that it is an important force for global peace and 
development and that the Chinese people will remain 
trustworthy friends and cooperation partners to the 
world’s peoples. Please accept 
my congratulations, Madam, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first 
session. I wish you every success. I should also like to 
express my sincere thanks to the President of the 
General Assembly at its sixtieth session for his 
dedicated work and to wish him every success in his 
future endeavours. 
 The world events that have taken place over the 
past 60 years are reflected more graphically in 
Germany than in almost any other country. Until 1989, 
the wall and the barbed wire across our country 
symbolized the division of Europe and the rest of the 
world into two blocs. Since then, Germany has become 
the embodiment of the successful overcoming of that 
division. 
 Both division and the overcoming of division 
have influenced our view of the world. For 45 years, 
peace in Germany was due largely to the friendship and 
the political and military protection of partner 
countries, which took their responsibility seriously. 
That experience shaped the political outlook of 
Germans. That is why we, too, are now shouldering our 
responsibility, both in Europe and in other parts of the 
world. In the context of the United Nations, that means 
that a reunited Germany believes it has an obligation to 
do everything it can to support the Organization in 
creating a more peaceful and more equitable world. 
 German soldiers and police officers are taking 
part in numerous peace missions that are either led or 
mandated by the United Nations. In the Western 
Balkans, Germany has provided the largest contingent 
of peacekeeping troops in Kosovo and in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Germany is playing a prominent role in 
the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Germany is leading 
the European operation in the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo and is supporting the first free elections 
there in 40 years. Germany is engaged in the Sudan 
through its support for the African Union Mission in 
the Sudan and the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan. And, at this very moment, German navy vessels 
 
 
29 06-53317 
 
are on their way to the Lebanese coast, where they will 
reinforce the United Nations peacekeeping force. 
Germany will contribute up to 2,400 troops to that 
peace mission. 
 Germany supports a policy of dialogue and the 
peaceful reconciliation of differing interests. We firmly 
believe that political conflicts cannot be resolved 
through military force or military victories. Peace is 
brought about by engaging in political dialogue, 
establishing economic ties and giving people tangible 
hope for the future. If the parties to a conflict are 
unable to overcome political divisions on their own, 
the international community, represented by the United 
Nations, has an obligation to help. That is the guiding 
principle of our foreign policy. 
 As Minister for Foreign Affairs of a reunited 
Germany, I have been profoundly influenced by 
German and European history. On that basis, I have a 
concrete mandate for German foreign policy: we must 
do everything in our power to prevent the world from 
dividing once again into hostile blocs. Politicians in 
every country have a responsibility in that regard. 
Everyone can — and, I believe, everyone must — 
make a contribution. It is my firm conviction that 
anyone who instigates antagonism between people of 
different cultures and religions is not living up to his or 
her responsibility. 
 No one should interpret the involvement of 
Germany and its partners in the Balkans, in 
Afghanistan, in the Sudan and in Lebanon as an 
aggressive global campaign waged by the West against 
Islam. In a world that has grown closer together than 
ever before, we do not need exclusion or polarization. 
Rather, we need the courage to promote understanding 
and to engage in dialogue. 
 In the Middle East, it is crucial, following 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), on Lebanon, 
that we seize the opportunity to promote 
understanding. I call on all parties to the conflict in the 
region to act responsibly. Those who want their 
children and grandchildren to live in peace instead of 
violence, in safety instead of fear, in prosperity instead 
of poverty, must have the courage to embark on new 
paths rather than simply cultivating long-standing 
enmities.  
 The principles for a settlement are clear: Israel’s 
right to exist, on the one hand, and the establishment of 
a Palestinian State, on the other. Those were the core 
concerns of the Road Map, to which, I am firmly 
convinced, we must return. However, if we are to 
ensure lasting success, we must do everything we can 
to include everyone involved, even if that seems a 
roundabout way to achieve our goal. Therefore, I hope 
that we will succeed in persuading Syria to engage in a 
constructive dialogue. We need stronger engagement 
on the part of the international community, particularly 
the Middle East Quartet. I welcome the Quartet’s 
recent meeting. 
 In Afghanistan, the international community is 
demonstrating how the principle of responsibility can 
be put into practice in concrete terms. After 23 years of 
civil war, political structures are now being developed. 
Millions of refugees have returned to their home 
country. Just as important, young people — including 
girls — can go to school again. However, drug 
cultivation and the security situation pose a threat to 
the progress that has been made, at least in certain 
regions of the country. We, the international 
community cannot allow the successes to date to be 
brought to naught. 
 In the Western Balkans, too, war is a thing of the 
past; I am very pleased to note that that is so. The 
political and military commitment of the United 
Nations, the United States of America, Russia and the 
European Union has played a key role in this. In 
Kosovo, the task now is to ensure that the two parties 
to the conflict take their responsibility for peace and 
stability seriously. A solution to the status of Kosovo, 
which has remained unresolved for many years, is 
overdue. Germany staunchly backs the efforts of the 
United Nations Special Envoy, President Martti 
Ahtisaari. We believe that stability cannot be achieved 
if the will of only the majority population of Kosovo is 
expressed. Kosovo Serbs must be guaranteed adequate 
protections as a minority. 
 We need only glance at a map of Africa to 
understand how important the peace and stability of the 
Sudan and the Congo are for the African continent as a 
whole. I believe that instability and conflicts in Africa 
also have a direct impact on Europe. For this reason, 
too, Germany is supporting the United Nations in its 
efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in those two 
countries. 
 While the United Nations peace mission in 
southern Sudan — the United Nations Mission in the 
Sudan (UNMIS) — has made an effective contribution 
  
 
06-53317 30 
 
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement 
between northern and southern Sudan, peace in Darfur 
is still a long way off. Neither the Sudanese 
Government nor rebel groups can be absolved of 
responsibility for the humanitarian disaster in the west 
of the country. Nevertheless, I am firmly convinced 
that a lasting solution to the conflict will be possible 
only if we work with, not against, them. 
 As members are aware, over the past few years 
Germany, together with France and Britain, supported 
by the United States of America, Russia and China, has 
been intensively seeking a solution to the conflict 
regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. Let me state 
clearly that no one wants to deny Iran the right to use 
nuclear energy peacefully. Nor is isolating Iran the 
objective of the diplomatic effort. On the contrary, we 
hope that Iran will become a reliable and responsible 
partner in the crisis-stricken Middle East. That is why, 
on 6 June, we offered Iran a package aimed at far-
reaching cooperation. The package includes proposals 
for closer diplomatic, economic and security 
cooperation, and expressly acknowledges Iran’s right 
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
 However, the international community also 
rightly expects cooperation and transparency from Iran. 
If Iran were to prove that the suspicions of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are 
unfounded and if it sent a clear sign that it truly intends 
to use its nuclear programme for peaceful purposes 
only, that could open the door to a development which 
benefits the people of Iran and the entire region. 
 It is now up to the Government in Tehran to face 
up to its responsibility. The decision in favour of peace 
and stability in the entire Middle East requires courage. 
I call upon Iran to end the current phase of 
procrastination and give a clear sign of trust so that we 
can look to the future together and can finally sit down 
at the negotiating table. 
 Resolution of the nuclear dispute with Iran is 
urgent. However, the challenges of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons go far beyond that. We must act now 
if we want to halt the erosion of the non-proliferation 
regime. The next attempt to implement the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must not 
fail. 
 Not only Iran but also other countries are 
thinking about developing enrichment technology. We 
will have to develop new instruments if we want to 
prevent such risks from arising. 
 I am therefore strongly in favour of not merely 
exchanging ideas on the multilateralization of the fuel 
cycle and transferring responsibility for uranium 
enrichment to the international community, but of 
further developing such ideas into concrete options. I 
therefore appeal for greater efforts to find solutions, 
working together with the IAEA. 
 The conflicts in the Middle East, Afghanistan, the 
Western Balkans and the Sudan, and the dispute with 
Iran, as well as the fight against international terrorism, 
have one thing in common: in none of those cases is 
the West taking a hostile stance against Islam. Nor do 
they involve a clash of civilizations. Rather, they are 
very diverse conflicts involving diverse interests. 
 I believe that there is just one link, albeit a very 
different one: each one of those conflicts can be 
resolved only with a willingness and ability to engage 
in dialogue. That is because dialogue gets everyone 
concerned involved, engages them and does not allow 
them to shirk their responsibility for resolving a 
conflict. However, a policy of cooperation and 
dialogue does not mean talking at any cost. Those who 
want to engage in dialogue must meet some basic 
prerequisites. In my view, these include a readiness to 
bring about a peaceful reconciliation of interests — 
that is to say, they must be prepared to renounce 
violence and respect the position of the other side — 
and their own position must be consistent and credible. 
If these prerequisites are not met, then no dialogue 
with any chance of success can get off the ground. 
 I am firmly convinced that a dialogue beyond 
cultural borders can succeed because, despite all of our 
differences, we are living in one world. The various 
cultures of the world have more in common than 
political rabble-rousers would have us believe. People 
everywhere have the same fundamental interests: they 
want to live in peace and security, free from poverty. 
They want good health care and good schools for their 
children. No responsible Government would ever want 
to withhold these from its people — nor should they 
ever be allowed to try to do so. 
 The United Nations and its agencies and 
programmes embody this vision — and it is this vision 
that makes the United Nations so indispensable. I am 
convinced that we will need the United Nations more 
than ever in the coming decades. The number and the 
 
 
31 06-53317 
 
scale of crises in the world are increasing. That could 
bring about a renaissance of the United Nations even in 
countries that are sometimes still sceptical about the 
world Organization. 
 The effectiveness of the United Nations, its 
ability to act and the confidence it inspires as the 
international community’s main multilateral 
Organization are closely connected. Everyone can see 
how necessary transparent structures and effective 
institutions are for the United Nations. The reform of 
the United Nations — the entire Organization, not just 
the Security Council — should not, therefore, simply 
remain on the agenda; concrete progress must be made. 
 We see the expectations placed on the United 
Nations rising. This is especially urgent in the case of 
the review of mandates, as well as management and 
financial reform. Germany pledges to support this 
endeavour, because we must reform if we, as members 
of the international community, wish to remain 
effective. We owe that not only to the United Nations 
but, above all, to the people in whose name we 
shoulder responsibility together. Lebanon 
has again been set ablaze by war, a further 
manifestation of the interminable conflict in the Middle 
East whose tragedies have, for 60 years now, 
punctuated the life of the United Nations. 
 By endlessly deferring its settlement, this 
confrontation has become the epicentre of international 
instability, the main source of incomprehension 
between the different worlds and an easy alibi for all 
forms of terrorism. 
 This situation is not a foregone conclusion. With 
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), the United 
Nations is shouldering its responsibilities. The 
unanimous adoption of this resolution has brought the 
fighting to an end. France, Europe and Asia have 
contributed to the strengthening of United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). 
 But the fire is still smouldering. It is now up to 
all the parties to work towards the consolidation of 
peace and the recovery of Lebanon. 
 It is now up to Israel to complete the withdrawal 
of its forces. It is up to the Lebanese Government to 
affirm its sovereignty throughout its territory. And it is 
up to the countries in the region to cooperate fully in 
order to ensure the success of resolution 1701 (2006), 
to cooperate with the United Nations. 
 In this highly sensitive region where divides 
meet, the status quo has become unbearable. Because 
the conflict in the Middle East is a threat to global 
peace and security, the world has no option but to be 
the guarantor of peace. Let us tread off the beaten track 
of habit. Let us define a global strategy the key to 
which is an Israeli-Palestinian settlement. 
 The parameters for that settlement are well-
known, namely, the secure coexistence of two viable 
States, as has already been widely accepted by both 
peoples; safe and recognized borders; and a fair 
solution for refugees and for Jerusalem. All that still 
stands between Israelis and Palestinians and the peace 
to which they aspire is the deep-seated, mutual distrust 
of two peoples shattered by history and reeling from 
their sufferings and ordeals. Let us now stop extremists 
from laying down the law! Let us help peoples and 
leaders bold enough to seek peace! Like, before them, 
Sadat and Begin, Rabin and Arafat! Before this 
Assembly, I call on the world to commit itself to 
restoring the conditions for confidence. 
 The Quartet should meet shortly to start preparing 
an international conference. I propose that the 
conference define in advance the guarantees that we 
are prepared to provide to the parties as soon as they 
reach an agreement. I also propose that the conference 
pave the way for a new future in the Middle East 
through a regional framework for collective security, 
economic integration and dialogue among cultures. 
 Building peace means fighting terrorism. It 
means preventing proliferation. It means shouldering 
the “responsibility to protect” that we enshrined here 
last year. 
 International legality must prevail over the threats 
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In the 
crisis with Iran, confidence has been impaired by the 
existence of hidden programmes. We have extended 
ambitious offers of cooperation to that major country, 
 
 
21 06-52731 
 
provided it restores confidence by suspending its 
contentious activities. Dialogue must prevail. Let us 
talk in order to enter into negotiations. 
 Given the seriousness of what is at stake, the 
international community must stand firm and united. 
We do not aim to call regimes into question. We aim to 
ensure security in accordance with international law 
and with due regard for the sovereignty of all 
countries. 
 The “responsibility to protect” — that was what 
we affirmed here. In Darfur, millions of people are 
threatened. A crime against humanity looms. 
Bloodshed and turmoil are about to convulse the very 
heart of Africa again. 
 France entreats the international community to 
ward off a further humanitarian catastrophe. I solemnly 
call on Sudan to accept the United Nations peace 
mission without delay. I call on the International 
Criminal Court to bring to justice those responsible for 
these crimes. 
 The time has come for the immense continent of 
Africa, with its wealth of peoples and vibrant youth, 
which has embarked on the road to growth and reform, 
to find, at long last, a destiny worthy of it and of the 
cradle of humanity it represents. Humanity must be 
united and there must be solidarity among its diverse 
peoples. Humanity needs, more than ever, a strong and 
respected United Nations, the irreplaceable tool for 
shared sovereignty and responsibility. 
 It is here that universal and sacred human rights 
must be defended and protected. With the new Human 
Rights Council and the International Criminal Court, 
the United Nations returns to this primary vocation. Let 
us not disappoint the hopes of all those who love 
freedom and justice. 
 At a time when the world’s wealth is increasing 
as never before, the separation between the rich and 
poor is becoming intolerable. From its inception, the 
United Nations has stood for the moral imperatives of 
fairness and solidarity. For this reason France wishes to 
submit to the United Nations the idea of innovative 
development financing mechanisms such as the 
international solidarity levy on airplane tickets, a 
modern, pragmatic and experimental response to the 
need to fight poverty and pandemics. In this spirit we 
will be launching the International Drug Purchase 
Facility (UNITAID) initiative this afternoon. Let us 
overcome selfishness and dogmatism and give the 
generous idea of a world united for human progress a 
chance. 
 Finally, we all know that uncontrolled human 
activity is bringing about a sort of slow collective 
suicide. Disaster can only be averted if nations can 
come together to support jointly agreed commitments. 
Let us create a United Nations for the environment, as 
the expression of the world’s ecological conscience and 
the premier forum in which we take common action for 
future generations. France will host an international 
conference next year to bring together all those who 
want to make progress on this project, which is crucial 
to the future of the planet. 
 For 10 years now, a man has held high the torch 
of the United Nations and our universal values. Today, 
I wish to pay Kofi Annan the solemn and merited 
honour of our profound admiration, of our respect and 
of our recognition. 
 In a few weeks’ time, we will appoint a new 
Secretary-General, who will be faced with immense 
challenges. He will be able to count on the support of 
France, on its unswerving commitment to serving 
peace and justice, fraternity and progress. First, I would 
like to pay tribute to the work of the Secretary-General. 
A former British Minister once said of the NATO 
Secretary General that he should be more of a secretary 
and less of a general. Kofi Annan has been more of 
everything: more of a diplomat, more of a reformer and 
more of a moral voice of leadership in the world. 
 In a world shattered by conflict, the founders of 
the United Nations saw that only by coming together, 
united in support of larger freedom, could we build our 
shared future. Today, when the world’s nations are 
even more interdependent than they were in 1945, what 
does it mean to stand, as they intended, united? At one 
level it means taking action when things go wrong, 
where there is an actual breakdown of security or a 
descent into violence or chaos. Today in particular, the 
United Nations faces the challenges posed by multiple 
upheavals and crises across the world. 
 In the Middle East the United Nations is playing 
a vital role in establishing stability in southern 
Lebanon. Troops from the European Union are 
deploying alongside those from the Middle East, Asia 
and Africa. All Member States must meet their 
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1701 
(2006), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), if we are to 
enable Lebanon to be the proud, democratic and 
diverse nation that its people want it to be. 
 But we are all aware that this most recent conflict 
in Lebanon had its roots in the continuing failure to 
achieve a just solution to the Palestinian question. That 
is why the United Kingdom has consistently argued 
that there can be no higher priority than reinvigorating 
the Middle East peace process. 
 In Iraq, Prime Minister Al-Maliki’s national 
reconciliation plan can help leaders from all 
communities come together. At this crucial juncture, 
we must all intensify our support. The International 
Compact provides the right vehicle. It allows the Iraqi 
Government to set its own vision and shows us how we 
can help turn that vision into a reality. 
 In Afghanistan, real progress has been made, with 
the United Nations taking a leading role in 
coordinating the international effort. But real 
challenges still lie ahead. NATO’s task of securing the 
south of the country is far from easy. Soldiers from 
many NATO countries, not least my own, have given 
their lives to provide a better future for the people of 
Afghanistan. The Afghan Government and people, too, 
want security, development and good governance. The 
United Kingdom and the international community are 
determined to help them to achieve them. 
 We must show a similar shared determination in 
urging the Government of Iran to address international 
concerns over its nuclear ambitions and its support for 
terrorism. The proposals put forward by Britain, France 
and Germany with China, Russia and the United States 
offer a path for the Iranian Government to develop a 
more constructive relationship with the rest of the 
world and give Iran’s talented population the 
opportunities and prosperity that is their right, 
including, if they wish, a modern nuclear power 
industry. We want to be able to resume negotiations. 
  
 
06-53317 20 
 
Iran knows what is required, and that the alternative is 
increasing isolation. 
 Darfur remains in crisis. I pay tribute to the 
efforts of the African Union and its peacekeepers. 
Wednesday’s decision to extend their mandate averted 
a security vacuum. We must now strengthen the force 
of the African Union Mission in the Sudan. But it can 
only be a temporary reprieve. We also need action 
immediately on the political and humanitarian front. 
Those who have not signed the Darfur Peace 
Agreement must do so. Those who have must abide by 
its provisions. 
 To underpin that Agreement, we urgently need a 
greatly strengthened international presence on the 
ground, with the active engagement and support of 
Asian and Muslim, as well as African, countries. That 
is why the Security Council authorized the deployment 
of United Nations peacekeepers to Darfur. I urge 
President Bashir to extend the Sudan’s relations with 
the United Nations in a common purpose to bring 
lasting peace and genuine stability to the whole of the 
Sudan. It is, above all, his responsibility. 
 The security challenges the world faces are real. 
As an international community we must deal with 
them. But standing united also requires us to take up a 
second, deeper level of global responsibility, namely, 
tackling the underlying problems that promote conflict 
and underdevelopment. We must strive to promote 
sound global values and to build multilateral systems 
within which nations and individuals can cooperate, 
co-exist and each achieve their potential. 
 Many representatives to the Assembly have 
already spoken of the need to accelerate progress 
towards the achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals. Progress on those Goals is a moral 
imperative rooted in a concern for, and an 
understanding of, our common humanity. But it is also 
a political imperative, because there will be no stability 
and security in our global community while so many 
millions of men, women and children in that 
community face only a life of hunger, poverty, 
inequality and disease. 
 The same is true for those whose lives are 
shattered by conflict or blighted by injustice. The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council are new structures that give us new 
opportunities and new impetus. At the same time, we 
must see a step change in efforts towards an 
international arms trade treaty that will end the 
irresponsible transfer of arms that fuel conflict and 
facilitate the abuse of human rights. That is why the 
United Kingdom, with six other countries, will 
introduce a draft resolution in the First Committee to 
establish a process to work towards a legally binding 
treaty on the trade in all conventional arms. 
 Collectively, we have a responsibility to protect 
human life and a duty to defend the international 
institutions that help us as a community to achieve that 
goal. The answers lie not in division or in personal 
attacks, but in the earnest and consistent pursuit of 
justice and peace.  
 Our collective responsibility to each other is 
nowhere more evident than in the huge challenge posed 
by climate change. The British Prime Minister, Tony 
Blair, made climate change one of our two G8 
priorities last year, alongside poverty reduction in 
Africa. When the Prime Minister appointed me as his 
Foreign Secretary, in May, he specifically charged me 
with putting climate security at the heart of our foreign 
policy. We will not solve that problem if we do not 
each assume our share of the responsibility for tackling 
it. Nobody can protect themselves from climate change 
unless we protect each other by building a global basis 
for climate security. That goes to the heart of the 
United Nations mission, and the United Nations must 
be at the heart of the solution. 
 To put it starkly, if we all try to freeride, we will 
all end up in free fall, with accelerating climate change 
the result of our collective failure to respond in time to 
that shared threat that faces us all. Look just at the 
danger posed by rising sea levels. Potentially, that 
could cause massive damage to some of the key urban 
centres of our global civilization. London, Shanghai, 
Dhaka, Singapore, Amsterdam, Cairo and, yes, 
Manhattan are all at risk. That is why we must all — as 
foreign ministers, heads of Government and heads of 
State — be ready to do more, and do it more quickly. 
Our climate presents us with an ever-growing threat to 
international security. Dealing with climate change, by 
both adapting to what is now inevitable and acting to 
avert still greater damage, is no longer a choice, it is an 
imperative. 
 We need common commitment and genuine 
action. We must all be ready to find a way to get the 
agenda moving beyond Kyoto. The Gleneagles 
dialogue meeting in Mexico at the beginning of 
 
 
21 06-53317 
 
October will be one such opportunity, a chance for 
developed and developing countries to work together 
on that shared problem.  
 If we do not act now, an unstable climate will 
undermine our progress in all those other areas that 
matter to us, not least the Millennium Development 
Goals themselves. Take one of the most basic needs of 
all, water. Already perhaps two fifths of the world’s 
population finds it hard to get the water they need. At 
the same time, many in the world rely on affordable 
energy to help lift themselves out of poverty — and, 
indeed, perhaps to give them access to that water. But 
there is a dilemma: if we provide affordable energy by 
burning fossil fuels, we accelerate climate change. That 
means further disrupting water supplies. For some 
people who now have plenty of water it will mean new 
shortages. For those who already have little, it will 
mean less. In turn, everywhere less water means less 
food. 
 Let me give a specific example of that dilemma. 
The whole world, as well as the Chinese people, is 
benefiting from the great success of the Chinese 
economy. No one in China or elsewhere wants that 
growth to stop. But it is based, in China as elsewhere, 
on a rapidly increasing use of the fossil fuels that are 
creating climate change. Yet China is a country already 
vulnerable to climate change. The Chinese Government 
knows that as the Himalayan glaciers melt and 
agricultural land shrinks, crop yields will fall, fresh 
water will become more scarce and the economy itself 
will suffer, and with it the world’s economy. 
 All the nations of the Arctic Circle are being, and 
will be, affected by melting permafrost, with 
disruptions to infrastructure and to investment. The 
Vice-President of Palau has just given us a vivid 
description of what the environment means for his 
nation. We all share, to a greater or lesser extent, that 
same dilemma. If we do not act on climate change, we 
risk undermining the very basis of the prosperity and 
security we are seeking to achieve. That is why we 
must recognize that talk of having either a successful 
economy or a stable climate is a false choice. We must 
work together to find paths for economic growth that 
will protect our climate. The truth is that we already 
have much of the technology we need to move to a 
low-carbon economy. But we must now deploy it very 
much more rapidly. What we do in the next 10 years 
will count the most.  
 The former chief economist of the World Bank, 
Sir Nicholas Stern, will shortly publish one of the most 
significant and wide-reaching analyses so far of the 
economic impacts of climate change itself. One of the 
key emerging findings of his work is that while it will 
not cost the Earth to solve climate change, it will cost 
the Earth, literally as well as financially, if we do not. 
 Moreover, if we learn to tackle climate change 
together, we have an opportunity to build trust between 
nations and to strengthen the multilateral system. But if 
we get it wrong, that trust will be further eroded. It is 
the developed, rich world that bears a large 
responsibility for the present level of greenhouse gas 
emissions, but it is the poorest in our global 
community — those least able to bear it — who will 
bear the brunt of climate insecurity. We all need to do 
more. But the rich world should of course continue to 
lead the effort, applying the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibility, which must continue to be 
our guide. In the joint endeavour which the United 
Nations represents there can be no more stark or more 
urgent warning than that. At the outset, Madam, 
let me join previous speakers in welcoming your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-first session. On India’s behalf, I would like to 
assure you of our constructive support and 
wholehearted commitment to work with you to achieve 
both the larger goals of the Charter and the more 
specific goals of the reform of this Organization that 
were set out in last year’s World Summit Outcome 
Document. 
 The topic of this general debate is “Implementing 
a global partnership for development”. It is difficult to 
contest its relevance or topicality. Today, whether we 
look at issues such as international trade, international 
financial mechanisms, methods to improve economic 
and social well-being, or even the various threats to 
peace and security that challenge our collective 
existence, one common theme that emerges is the lack 
of an effective and equitable global partnership. This is 
an imperative even for achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals. 
 The important annual report of the Secretary-
General highlights several successes in moving ahead 
with United Nations reform. During the previous 
General Assembly session, the Central Emergency 
Response Fund, the Peacebuilding Commission and the 
Human Rights Council were established, and the 
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was 
agreed upon. We have also gradually moved forward 
on management and budgetary reforms. While these 
are certainly important — indeed, critical — if we are 
honest, we must acknowledge that significant 
unfulfilled tasks and challenges lie ahead, particularly 
with regard to unaddressed issues, including the reform 
of the architecture of our multilateral bodies that 
oversee security, trade, financial flows and 
development. Without this reform, the discontent 
associated with globalization will only deepen. Without 
it, there cannot be substantially enhanced and assured 
resource and technology flows to developing countries, 
which are necessary for real economic transformation 
and for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
 It is sometimes argued that private sector 
investment is today replacing the traditional reliance 
on aid and development assistance. While we 
appreciate the important role of private sector 
investment, it cannot replace public investment in 
developing countries, whose absorptive capacities are 
often limited and where the physical and social 
infrastructure is often weak. Official development 
assistance (ODA) remains an important means to 
 
 
7 06-53952 
 
augment public investment in areas such as human 
capital development and rural infrastructure, which 
rarely attract private sector investment. 
 The process of increasing the available pool of 
resources for investment in the social and economic 
infrastructure of developing countries can be promoted 
at one level by developed countries, expeditiously 
reaching the target of setting aside 0.7 per cent of their 
gross domestic product for official development 
assistance. 
 At another level, there is also a need to develop 
innovative sources of financing. We must evolve a 
broader understanding of ways to encourage the least 
developed countries to get out of the debt trap by 
extending debt-cancellation programmes, without 
insisting on conditionalities, such as encouraging 
privatization, which, applied indiscriminately, may 
recreate the original difficulties that necessitated 
recourse to debt in the first place. 
 The impasse in international trade negotiations is 
disappointing, to say the least, considering the hopes 
raised after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference and 
at the Group of Eight Summit in Saint Petersburg in 
July. Early resumption is desirable, but adherence to 
the existing mandate is imperative — the mandate of 
the Doha Declaration, the July framework and the 
Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. When agriculture 
was brought into the ambit of negotiations at the 
creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the 
developing countries were given a clear understanding 
that trade-distorting agricultural subsidies would be 
phased out in a time-bound manner. Minimizing the 
vulnerabilities of poor farmers must be our collective 
priority. Demanding market access from developing 
countries, which displace low-income and subsistence 
farmers to satisfy commercial interests, cannot be 
supported.  
 Proportionately lower overall tariff reduction 
commitments, operable, effective development 
instruments for special products and a special 
safeguard mechanism are essential if we are to ensure 
food and livelihood security and meet the rural 
development needs of developing countries. The 
overarching principle of special and differential 
treatment therefore remains a categorical imperative, 
and is the underlying basis of the position of 
developing countries. 
 In our view, there exists an overwhelming logic 
for giving the United Nations a role in providing 
direction to the comprehensive reform of the 
international financial and trading systems. These 
reforms must be aimed at building an international 
architecture that reflects the realities of the twenty-first 
century and is able to create an environment that 
effectively supports national efforts to eradicate 
poverty. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
have given hope to the poor and the underprivileged of 
the world, and these goals are to be achieved by 2015. 
In this context, the World Bank must remain steadfast 
in its mission to build a world free of poverty, and its 
strategy must remain embedded in the historical 
development-centric approach.  
 The Outcome Document of last year’s World 
Summit emphasized that enhancing the voice and 
participation of developing countries in the Bretton 
Woods institutions remains a continuous concern. The 
bridging of this voice deficit requires fundamental 
reforms in the quota structure which are long overdue 
and absolutely necessary to enhance the credibility and 
legitimacy of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
The quota reforms have to begin with the revision of 
the formula so as to reflect the relative economic 
strengths of countries in the twenty-first century. The 
United Nations should encourage immediate steps 
being taken to initiate the second stage of IMF quota 
reform, involving a basic revision of the quota formula 
and the subsequent increase of quotas for all under-
represented countries. All of this must be done in a 
time-bound manner. 
 Change is the law of life. The acute 
dissatisfaction heard in many statements is the result of 
institutions having been prevented from changing. 
What is true in the economic field is equally true of the 
architecture of our international security system as 
reflected in this unique Organization that is supposed 
to reflect the collective will of our world, a system 
which remains mired in the past. Recent tragic events 
in Lebanon and the stasis in the peace process in the 
broader Middle East have highlighted the growing 
failure of the institution designated by the Charter as 
having primary responsibility for issues relating to 
peace and security. 
 It is widely accepted that the Security Council 
can no longer be regarded as reflecting the changed 
international environment that has emerged since the 
time of its creation. The Security Council must not 
  
 
06-53952 8 
 
only be more representative but also more effective if it 
is to be able to satisfactorily perform the role mandated 
to it by the Charter. 
 At the same time, the Security Council has 
needlessly diverted its attention to issues and areas that 
go beyond its mandate. For instance, the inclusion of 
items on its agenda which have nothing to do with 
peace and security represents an encroachment on the 
roles mandated to other United Nations bodies. In 
order to ensure that the international community 
exercises real ownership of the process of securing our 
world, it is essential that comprehensive reform of the 
Security Council be undertaken and that its 
membership be expanded in both the permanent and 
the non-permanent categories. It is no accident that the 
Secretary-General’s report refers to the enhancement of 
legitimacy and the urgent need for reform to ensure the 
Security Council’s relevance and credibility. 
 The revitalization of the General Assembly is 
intertwined with the reform of the Security Council. It 
is no coincidence that its reform too has long been 
frustrated. A strengthened and more effective United 
Nations presumes a revitalized General Assembly that 
exercises its role and authority in the areas of 
responsibility assigned to it by the Charter. These 
include its effectively addressing topics such as 
international law and human rights, financial, 
budgetary and administrative matters, as well as the 
global economic architecture and important issues 
related to development. 
 I now turn to one of the most crucial issues of our 
times: the problem of terrorism. While this 
phenomenon has become increasingly global, our 
collective response to it has remained rather 
inadequate. The multiple ways in which terrorism 
challenges the core principles of humanity and the 
mandate of the United Nations are underlined by the 
outrages perpetrated in India over the last few months. 
Barely two months ago, on a single black day, more 
than 200 lives were lost and more than 1,000 were 
injured by dastardly bombings in Mumbai and 
elsewhere in India. These and other such outrageous 
incidents were clearly designed to spread maximum 
terror among ordinary people. Ours is not the only 
country to be singled out for vicious and senseless acts 
of murder. A strong response to terrorism requires 
broad-based international cooperation, denying to 
terrorists the space that has been available to them and 
increasing the capability of States to address terrorist 
threats. It requires sustained and specific cooperation 
by a variety of national, regional and global agencies. 
 Earlier this month, we joined in the adoption of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy 
(resolution 60/288), even though, ideally, we would 
have liked the United Nations to convey a far stronger 
message in order to counter terrorism. We must 
collectively and unanimously reject the notion that any 
cause can justify terrorism. No cause can ever justify 
the targeted killing of innocent men, women and 
children. The international community must signal that 
it will no longer tolerate the actions of the sponsors 
and abettors of terrorism, including States which 
wilfully fail to prevent terrorists from utilizing their 
territory. We hope that the Strategy will provide the 
impetus to unite the international community in its 
fight against terrorism via practical measures that 
facilitate cooperation by way of extradition, 
prosecution, information exchange and capacity-
building. 
 We went along with the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, but the comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism, which remains a work in 
progress, would have provided the requisite legal 
framework upon which a counter-terrorism strategy 
could have been based. It cannot be beyond our 
collective ingenuity to reach an agreement on such a 
comprehensive convention, even though we have 
missed the target of doing so at the sixtieth session of 
the General Assembly. We must work together to 
finalize and adopt the comprehensive convention, at 
least during this session of the General Assembly. 
 The existence of nuclear weapons continues to 
threaten international peace and security. In our view, 
the best non-proliferation measure is universal 
disarmament, and the international community needs to 
take immediate steps to eliminate the threat of the use 
of nuclear weapons. We have to revive momentum for 
achieving what the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
called a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world, to 
be achieved, through negotiations, in a time-bound 
manner. India will be presenting a working paper at 
this session of the General Assembly on the issue of 
nuclear disarmament, on which we look forward to 
working with Member States. 
 In recent years, new dangers have emerged due to 
the threat of proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction-related materials and technologies to non-
 
 
9 06-53952 
 
State actors and terrorist groups. The international 
community must work together to meet those 
challenges. India’s record in that regard is impeccable, 
and we have instituted effective measures to ensure 
that the technologies we develop are not leaked in any 
way. 
 It is true that the developing countries bear the 
heaviest burden from pandemics, epidemics and 
chronic diseases. The scourge of HIV/AIDS, malaria, 
avian influenza and tuberculosis seriously threatens the 
future of many developing countries by robbing them 
of the most productive segment of their society — their 
young people — thereby affecting the future of those 
countries. An enhanced global collaborative effort is 
called for to confront the proliferation of challenges 
affecting the lives of the majority of our citizens. 
 We also need to address the central issue of the 
special needs of the developing countries, especially in 
Africa, and of the vulnerable small States. On our part, 
we will continue to expand our programme of South-
South cooperation also through the New Partnership 
for Africa’s Development, through Team 9 — our 
special programme for West African countries — and 
by means of the connectivity mission in Africa, as well 
as through assistance, capacity-building and 
technology transfer aimed at reducing the vulnerability 
of small States. 
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who embodied 
our commitment to the United Nations ideals, said that 
 “in a world of incessant and feverish activity, 
men have little time to think, much less to 
consider ideals and objectives. Yet, how are we to 
act, even in the present, unless we know which 
way we are going and what our objectives are?”  
 Confronted as we are by the globalization of 
threats and by the limitations of our international 
system to address such challenges, the need for a 
comprehensive reform of the United Nations has never 
been more imperative. We need to enfranchise the 
United Nations to meet the challenges of our time by 
reinforcing its role and authority as the core of real 
multilateralism. 
 We look forward to working closely with other 
Member States, under your leadership, Madam 
President, to press ahead with essential reforms at the 
United Nations and to implement an effective global 
partnership for development that encompasses 
everyone and enables every individual to live a life of 
dignity in a clean, safe and healthy environment. These days, the days of the 
general debate of the General Assembly, fall this year 
at a time of unique significance for the Jewish people. 
They come on the eve of the Jewish New Year and the 
Day of Atonement and are known as the Days of Awe. 
 In Jewish tradition, these are days of soul-
searching and prayer, of judgement and of renewal. 
That concept of reflection is fitting not just for the 
faithful. It should be a time of reflection for nations as 
well. Let us use this time and this gathering to look 
deeply and honestly at the world in which we live — 
the world as it is and as it might be. The United 
Nations emerged from the horrors of war and offered a 
vision of a new and peaceful world, but we see the 
suffering of the people of Darfur, we see bloodshed and 
violence across the globe, and we know that that is not 
yet the world in which we live. 
 Our planet remains torn by conflict, At its heart, 
this is a conflict about values — a battle of ideas. It is a 
conflict about whether to respect or to reject the 
other — a conflict between tolerance and tyranny, 
between the promise of coexistence and the 
hopelessness of hate. We see it played out in internet 
chat rooms and in houses of prayer, in classrooms and 
newsrooms, on the battlefield and in the corridors of 
power. It is the challenge of our time. 
 We, the people of Israel, have lived for many 
years on the frontlines of this conflict. Our nation has 
felt its fury; our soldiers have fought and died in its 
battles. An ancient people in the heart of the Middle 
East — great in history but small in number — we 
have been a constant target of those that oppose our 
very existence. We face this conflict on different 
fronts — as Jews against the dark forces of anti-
Semitism, as Israelis against the enemies of our 
statehood, and as members of the free world against 
the merchants of global terror. 
 We have been guided in this conflict by two core 
values that are embodied in our declaration of 
independence and shape our national identity. The first 
is that Israel, with Jerusalem at its heart, is the national 
homeland of the Jewish people, their refuge from 
persecution, their first and last line of defence. The 
second is that Israel is a democracy and that the values 
of justice, peace and humanity — first expressed by the 
prophets of Israel — are an integral part of our nation’s 
sense of mission. We share the same values as the 
community of democratic States. We are ready and 
proud to be judged by them. They are our own.  
  
 
06-52885 44 
 
 But too often there is a gap between perception 
and reality. Too often, Israel is not seen for its unique 
creativity and spirit of enterprise, or for its 
contribution — well beyond its size — to the sciences 
and to literature, to human development and 
innovation. In many parts of the world, we are seen 
mainly through the lens of the Arab-Israeli conflict. 
And too often, that lens is distorted. To many, this 
conflict is portrayed as a clash of David and Goliath, 
with Israel perceived unjustly as Goliath, but this 
simplistic image ignores the fact that Israel remains a 
threatened democracy in a hostile region. 
 We have, of necessity, the capacity to defend 
ourselves, but we will always be constrained in its use 
by our values. And yet, we face an enemy willing to 
use all the means at its disposal to kill without restraint 
and without distinction. Every innocent casualty in this 
conflict is a tragedy. There is no difference between the 
tears of a grieving Israeli mother and a grieving 
Palestinian mother, but there is a critical moral 
difference between the terrorists who hunt down 
civilians and the soldiers who target terrorists while 
trying to avoid civilian casualties. 
 To protect its integrity, the international 
community must uphold that basic moral distinction. 
Terror is terror, even when it is called resistance. It 
cannot be justified and it cannot be equated with the 
actions of those seeking only to defend themselves 
against it. 
 If we want to protect our values, it is not enough 
to believe in them — we must act according to them. 
There is no greater challenge to our values than that 
posed by the leaders of Iran. They deny and mock the 
Holocaust. They speak proudly and openly of their 
desire to wipe Israel off the map. And now, by their 
actions, they pursue the weapons to achieve that 
objective, to imperil the region and to threaten the 
world. The moment of truth is here. 
 The international community is faced with no 
greater responsibility than to stand against that dark 
and growing danger — not for Israel’s sake, but for its 
own; for the sake of the values it claims to embrace; 
for the sake of the world we all wish our children to 
inherit. What more needs to happen for the world to 
take the threat seriously? What more needs to happen 
to end the hesitation and the excuses? We know the 
lessons of the past. We know the consequences of 
appeasement and indifference. There is no place for 
such leaders in this forum. There is no place for such a 
regime in the family of nations. 
 For any who still had doubts, the Iranian threat 
was exposed to all in the recent conflict in Lebanon. 
Armed, financed and directed by Iran, Hizbullah 
kidnapped Israeli soldiers and targeted Israeli cities, 
but it was the hopes of an entire region that they sought 
to take hostage. Out of the conflict — and because of 
Israel’s response to it — opportunity has emerged, but 
much is needed to turn opportunity into reality. 
Hizbullah can never again be allowed to threaten the 
future of the region. The world faces a critical test — 
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1701 
(2006) and the immediate and safe release of the Israeli 
hostages. 
 As we gather here, we think of anxious families 
that ache for the return of their loved ones — parents 
waiting for a son, a brother for a brother, a wife for a 
husband. Israel will not rest until all the Israeli 
hostages are returned safely to the arms of their 
devoted families and to the embrace of a loving nation. 
Let us all make them the same promise today. 
 Last year, a great leader of Israel, Ariel Sharon, 
stood before this forum and said:  
 “The Palestinians will always be our neighbours. 
We respect them and have no aspirations to rule 
over them. They are also entitled to freedom and 
to a national, sovereign existence in a State of 
their own.” (A/60/PV.5, p.46) 
 That was not only the voice and vision of one 
man. It is the voice and vision of a nation. We do not 
believe that Israeli-Palestinian relations are of 
necessity a zero-sum game. Not every Israeli interest is 
at odds with Palestinian interests. There is, in fact, a 
common vision that binds together Israelis, moderate 
Palestinians and the international community. It serves 
the goals of both peoples and represents the basis of a 
genuine and lasting peace. At its heart is the vision of 
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in 
peace and security. Israel believes in this vision, and 
from this vision we have drawn our principles for 
peace. 
 The first is inherent in the very idea of two 
States. For the Jewish people, Israel was established to 
be our national homeland. It was the solution for 
Jewish refugees and the realization of Jewish rights. 
And this is the true calling of the future State of 
 
 
45 06-52885 
 
Palestine: a national homeland for the Palestinian 
people — the solution to Palestinian claims, the 
fulfilment of Palestinian dreams, the answer for 
Palestinian refugees, wherever they may be. If 
Palestinian leaders are unwilling to say this, the world 
should say it for them. Instead of giving false hope, it 
is time to end the exploitation of the refugee issue and 
to begin to resolve it on the basis of the vision of two 
States, two homelands.  
 That is the real and only meaning of the two-State 
vision. It requires each people to accept that their 
rights are realized through the establishment of their 
own homeland, not in the homeland of others.  
 The second principle for peace is drawn from the 
concept of living in peace and security. On the basis of 
this principle the international community has insisted 
that the State of Palestine that emerges next to Israel 
cannot be a terror State. A terrorist State is the last 
thing our troubled region needs. It is for that reason 
that the road map requires an end to terror. It is for that 
reason that the international community has demanded 
that any Palestinian Government fulfil three basic 
conditions: renounce terrorism, recognize Israel’s right 
to exist and accept existing Israeli-Palestinian 
agreements. Those conditions are not an obstacle to 
peace or to the establishment of a responsible 
Palestinian State; they are a crucial ingredient for the 
realization of those goals.  
 An end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will also 
require agreement on a common boundary. There are 
those who believe that if only we could turn back the 
hands of time to 1967 all would be resolved. But, in 
1967 there was no Palestinian State; there was no link 
between the West Bank and Gaza; and there was no 
commitment to lasting peace. A two-State solution 
requires the creation of a new reality which never 
existed in the past. For it to succeed, both sides will 
need to commit themselves to compromise and to 
believe in coexistence. 
 If only we could end the conflict today. But we 
have learned from bitter experience that to reach 
lasting peace it is not enough to have a vision. Peace 
must be built on the solid foundations of shared values, 
not the shifting sands of false promises. Without this, 
the political horizon will always be out of reach. We 
have seen negotiations doomed by mistrust and 
frustration. We have seen them lay the ground for 
greater violence, not greater understanding. We cannot 
afford to repeat that experience. 
 Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority is 
dominated today by a terrorist organization that teaches 
children to hate and seeks to transform the conflict 
from a resolvable political dispute into an endless 
religious confrontation. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
is the consequence and not the cause of this ideology 
of intolerance and hatred. We cannot reach peace by 
ignoring these realities. We cannot find the solutions 
for tomorrow without addressing the problems of 
today. 
 But we also cannot give up hope, and I refuse to 
do so. In a Middle East where being moderate is often 
the same as being weak, our challenge is to empower 
the peacemakers and disempower their opponents. The 
road map phases and the three international conditions 
are designed precisely for that purpose. But if the 
world hesitates in enforcing these standards, the 
extremists sense opportunity. And if it appeases, they 
sense victory. This is the moment for determination not 
half-measures and vague formulations. It is the 
moment to demand that those Palestinian leaders that 
believe in peace determine the future on these terms, 
not on the terms of terrorists. 
 Unfortunately, there are no shortcuts on the road 
to peace. But stagnation is not in our interest, and it is 
not our policy. 
 It is in this spirit that Israel embarked on the 
painful process of disengagement, to create an 
opportunity for progress. But, sadly, we received terror 
in return. And it is in this spirit that I met with 
Chairman Abbas two days ago, and we agreed to re-
energize the dialogue between us and create a 
permanent channel to pursue ways to advance together. 
The parties do not need another forum to act out their 
differences, and the only forum that will resolve them 
is the bilateral negotiating table. We have no illusions 
about the difficulties before us. We must face them not 
ignore them. But we can advance along the road to 
peace if we have the strength to defend its principles 
and the courage to confront its enemies. 
 In these days, while Jews prepare to welcome a 
new year, Muslims around the world prepare for the 
holy month of Ramadan. As two great faiths begin their 
annual journey of reflection and decision, let the 
nations of the world begin it too. 
  
 
06-52885 46 
 
 The Jewish prayers tell us that this is a time of 
decision not just for individuals but also for States: 
“which for the sword and which for peace, which for 
famine and which for plenty”. 
 Those are sobering words, but they are also 
empowering ones. The message of these special days is 
that no future is predetermined; no conflict is 
inevitable. It is up to us to make the right choices. 
History will judge us by them. In the words of the 
traditional greeting: may the curses of the last year 
end; may the blessing of the new year begin. Shana 
tova: may it be a good year. New Zealand remains 
unwavering in its support for the United Nations. Our 
commitment has not changed since we helped found 
the Organization 61 years ago. This year’s events have 
only reinforced our belief that the world would be 
substantially worse off without the United Nations. 
 It would be remiss of me at this time not to pay 
tribute to Kofi Annan. It is to his vision, determination 
and courage that we must attribute many of the reforms 
achieved thus far. Five years ago, when he was 
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, the Nobel Committee 
paid tribute to his efforts on reform. Since then he has 
continued to work tirelessly for a United Nations that 
can live up to the hopes that “we the peoples” have 
invested in it. This is all the more remarkable given 
that, for much of his stewardship, the United Nations 
has been confronted with some of the most difficult 
international crises of its existence.  
 New Zealand is committed to multilateralism. 
This is not some act of faith, but a commitment to a 
multilateralism that really delivers. We need to be 
prepared to work diligently for the good of the global 
community. 
 The United Nations is passing through a period of 
challenge to its relevance and effectiveness. It has 
 
 
19 06-53323 
 
confronted serious political and security shocks — 
fresh hostilities in the Middle East, the tragic and 
worsening situation in Darfur, and, in our own region, 
instability in Timor-Leste. 
 Last year, world leaders agreed to an ambitious 
reform agenda based on the three pillars of peace and 
security, development and human rights. Progress has 
been made, but this is no time to rest. We must press 
on, for much remains to be done. 
 The challenge of development has never been 
higher on the international agenda. Never before has 
the commitment to eradicating poverty been so critical. 
But increasing aid levels will not be enough; we must 
become more effective. We need to make sure that 
every dollar we spend makes a positive difference. 
That means addressing the key threats to our 
success — poor governance, corruption and gender 
inequality. We need to secure fairer international 
trading relationships, and we must work on all of those 
together. 
 The theme of this year’s general debate is the 
implementation of a global partnership for 
development. For New Zealand, collective action is 
imperative. We need participation, ownership and 
responsibility from recipient countries. We seek 
harmonization with larger contributors to align and 
combine our contributions. We seek partnership with 
multilateral development agencies in our campaign to 
eradicate poverty, and we endorse the efforts of the 
United Nations and those agencies to coordinate better, 
country by country. 
 New Zealand, as members are aware, has a 
relationship with the Pacific that is based on history, 
culture and economic and social linkages. Our bonds 
with Pacific States are an important dimension of our 
other relationships. We want nothing less than 
educated, healthy, well-governed, economically 
prosperous and safe communities. 
 In the Auckland Declaration of 2004, Pacific 
leaders committed themselves to a “region that is 
respected for the quality of its governance, the 
sustainable management of its resources, the full 
observance of democratic values and for its defence 
and promotion of human rights”. These are ambitious 
goals, and translating them into reality means hard 
work by all Pacific countries. That is a challenge that 
New Zealand accepts. 
 In facing that challenge, we confront economic, 
environmental, governance, development and security 
issues. Markets are distant. Climate change is a reality. 
Political instability does not help. Threats from 
communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS and 
pandemic influenza must be managed. 
 The Pacific accounts for almost one quarter of the 
surface of the world — an area bigger than Europe and 
the Middle East combined. Its strategic significance 
presents opportunity and challenge. New Zealand is 
determined to seek out the benefits of that significance 
and guard against the threats, among which I include, 
sadly, cheque-book diplomacy. 
 Across the Pacific, we have learned that regional 
problems require regional solutions. Last year, Pacific 
Island Forum leaders adopted the Pacific Plan for 
regional cooperation. Through that plan we will 
strengthen regional cooperation where it can most 
make a difference, and we will use it to promote the 
four goals of the Pacific Islands Forum: sustainable 
development, economic growth, security and good 
governance. 
 At the same time, we do not forget that our 
regional endeavours depend on strong international 
frameworks. The Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is an essential example. Another example is the 
United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement on the 
conservation and management of straddling and highly 
migratory fish stocks. 
 We are proud of our achievements in regional 
fisheries management. The Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission, with its headquarters in 
Pohnpei, manages the region’s migratory fish species. 
We are in the midst of developing new regional 
arrangements for non-migratory fish stocks. 
 These mechanisms are central to the region’s 
ability to ensure the sustainable management of its 
most important natural resources. They are at the 
leading edge in establishing best-practice management 
norms. 
 There have been profound political and security 
shocks over the past year — in the Middle East and in 
Darfur, as well as instability in Timor-Leste — those 
and more are testing the United Nations system. 
 It is a sad reality that the situation in the Middle 
East has been on the agenda of the United Nations for 
60 years, ever since its inception. The lack of sustained 
  
 
06-53323 20 
 
political will to see through more than a handful of 
decisions on the Middle East has undermined 
confidence. It has contributed to an unstable 
environment where extremism, injustice and despair 
flourish. 
 These issues must be tackled with a new resolve, 
using the international multilateral system as a tool for 
peace and progress. The international response to the 
Security Council’s call for an expanded United Nations 
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) shows that the 
international community can react to conflict and 
provide basic stabilization. But such responses are 
doomed to failure unless the underlying political and 
security issues are addressed. It is therefore imperative 
to relaunch the Middle East peace process covering all 
issues, on the basis of the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. 
 The Organization’s efforts to introduce a United 
Nations force into Darfur is being cynically thwarted 
by the Government of the Sudan. That is simply 
unconscionable. The Government of the Sudan must, in 
the name of basic humanity, accept the need for a 
United Nations force as the best chance for the security 
of the people of Darfur. 
 New and fragile States face enormous challenges. 
Recent unrest in Timor-Leste demonstrates that fact. 
New Zealand responded quickly to Timor-Leste’s 
needs with a military and police contribution to help 
restore stability. The regional response has been swift 
and robust. The United Nations played an important 
role in facilitating Timor-Leste’s independence, and it 
is clear the United Nations will continue to be involved 
in Timor-Leste for many years to come. The 
deployment of a substantial United Nations police 
force is vital if peace and stability is to be maintained 
even in the medium term. The nature of the expanded 
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste reflects the 
deep and broad engagement required to build a lasting 
peace. Timor-Leste encapsulates the principle that 
peace and security cannot be separated from economic 
development, social reconciliation and the protection 
of basic human rights. The Security Council’s mandate 
for Timor-Leste endorses that truth. 
 New Zealand fully supported the renewed focus 
on human rights at last year’s World Summit. We 
strongly campaigned for the new Human Rights 
Council, and we worked hard to bring it into being. We 
have high ambitions for it and will follow its activities 
closely. It must remain strong, focused and effective. It 
must be able to deal swiftly with emerging situations of 
human rights concern, in a balanced way, with 
scrupulous attention to verifiable facts. It must be 
aspirational, inspirational and practical. Its working 
methods must be transparent and inclusive. Above all, 
there must be genuine political will to make it work. 
 A few weeks ago, encouraged all the way by 
energetic non-governmental organizations, Member 
States agreed on the first new comprehensive human 
rights instrument of the twenty-first century: a draft 
convention relating to persons with disabilities. We are 
proud in New Zealand of the role we played in those 
negotiations on the text. The draft convention stands to 
make a real difference to the lives of approximately 
650 million of the world’s most disadvantaged citizens. 
 New Zealand is also conscious of the 
disadvantages faced by indigenous peoples in many 
parts of the world. We were closely engaged in the 
lengthy negotiations towards a declaration on the rights 
of indigenous peoples. We had hoped that the 
declaration would be a new standard of achievement 
for Governments that could be implemented to really 
improve the lives of indigenous peoples. Therefore, we 
are disappointed that that was not to be so. The draft 
declaration that emerged with less than conclusive 
support from the Human Rights Council is deeply 
flawed and represents a lost opportunity for the world’s 
indigenous peoples. 
 At the beginning of his term, the Secretary-
General set an important goal for the United Nations: 
to perfect “the triangle of development, freedom and 
peace” (A/51/PV.88, p. 13). The Secretary-General’s 
words still ring true today. We have travelled only part 
of the journey towards that goal. Considering our 
achievements over the past year, we can be satisfied 
with progress made in setting up the Human Rights 
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. The 
challenge now is to make those two new bodies truly 
effective. The welcome adoption of the United Nations 
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) 
reminds us of the efforts we must continue to make at 
regional and national levels. 
 New Zealand wants to see continuing reform high 
on the list of priorities for the sixty-first session in 
order to ensure that the United Nations can be as 
responsive as possible to the needs of Member States, 
 
 
21 06-53323 
 
and efficient in getting the best from the resources 
available to it. 
 Sixty years ago, New Zealand had high hopes for 
the United Nations. In 2006, we still do. New Zealand 
is a country that engages with the United Nations with 
no hidden agenda. What we say is what we mean. We 
engage with no other or hidden agenda. But those that 
do so pervert and weaken this Organization.  
 In 2006, at this meeting, New Zealand declares 
that we will continue to put our efforts behind the 
principles and policies that will make the United 
Nations strong. Traditionally, the General Assembly session 
provides an opportunity to conduct a review of the 
current situation in the world, identify major 
international issues and determine the role that the 
United Nations could play in resolving them.  
 I believe that we have every reason to conclude 
that there is a prevailing trend of growing awareness of 
the need to strengthen the collective foundations of 
international politics, as well as of the fact that there is 
no alternative to tackling problems through multilateral 
diplomacy. That trend is based on objective facts, for it 
reflects the realities of an emerging multipolar 
architecture of international relations. It is logical, 
because answers to global challenges and threats can 
only be found collectively. Finally, it is a manifestation 
of historical continuity, because we are revisiting the 
same objective as the founding fathers of the United 
Nations were determined to pursue by enshrining in the 
Charter the principles for a system of collective 
security.  
 It is precisely such an approach, firmly grounded 
in international law, that can ensure the world’s 
sustainable development in this era of globalization. 
That requires a strengthened central role for the 
universal Organization in every area of international 
life. 
 We must of course continue to adapt the 
mechanisms and methods of the United Nations to the 
new environment. Much has been done as follow-up to 
the decisions of the 2005 World Summit: The 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council have been established, and the reform process 
has been extended to management.  
 It is important that all our further work be based 
upon the fundamental principle of the universality of 
the United Nations. Patterns contrary to the Charter of 
the United Nations that exclude individual States or 
groups of States from participating meaningfully in the 
activities of the Organization or that introduce a single 
system of values into the work of the Secretariat are 
unsustainable. Let us not forget that the United Nations 
belongs to us all. Moreover, administrative reform 
should not lead to the bureaucracy taking over the 
management of the Organization, thereby jeopardizing 
the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. 
 A trend towards collective action has also spread 
beyond the structures of the United Nations. During 
Russia’s presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8), there 
was greater interaction between the G-8 and other 
leading countries and international organizations. Over 
  
 
06-53005 28 
 
the past 12 months our dialogue partners have actively 
contributed to Saint Petersburg summit documents on 
every main agenda item, including global energy 
security, education and controlling infectious diseases.  
 A new and genuinely collaborative type of 
interaction between the G-8 and Africa is now 
emerging in this era of globalization, as the needs of 
the continent are reflected in the mainstream of world 
development rather than being viewed as issues 
divorced from overall trends.  
 The G-8 does not have a monopoly over the 
decisions taken at Saint Petersburg. All States are 
invited to participate in their implementation. 
 Regional organizations and cooperation and 
coordination between those organizations and the 
United Nations have also strengthened in maintaining 
international peace and security. Issues pertaining to 
that were discussed yesterday at the special ministerial 
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.5529). Once 
again, we are dealing here with an important dimension 
of collective action by the international community. 
 The Commonwealth of Independent States has 
made a significant contribution to such interaction. To 
address common problems, specific actions have been 
taken within the Commonwealth area, primarily within 
the Eurasian Economic Community and the Collective 
Security Treaty Organization. Further substantive and 
resolute efforts are being made in the context of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which developed 
and launched and initiative to establish a partnership 
network for multilateral organizations in the Asia-
Pacific region. Development patterns in that region 
will largely determine the future contours of our planet.  
 Multilateral institutions in Latin America have 
also become stronger, and the development of the 
African Union is gaining momentum. 
 At their recent Summit in Havana, heads of State 
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement 
expressed their support for a collective search — 
within the context of the central role of the United 
Nations — for agreed solutions to problems 
confronting the world community. 
 Europe, of course, is not outside the common 
trend towards collective examination and resolution of 
common problems. In that connection, we also see 
growing awareness of the fact that security and 
prosperity are indivisible. We expect NATO to 
transform itself from a defence alliance into something 
more contemporary that would be in line with 
principles of transparency and collective response and 
based upon a universal legal foundation.  
 We have been watching with keen interest the 
emerging foreign policy and security mechanisms of 
the European Union. Russia is prepared to cooperate 
with multilateral structures in the Euro-Atlantic space 
and other regions of the world. In fact, we already have 
effective common mechanisms with many of them. 
 Collective efforts are also needed to further 
develop international law, primarily within the context 
of countering new threats. The United Nations Global 
Counter-terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288), which 
was recently adopted by consensus, is an important 
contribution in terms of strengthening the legal basis 
for the anti-terrorist coalition and ensuring a 
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. It is not 
only about countering all terrorist manifestations and 
ideologies, it is also about eliminating the problems 
that give rise to terrorism. The next step will be to 
agree upon a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention. 
 It is necessary to secure the achievements that 
have been made by taking practical steps. In the course 
of Russia’s presidency of the G-8, the Second 
Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking Routes 
From Afghanistan was held, where additional measures 
were approved aimed at mobilizing the international 
community to counter the terrorism-related drug threat 
originating from Afghanistan. Another international 
meeting will be held in Moscow next November to 
focus on developing modalities for government-
business partnerships in countering terrorism. 
 What is needed today are more proactive 
measures to prevent lethal weapons from falling into 
the hands of non-State actors, as well as the consistent 
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 
(2004) and other counter-terrorism resolutions of the 
Council. The Russia-United States global initiative to 
combat nuclear terrorism, which was launched at Saint 
Petersburg by Presidents Vladimir V. Putin and George 
W. Bush last July, should be an important tool in 
preventing a linkage between weapons of mass 
destruction and terrorism. That initiative invites 
interested States to act collectively. 
 The ever-growing demand for the unique 
peacekeeping capabilities of the United Nations also 
calls for a collective effort. Not all of those capabilities 
 
 
29 06-53005 
 
have been utilized to the fullest. Utilizing the 
capabilities of the Military Staff Committee, as well as 
those of regional organizations, on the basis of the 
relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter 
would be helpful. 
 It is encouraging to see a more active role being 
played by Africans themselves in peacemaking 
operations in Africa — an undertaking spearheaded by 
the African Union and supported by the United 
Nations.  
 In a number of crisis situations conditions are 
gradually emerging for a transition to post-conflict 
reconstruction. It is our hope that the Declaration on 
Cooperation and Future Action in Stabilization and 
Reconstruction adopted at the Saint Petersburg G-8 
Summit will help us complement the efforts of the 
United Nations and regional organizations at this 
critically important period of transition to 
peacebuilding. 
 A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli 
conflict remains a central task for the world 
community. Many of today’s threats have come 
together in that region, and the key to resolving them is 
most often to be found there. In that connection, I 
should first like to mention the truly global challenge 
posed by the need to prevent a schism between 
civilizations.  
 We welcome the emerging prospects for a 
national agreement in the Palestinian territories, as 
well as for the resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli 
talks. It is important to continue to encourage the 
parties to meet their respective obligations, with the 
clear understanding that any progress towards the 
objectives set out by the international community will 
inevitably be gradual and that any attempt to act in an 
all-or-nothing spirit will be counterproductive and 
could once again plunge the region into confrontation. 
 The recent war in Lebanon demonstrated the 
great fragility of the situation in the Middle East and 
the acute need for a comprehensive approach along all 
tracks. That presupposes the involvement of all 
countries and parties. Without their participation it will 
be impossible to reach any viable negotiated solution. 
It is also clear that the road to comprehensive peace 
will not be an easy one, but now is the time. The 
initiative of the League of Arab States to convene an 
international conference should contribute to finding 
the proper framework for that undertaking. The Quartet 
of international mediators should also make a key 
contribution to the process. 
 A breakthrough on a Middle East settlement 
could provide the positive momentum so wanting in 
the region. It could also facilitate the solution of other 
burning problems in the region and in neighbouring 
countries. That is particularly true as regards efforts 
aimed at stabilizing the situation in Iraq, where 
attempts to contain wanton violence and chaos have 
thus far proved unsuccessful. Dozens of people, mainly 
civilians, continue to die in Iraq every day. Five 
officials of the Russian embassy in Baghdad have also 
fallen victim to that barbarous massacre. A resolution 
in Iraq will be possible only through concerted efforts. 
That requires the involvement in the political process 
of all major Iraqi interests and the implementation of 
the plans of that country’s Government to reach 
genuine national accord, with the concerted support of 
the international community, including all of Iraq’s 
neighbours. 
 We are, unfortunately, now witnessing growing 
significance of the use of force in world affairs; that 
undermines non-proliferation regimes. The feeling of a 
lack of predictability and stability in the area of 
security is becoming ever more pronounced. Against 
that background, the growing interest of many States in 
nuclear energy may give rise to concerns, given the 
trend towards the global proliferation of sensitive 
technologies.  
 Apart from current resolute steps to find 
negotiated solutions to individual problems — such as 
the Iranian nuclear programme and the problem of the 
Korean peninsula — there is a need for an urgent effort 
by the entire international community to systematically 
strengthen non-proliferation regimes on a generally 
acceptable basis, while ensuring that the benefits of 
peaceful atomic energy are legitimately accessible to 
all States.  
 President Vladimir V. Putin’s initiative to 
establish multilateral centres for nuclear fuel-cycle 
services, along with similar ideas proposed by the 
leadership of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) and proposals put forth by United States 
President George W. Bush, have found support among 
G-8 leaders. We are confident that the development and 
practical implementation of such approaches — in 
cooperation with all countries with an interest in 
modern and safe nuclear energy — will make it 
  
 
06-53005 30 
 
possible to resolve non-proliferation issues in a non-
confrontational manner. 
 As in other areas, the obsession with sanctions — 
applied without calculating their consequences — 
might produce unpredictable results. It is absolutely 
necessary to eliminate the loopholes in the non-
proliferation regimes, but that should be done through 
clear and non-discriminatory approaches, without 
creating grounds for suspicion regarding the existence 
of some hidden agenda. 
 Stagnation in the international disarmament 
process does not help to resolve non-proliferation 
problems. Here again, we need concerted action, for 
this is a matter of collective security. 
 In the area of strategic arms, the United States-
Russian agreements play an enormously important role. 
Their significance goes far beyond the framework of 
bilateral relations, considering that virtually all 
members of the international community benefit from 
strategic stability. We support the consistent 
development of the United States-Russian bilateral 
disarmament process, as was stated by our Presidents 
in Saint Petersburg in July.  
 Closely related to that are issues related to anti-
ballistic missiles, in particular within the context of the 
existing plans of the United States. In that context, 
there is a need for complete transparency and for an 
analysis of the consequences for strategic stability. 
 The situation surrounding the Treaty on 
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe continues to 
cause grave concern. The old Treaty, based on the 
realities of confrontation between military blocs, has 
lost its relevance, while NATO is blocking the entry 
into force of the Agreement on its adaptation. 
 At the same time, reconfiguration of the military 
architecture on the European continent is under way. At 
its heart is an expanding military alliance. Such virtual 
arms control becomes meaningless as it turns into a 
one-way street.  
 It is also necessary to revitalize multilateral 
disarmament approaches. That agenda should include 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, non-deployment of weapons in outer 
space, conclusion of a fissile material cut-off treaty and 
ensuring information security. Nuclear-weapon-free 
zones play an important role, and we welcome the 
creation of such a zone in Central Asia. 
 The overall task is to reinvigorate the efforts of 
the international community in the area of disarmament 
and arms control, within the framework of the 
Conference on Disarmament and other relevant United 
Nations bodies.  
 The 2005 World Summit unanimously reaffirmed 
that peace, security and development are inseparable. 
With that in mind, we are prepared to engage in 
collective discussions and support further joint 
pragmatic steps with a view to improving the 
efficiency of the social and economic activities of the 
entire United Nations system. 
 The Russian Federation realizes its responsibility 
as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, 
and is devoting increasing attention to development 
assistance. Thus far, Russia has written off or has 
undertaken to write off $11.3 billion of the debt of 
African countries, including more than $2.2 billion 
within the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt 
Initiative. New steps are planned in that area. Russia 
now ranks third in absolute figures of debt relief and 
first in terms of the ratio of debt relief to gross 
domestic product. We have also increased our 
contributions to other international development 
assistance mechanisms, including through United 
Nations institutions and funds and the Bretton Woods 
institutions. 
 Today, I cannot fail to express my sincere 
appreciation and praise to the Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan. For many years, during the most difficult times 
for world politics, he has carried out his duties with 
dignity. Thanks largely to the efforts of Kofi Annan 
and to his ability to take the lead while remaining a 
realist in the face of severe challenges, we have 
managed to make progress in strengthening the United 
Nations. 
 Today the United Nations is relevant as never 
before. We do not have to create it anew. In the course 
of reforming the United Nations in accordance with the 
dictates of the time, it is incumbent upon us all to 
reaffirm by action our commitment to the world 
Organization, which draws its strength from our trust 
in it and in its unique legitimacy. Without the United 
Nations and its Charter to rely upon, it would prove 
impossible to ensure a more reliable and democratic 
system of collective security that would respond to the 
dictates of our time. I am grateful for the privilege of 
speaking to the General Assembly. 
 Last week, America and the world marked the 
fifth anniversary of the attacks that filled another 
September morning with death and suffering. On that 
terrible day, extremists killed nearly 3,000 innocent 
people, including citizens of dozens of nations 
represented right here in this Hall. Since then, the 
enemies of humanity have continued their campaign of 
murder. Al-Qaida and those inspired by its extremist 
ideology have attacked more than two dozen nations. 
And recently, a different group of extremists 
deliberately provoked a terrible conflict in Lebanon. At 
the start of the twenty-first century, it is clear that the 
world is engaged in a great ideological struggle 
between extremists who use terror as a weapon to 
create fear and moderate people who work for peace. 
 Five years ago, I stood at this rostrum and called 
on the community of nations to defend civilization and 
build a more hopeful future. This is still the great 
challenge of our time. It is the calling of our 
generation. This morning, I want to speak about the 
more hopeful world that is within our reach — a world 
beyond terror, where ordinary men and women are free 
to determine their own destiny, where the voices of 
moderation are empowered and where the extremists 
are marginalized by the peaceful majority. This world 
can be ours if we seek it and if we work together. 
 The principles of this world beyond terror can be 
found in the very first sentence of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. This document declares 
that the “equal and inalienable rights of all members of 
the human family [are] the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world”. One of the authors of 
this document was a Lebanese diplomat named Charles 
Malik, who would go on to become President of this 
Assembly. Mr. Malik insisted that these principles 
apply equally to all people, of all religions, in all 
regions — including the men and women of the Arab 
world that was his home. 
 In the nearly six decades since that document was 
approved, we have seen the forces of freedom and 
moderation transform entire continents. Sixty years 
after a terrible war, Europe is now whole, free and at 
peace, and Asia has seen freedom progress and 
hundreds of millions of people lifted out of desperate 
poverty. The words of the Universal Declaration are as 
true today as they were when they were written. As 
liberty flourishes, nations grow in tolerance, and hope, 
and peace. And we are seeing the bright future begin to 
take root in the broader Middle East. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East have 
been dramatic, and we see the results in this Hall. Five 
years ago, Afghanistan was ruled by the brutal Taliban 
regime, and its seat in this body was contested. Now 
this seat is held by the freely elected Government of 
Afghanistan, which is represented today by President 
Karzai. Five years ago, Iraq’s seat in this body was 
 
 
9 06-52731 
 
held by a dictator who killed his citizens, invaded his 
neighbours and showed his contempt for the world by 
defying more than a dozen Security Council 
resolutions. Now Iraq’s seat is held by a democratic 
Government that embodies the aspirations of the Iraqi 
people, represented today by President Talabani. With 
these changes, more than 50 million people have been 
given a voice in this Hall for the first time in decades. 
 Some of the changes in the Middle East are 
happening gradually, but they are real. Algeria has held 
its first competitive presidential election, and the 
military remained neutral. The United Arab Emirates 
recently announced that half of its seats in the Federal 
National Council will be chosen by elections. Kuwait 
held elections in which women were allowed to vote 
and run for office for the first time. Citizens have voted 
in municipal elections in Saudi Arabia, in 
parliamentary elections in Jordan and Bahrain and in 
multiparty presidential elections in Yemen and in 
Egypt. These are important steps, and the Governments 
should continue to move forward with other reforms 
that show that they trust their people. Every nation that 
travels the road to freedom moves at a different pace, 
and the democracies they build will reflect their own 
cultures and traditions. But the destination is the same: 
a free society where people live at peace with each 
other and at peace with the world. 
 Some have argued that the democratic changes 
we are seeing in the Middle East are destabilizing the 
region. This argument rests on a false assumption: that 
the Middle East was stable to begin with. The reality is 
that the stability we thought we saw in the Middle East 
was a mirage. For decades, millions of men and women 
in the region have been trapped in oppression and 
hopelessness. And these conditions left a generation 
disillusioned and made this region a breeding ground 
for extremism. 
 Imagine what it is like to be a young person 
living in a country that is not moving toward reform. 
You are 21 years old, and while your peers in other 
parts of the world are casting their ballots for the first 
time, you are powerless to change the course of your 
Government. While your peers in other parts of the 
world have received educations that prepare them for 
the opportunities of a global economy, you have been 
fed propaganda and conspiracy theories that blame 
others for your country’s shortcomings. And 
everywhere you turn, you hear extremists who tell you 
that you can escape your misery and regain your 
dignity through violence and terror and martyrdom. For 
many across the broader Middle East, this is the dismal 
choice presented every day. 
 Every civilized nation, including those in the 
Muslim world, must support those in the region who 
are offering a more hopeful alternative. We know that 
when people have a voice in their future they are less 
likely to blow themselves up in suicide attacks. We 
know that when leaders are accountable to their people, 
they are more likely to seek national greatness in the 
achievements of their citizens, rather than in terror and 
conquest. So we must stand with democratic leaders 
and moderate reformers across the broader Middle 
East. We must give voice to the hopes of decent men 
and women who want for their children the same things 
we want for ours. We must seek stability through a free 
and just Middle East where the extremists are 
marginalized by millions of citizens in control of their 
own destinies. 
 Today, I would like to speak directly to the 
people across the broader Middle East. My country 
desires peace. Extremists in your midst spread 
propaganda claiming that the West is engaged in a war 
against Islam. This propaganda is false, and its purpose 
is to confuse you and justify acts of terror. We respect 
Islam, but we will protect our people from those who 
pervert Islam to sow death and destruction. Our goal is 
to help you build a more tolerant and hopeful society 
that honours people of all faiths and promotes peace. 
 To the people of Iraq: nearly 12 million of you 
braved the car bombers and assassins last December to 
vote in free elections. The world saw you hold up 
purple ink-stained fingers, and your courage filled us 
with admiration. You have stood firm in the face of 
horrendous acts of terror and sectarian violence, and 
we will not abandon you in your struggle to build a 
free nation. America and our coalition partners will 
continue to stand with the democratic Government you 
elected. We will continue to help you secure the 
international assistance and investment you need to 
create jobs and opportunity, working with the United 
Nations and through the International Compact with 
Iraq endorsed here in New York yesterday. We will 
continue to train those of you who stepped forward to 
fight the enemies of freedom. We will not yield the 
future of your country to terrorists and extremists. In 
return, your leaders must rise to the challenges your 
country is facing and make difficult choices to bring 
security and prosperity. Working together, we will help 
  
 
06-52731 10 
 
your democracy succeed, so that it can become a 
beacon of hope for millions in the Muslim world. 
 To the people of Afghanistan: together, we 
overthrew the Taliban regime that brought misery into 
your lives and harboured terrorists who brought death 
to the citizens of many nations. Since then, we have 
watched you choose your leaders in free elections and 
build a democratic Government. You can be proud of 
these achievements. We respect your courage and your 
determination to live in peace and freedom. We will 
continue to stand with you to defend your democratic 
gains. 
 Today, forces from more than 40 countries, 
including members of the NATO alliance, are bravely 
serving side by side with you against the extremists 
who want to bring down the free Government you have 
established. We will help you defeat these enemies and 
build a free Afghanistan that will never again oppress 
you or be a safe haven for terrorists. 
 To the people of Lebanon: last year, you inspired 
the world when you came out into the streets to 
demand your independence from Syrian dominance. 
You drove Syrian forces from your country and you 
re-established democracy. Since then, you have been 
tested by the fighting that began with Hizbollah’s 
unprovoked attacks on Israel. Many of you have seen 
your homes and your communities caught in crossfire. 
We see your suffering, and the world is helping you to 
rebuild your country and helping you deal with the 
armed extremists who are undermining your 
democracy by acting as a State within a State. 
 The United Nations has passed a good resolution 
that has authorized an international force, led by 
France and Italy, to help you restore Lebanese 
sovereignty over Lebanese soil. For many years, 
Lebanon was a model of democracy and pluralism and 
openness in the region — and it will be again. 
 To the people of Iran: the United States respects 
you. We respect your country. We admire your rich 
history, your vibrant culture and your many 
contributions to civilization. You deserve an 
opportunity to determine your own future, an economy 
that rewards your intelligence and your talents and a 
society that allows you to fulfil your tremendous 
potential. The greatest obstacle to this future is that 
your rulers have chosen to deny you liberty and to use 
your nation’s resources to fund terrorism, and fuel 
extremism, and pursue nuclear weapons. 
 The United Nations has passed a clear resolution 
requiring that the regime in Tehran meet its 
international obligations. Iran must abandon its nuclear 
weapons ambitions. Despite what the regime tells you, 
we have no objection to Iran’s pursuit of a truly 
peaceful nuclear power programme. We are working 
toward a diplomatic solution to this crisis, and as we 
do, we look to the day when you can live in freedom 
and America and Iran can be good friends and close 
partners in the cause of peace. 
 To the people of Syria: your land is home to a 
great people with a proud tradition of learning and 
commerce. Today your rulers have allowed your 
country to become a crossroad for terrorism. In your 
midst, Hamas and Hizbollah are working to destabilize 
the region, and your Government is turning your 
country into a tool of Iran. This is increasing your 
country’s isolation from the world. Your Government 
must choose a better way forward by ending its support 
for terror, and living in peace with your neighbours, 
and opening the way to a better life for you and your 
families. 
 To the people of Darfur: you have suffered 
unspeakable violence, and my nation has called these 
atrocities what they are: genocide. For the last two 
years, America joined with the international 
community to provide emergency food aid and support 
for an African Union peacekeeping force. Yet your 
suffering continues. The world must step forward to 
provide additional humanitarian aid, and we must 
strengthen the African Union force that has done good 
work but is not strong enough to protect you. The 
Security Council has approved a resolution that would 
transform the African Union force into a blue-helmeted 
force that is larger and more robust. To increase its 
strength and effectiveness, NATO nations should 
provide logistics and other support. The regime in 
Khartoum is stopping the deployment of this force. If 
the Sudanese Government does not approve this 
peacekeeping force quickly, the United Nations must 
act. Your lives and the credibility of the United Nations 
are at stake. So today I am announcing that I am 
naming a presidential Special Envoy — former 
Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development, Andrew Natsios — to lead 
America’s efforts to resolve the outstanding disputes 
and help bring peace to your land. 
 The world must also stand up for peace in the 
Holy Land. I am committed to two democratic States, 
 
 
11 06-52731 
 
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and 
security. I am committed to a Palestinian State that has 
territorial integrity and will live peacefully with the 
Jewish State of Israel. This is the vision set forth in the 
road map, and helping the parties to reach this goal is 
one of the great objectives of my presidency. The 
Palestinian people have suffered from decades of 
corruption and violence and the daily humiliation of 
occupation. Israeli citizens have endured brutal acts of 
terrorism and constant fear of attack since the birth of 
their nation. Many brave men and women have made 
the commitment to peace. Yet extremists in the region 
are stirring up hatred and trying to prevent these 
moderate voices from prevailing. 
 This struggle is unfolding in the Palestinian 
territories. Earlier this year, the Palestinian people 
voted in a free election. The leaders of Hamas 
campaigned on a platform of ending corruption and 
improving the lives of the Palestinian people, and they 
prevailed. The world is waiting to see whether the 
Hamas Government will follow through on its 
promises or pursue an extremist agenda. The world has 
sent a clear message to the leaders of Hamas: serve the 
interests of the Palestinian people, abandon terror, 
recognize Israel’s right to exist, honour agreements and 
work for peace. 
 President Abbas is committed to peace and to his 
people’s aspirations for a State of their own. Prime 
Minister Olmert is committed to peace, and has said he 
intends to meet with President Abbas to make real 
progress on the outstanding issues between them. I 
believe that peace can be achieved and that a 
democratic Palestinian State is possible. I hear from 
leaders in the region who want to help. I have directed 
Secretary of State Rice to lead a diplomatic effort to 
engage moderate leaders across the region to help the 
Palestinians reform their security services and support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders in their efforts to come 
together to resolve their differences. 
 Prime Minister Blair has indicated that his 
country will work with partners in Europe to help 
strengthen the governing institutions of the Palestinian 
administration. We welcome his initiative. Countries 
like Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt have made clear 
that they are willing to contribute the diplomatic and 
financial assistance necessary to help these efforts 
succeed. I am optimistic that, by supporting the forces 
of democracy and moderation, we can help Israelis and 
Palestinians build a more hopeful future and achieve 
the peace in the Holy Land that we all want. 
 Freedom, by its nature, cannot be imposed; it 
must be chosen. From Beirut to Baghdad, people are 
making the choice for freedom. And the nations 
gathered in this Hall must make a choice as well. Will 
we support the moderates and reformers who are 
working for change across the Middle East, or will we 
yield the future to the terrorists and extremists? 
America has made its choice: we will stand with the 
moderates and reformers. 
 Recently, a courageous group of Arab and 
Muslim intellectuals wrote me a letter. In it, they said 
this: “The shore of reform is the only one on which any 
lights appear, even though the journey demands 
courage, patience and perseverance”. The United 
Nations was created to make that journey possible. 
Together we must support the dreams of good and 
decent people who are working to transform a troubled 
region. And by doing so, we will advance the high 
ideals on which this institution was founded. Once again, we have convened 
at this seat of the Organization of the peoples of the 
world, representing the whole of humanity and coming 
from all corners of the world. Our pilgrimage this year 
is tinged with sadness, because we are also paying 
  
 
06-52731 12 
 
homage to one of the most outstanding servants of the 
United Nations, a native son of Africa, Kofi Annan, 
whose term of office will soon come to an end. 
 The Group of 77 and China, as well as my own 
country, South Africa, sincerely thanks the Secretary-
General for the selfless and dedicated work he carried 
out during one of the most challenging periods in the 
history of this Organization. In the midst of increasing 
poverty and underdevelopment during an era of 
unprecedented wealth accumulation and technological 
advances, and as the river that divides the rich and the 
poor zones of the metaphorical global village ever 
widened, the Secretary-General never lost focus on the 
imperatives of our time. 
 We thank him for never losing sight of the fact 
that poverty and underdevelopment remain the biggest 
threats to the progress that has been achieved, and that 
equality among nations big and small is central to the 
survival, relevance and credibility of this global 
Organization. 
 We are only six years into the twenty-first 
century. Those who populate the poorest of the regions 
of the world — that is, Africa — have boldly declared 
that it will be an African century. It is a century that 
billions of citizens of the developing world and other 
poor and marginalized people want to transform into a 
century for all humanity. 
 If the wishes of the majority of the world could 
turn into reality, this would be a century free of wars, 
free of internecine conflicts, free of hunger, free of 
preventable disease, free of want, free of 
environmental degradation and free of greed and 
corruption. Indeed, we began the century with great 
hopes for a better, peaceful and more humane world. 
 Together, we crafted comprehensive plans and 
bold declarations to defeat the scourge of poverty and 
underdevelopment. Together, we committed ourselves, 
with what seemed like renewed vigour, to transform 
the United Nations to reflect the modern reality that is 
defined by free, sovereign and equal nations. 
 However, six years into the twenty-first century, 
dispassionate observers might well challenge us to 
achieve our noble and lofty objectives, pointing to the 
terrorists’ acts that welcomed us into the new century. 
They might emphasize the unilateralism that threatens 
to negate the democratic advances of the last decades 
of the twentieth century and draw attention to renewed 
conflicts and wars that seem to compete with the 
destructive fury of the conflicts of the last century. 
 They would remind us that for a decade and 
more, some of the developed nations have consistently 
refused to implement the outcomes and agreements of 
this world body that would help to alleviate the 
wretchedness of the poor. Thus, Madam President, 
when you correctly urge us to implement a global 
partnership for development, we, the members of the 
Group of 77 and China, who represent the poor people 
of the world, understand you to be communicating a 
message that we should give substance to the common 
commitments we solemnly made at this supreme 
Organization of the nations of the world. 
 Yet, this common commitment for a global 
partnership for development cannot be transformed 
into reality when the rich and powerful insist on an 
unequal relationship with the poor. A global 
partnership for development is impossible in the 
absence of a pact of mutual responsibility between the 
giver and the recipient. It is impossible when the rich 
unilaterally demand the right to set the agenda and 
conditions for the implementation of commonly agreed 
programmes. 
 We who represent the poor know as a matter of 
fact that these billions of poor people are increasingly 
becoming impatient, because every year they hear us 
adopt declaration after declaration and yet nothing 
practical is done to assuage the hunger pains that keep 
them awake at night. Only few and selected agreements 
are implemented, with outcomes that are clearly 
insufficient to alleviate the excruciating pain of their 
children who cannot cry anymore because to do so is to 
invite more pain. 
 Those of us who were at the 14th Summit of the 
Non-Aligned Movement in Havana heard this message 
very clearly emanating from all the countries and 
organizations that spoke. Those who are capable of 
listening should take note of what that great son of 
India and South Africa, Mahatma Gandhi, said on this 
matter: 
 “The test of friendship is assistance in adversity, 
and that too, unconditional assistance. 
Cooperation which needs consideration is a 
commercial contract and not friendship. 
Conditional cooperation is like adulterated cement 
which does not bind.” 
 
 
13 06-52731 
 
 Precisely because of the absence of a global 
partnership for development, the Doha Development 
Round has almost collapsed. Indeed, because the rich 
implicitly invoked the slogan of an over-confident 
European political party of the 1960s, and directed this 
uncaring declaration to the poor of today — “I’m 
alright, Jack!” — we have not implemented the 
Monterrey Consensus on Financing for Development, 
thus making it difficult for the majority of the 
developing countries, especially those in Africa, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 
and we have reduced the Johannesburg Plan of 
Implementation to an insignificant, and perhaps 
forgotten, piece of paper. 
 Part of the problem with this unequal relationship 
is the imposition of conditions on developing countries 
and the constant shifting of the goalposts, whenever the 
poor adhere to each and every one of those conditions. 
 Among other things, we have recently seen an 
outbreak of great social instability across Europe and 
other reactions of the poor to their miserable conditions 
in different parts of the world, which calls into 
question the image of a seemingly harmonious well-
woven tapestry of diverse groups, because we continue 
to fail to implement our own decisions as taken at the 
United Nations World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance. Those who coined the slogan: “I’m alright, 
Jack!” were communicating, whether consciously or 
not, a message and an attitude that said “I don’t care 
about my neighbour as long as my family and I eat 
well and sleep peacefully” and that “It is not my 
responsibility to ensure that my poor neighbour also 
eats well and sleeps peacefully.” 
 Today, the attitude among some of the rich also 
communicates the same message to the rest of the 
world, namely, “I’m alright, Jack!”, even when they are 
acutely aware that many in their neighbourhood are 
dying from hunger, preventable diseases and abject 
poverty. 
 This happens also in the cruelly ironic situation 
where resources flow from those who have little to 
those who have plenty. Although the rich and powerful 
know the miserable life circumstances of the poor and 
have solemnly committed themselves to the collective 
effort to reverse those conditions, their attitude and 
response resembles that of the Biblical Cain, who, after 
he killed his brother, Abel, and the Lord asked him 
“Where is Abel, your brother?”, replied: “I do not 
know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” 
 Perhaps, all of us, especially the rich, should heed 
the words of one of the great sons of the United States 
of America, who perished because of his belief in 
equality and justice for all human beings and whose 
civil rights movement is currently marking its golden 
jubilee. Martin Luther King Jr. warned that 
 “As long as there is poverty in the world I can 
never be rich, even if I have a billion dollars. As 
long as diseases are rampant and millions of 
people in this world cannot expect to live more 
than 28 or 30 years, I can never be totally healthy 
even if I just got a good check-up at the Mayo 
Clinic. I can never be what I ought to be until you 
are what you ought to be. This is the way our 
world is made. No individual or nation can stand 
out boasting of being independent. We are 
interdependent.” 
 The majority of the human race is entitled to ask 
the question whether the rich respond the way they do 
because further impoverishment of the poor is to the 
advantage of the rich, giving meaning to the old 
observation that the rich get richer as the poor get 
poorer. As the divide between the rich and the poor 
widens and becomes a serious global crisis, we see an 
increase in the concentration of economic, military, 
technological, media and other power. 
 Something is seriously wrong when people risk 
life and limb travelling in suffocating containers to 
Western Europe in search of a better life. Something is 
wrong when many Africans traverse, on foot, the harsh, 
hot and hostile Sahara Desert to reach European 
shores. Something is wrong when walls are built to 
prevent poor neighbours from entering those countries 
where they seek better opportunities. Something is 
indeed wrong when all these people, whose fault is 
merely the fact that their lives are defined by poverty, 
try desperately to reach countries where they believe 
the conditions of their existence could improve, only to 
meet hostile, and at times, barbaric and inhuman 
receptions. 
 In part, the United Nations is unable to fulfil 
some of the objectives set by the founders in San 
Francisco because, in truth, it does not reflect the 
expansion of the global family of free nations. Because 
this Organization of the peoples of the world has 
grown to encompass the entire world, many had 
  
 
06-52731 14 
 
thought that it would be logical that this custodian of 
global democracy would itself serve as a beacon in our 
continuing quest for democracy in all our countries. 
 Clearly, for the United Nations to continue 
occupying its moral high ground, it has to reform itself 
urgently and lead by practical example, showing what 
it means to be democratic. Even as we face the cold 
reality of the indifference of many among the rich and 
powerful, this Organization of the peoples of the world 
has continued to offer hope and the possibility of the 
fulfilment of the aspirations of the majority of the 
peoples of the world. 
 All of us, including those who hesitate to 
implement the commonly agreed positions, agree that 
this Organization has entrenched the correct 
understanding that development is a right and is central 
to the advancement of humanity. All of us, individually 
and collectively and as Members of the United 
Nations, must do whatever is necessary to develop and 
implement policies and strategies aimed at the 
achievement of sustainable development. It is 
important that international organizations such as the 
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) and others should, without any 
equivocation, seriously embark on the implementation 
of all the commitments that we have made as the 
international community. 
 This Organization of the peoples of the world 
cannot merely note the unacceptable situation that 
Africa will not achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals by 2015. We need further programmes, focused 
and concrete, to accelerate development in Africa and 
avoid the possibility of that continent sinking further 
into the morass of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 Because we are our brothers’ and sisters’ keepers, 
we have the responsibility to end the rhetoric and 
implement programmes that ensure that all human 
beings live decent, humane and prosperous lives. 
 On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, as well 
as my own country, South Africa, I take this 
opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, 
for the great work he did in steering this Organization 
during this past year as President of the General 
Assembly. 
 We are honoured to welcome Her Excellency 
Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-first session, and we 
wish her well in her important work. Madam President, 
we pledge to do whatever is necessary to make your 
work easier, so that through your efforts, the poor can 
regain full confidence in the ability of the United 
Nations to improve their conditions of life. 
 Every day the masses cry out in pain, frustration 
and anger. Every day they ask whether there is 
anybody who stops to hear their voices, anybody who 
listens and who is ready to respond to their heartfelt 
plea for the restoration of their dignity. 