I  wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I am convinced that under your able 
leadership, the current session will be a fruitful one. I 
also wish to thank Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa for 
her contribution during her presidency of the previous 
session. 
 The current international environment is highly 
complex. Mankind is facing both unprecedented 
opportunities and challenges. There is a growing trend 
towards peace, development and cooperation in the 
world. But, on the other hand, traditional and non-
traditional security threats are intertwined; hotspot 
issues are acute; the gap between the North and South 
is widening; trade protectionism is resurfacing; and 
developing countries generally remain in a 
disadvantaged position. The steady trend towards 
economic globalization and towards a multi-polar 
world is fostering a new way of thinking about 
international relations. 
 In this Hall two years ago, Chinese President Hu 
Jintao called on mankind to build a harmonious world 
with lasting peace and common prosperity in the 
twenty-first century (see A/60/PV.5). The core message 
of his call is that, while recognizing the diversity of the 
world, differences of interests and diversity of cultures, 
we should harmonize interests, defuse conflicts and 
promote cooperation for win-win progress in a 
peaceful and cooperative manner. 
 In its 62-year history, the United Nations has 
played an irreplaceable role in promoting humankind’s 
cause of peace and development. The current session of 
the General Assembly should focus on promoting 
harmonious coexistence among countries. Resolving 
hotspot issues and peacefully settling international 
disputes through dialogue and cooperation are not only 
explicitly called for by the United Nations Charter. 
They are also the right way to uphold world peace and 
stability and achieve mutual benefit and a win-win 
situation for all. 
 China remains committed to seeking a peaceful 
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula 
through dialogue to uphold peace and stability on the 
peninsula and throughout North-East Asia. The Six-
Party Talks have become an important platform for the 
parties concerned to maintain dialogue and 
consultations on achieving denuclearization on the 
peninsula, normalizing relations between the countries 
concerned and building a new harmonious architecture 
in North-East Asia. We will continue to play a 
constructive role in advancing the process of the Six-
Party Talks and the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula. 
 Diplomatic negotiations are the best option for 
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue peacefully and 
meeting the common interests of the international 
community. China opposes nuclear-weapon 
proliferation and stands for upholding the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. No non-proliferation effort 
should deviate from the goal of upholding international 
peace and stability. Countries should honour their due 
international obligations, and their right to peaceful use 
of nuclear energy should be fully respected. China 
urges the parties concerned to show flexibility and 
resume negotiations at an early date. China will 
continue to contribute its share to the peaceful 
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 The Palestine-Israel conflict is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. China supports the just cause of the 
Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the restoration 
of their lawful national rights, and it sincerely hopes 
that Arab countries and Israel will promptly end their 
disputes through political negotiations on the basis of 
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of 
land for peace. China calls on Palestine to strengthen 
its unity and welcomes the initiative to hold an 
international conference on the Middle East. We hope 
that the Iraqi people will continue to work for national 
reconciliation and restore peace and stability at an 
early date, and that this will lead to a comprehensive, 
just and lasting resolution of the Middle East issue. 
 The trilateral dialogue and consultation among 
the United Nations, the African Union and the 
Sudanese Government on an equal footing is an 
effective mechanism for resolving the Darfur issue. 
The international community should work to sustain 
the current sound momentum and give full play to the 
role of the trilateral mechanism as the main channel. 
We should adhere to dual-track strategy, promote 
balanced progress in peacekeeping operations and the 
political process and seek a lasting solution to the 
Darfur issue through making progress in the security, 
political, humanitarian, economic and social areas. 
China is committed to a proper settlement of the Darfur 
issue. It has provided humanitarian assistance to Darfur 
on a number of occasions and will send a military 
engineering unit to join the peacekeeping operations 
there. China will continue to firmly support the peace 
and national reconciliation process in the Sudan and 
will contribute to the resolution of the Darfur issue and 
peace, stability and development in the Sudan. 
 At its current session, the General Assembly 
should promote the peaceful development of all 
countries. Poverty is a major source of disputes, and 
only development can eliminate poverty. Human 
development concerns us all. Obviously, it is 
impossible to build common prosperity when there is a 
huge chasm between the North and the South. The 
international community should act with a sense of 
urgency and redouble its efforts to deliver the 
Millennium Development Goals, narrow the North-
South gap and, in particular, meet Africa’s special 
development needs. Developed countries should 
increase assistance, further open their domestic 
markets, transfer more technologies to developing 
countries and provide greater debt relief to them. 
 For their part, developing countries, on their part, 
should adopt development strategies and policies 
suited to their national conditions and boost their 
economic development. We should support an open, 
equitable and fair multilateral trade regime and oppose 
trade protectionism. We should work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations and make it a development round. 
Reform of the international economic system should 
fully reflect changes in the world economy and should 
give developing countries more say and greater 
representation in the international economic system. 
 China gives a high priority to strengthening 
international cooperation on development as it 
develops itself. We seek coordinated and balanced 
global development. While a developing country itself, 
China has all along provided assistance to African 
countries and other developing countries, according to 
its ability, and has helped them to improve their 
capacity for independent and sustainable development. 
That is because we believe that lasting peace and the 
common prosperity of the world is possible only with 
the development of developing countries. 
 To help Africa attain stability, security and 
sustainable development is the common responsibility 
of the international community. China and African 
countries enjoy mutual political respect and equality 
and economic mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. 
They support one another and maintain close 
consultation in international affairs. We draw on one 
another’s strengths in governance to promote 
development. Thanks to our joint efforts, China-Africa 
cooperation has yielded fruitful results. Such 
cooperation is well received by the African countries, 
and it has brought great benefits to both the Chinese 
and African peoples. China’s cooperation with Africa 
facilitates Africa’s cooperation with other countries and 
is not targeted against any third party. 
 The current session of the General Assembly 
should be devoted to promoting harmony between man 
and nature. Development in the world has both 
advanced material progress and caused ecological 
imbalance and environmental pollution. To protect our 
common homeland is a matter of vital importance for 
our common future. 
 Climate change is an environmental issue, but 
ultimately it is an issue of development. It has arisen in 
the course of development and can be resolved only 
through development. We should uphold the 
framework of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol 
and adhere to the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities. Developed countries 
should face up to their responsibilities, fulfil their 
commitments on emissions reduction in earnest and 
continue to take the lead in emissions reduction after 
2012. We should strengthen international cooperation 
on energy, resources and the environment, step up 
efforts to develop and introduce energy-conserving 
technologies, environmental protection technologies 
and low-carbon energy technologies, and establish 
reasonable mechanisms for financing and technology 
transfer. That will enable developing countries to gain 
access to and afford advanced environmental-
protection technologies, enhance capacity to respond to 
climate change and effectively address climate change 
through achieving sustainable development. 
 China takes climate change seriously. Though its 
current per capita carbon dioxide emissions are less 
than one third of the average of developed countries, 
China, acting in a way that is highly responsible to 
mankind, has taken many effective measures to tackle 
climate change, including adopting a series of laws and 
regulations and setting the goals of reducing energy 
intensity and increasing forest cover. The Chinese 
Government has set the following targets: to reduce 
energy intensity and total discharge of major pollutants 
by about 20 per cent and 10 per cent respectively and 
to increase the forest cover rate to 20 per cent for the 
period between the end of 2005 and 2010. Under its 
National Climate Change Programme, China will take 
an active part in international cooperation in climate 
change and contribute its share to protecting the global 
climate. 
 Advancing United Nations reform and enabling 
the Organization to play a more important role in 
maintaining world peace, promoting common 
development and strengthening cooperation among 
countries is crucial to building a harmonious world. 
China supports the reform of the United Nations. The 
reform decisions made at the high-level meeting 
marking the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations 
held in 2005 should be implemented in a 
comprehensive and balanced manner. Priority should 
be given to reform in the area of development, and the 
United Nations should increase its input in that area. 
The Human Rights Council should build on the 
outcome of reform in its previous phase and become a 
platform for dialogue and cooperation rather than an 
arena for political confrontation. Security Council 
reform should give priority to increasing the 
representation of developing countries and give small 
and medium-sized countries more opportunities to 
participate in decision-making. Reform proposals 
should be based on the widest possible consensus. 
China is ready to work with all other parties to turn 
reform into a process of strengthening consultation and 
dialogue and promoting solidarity and cooperation 
among all United Nations Member States. 
 China is committed to building a society of 
democracy, the rule of law, equity and justice, integrity 
and amity, vitality, stability and order, where people 
live in harmony with nature. To achieve that goal, 
China is fully implementing the outcomes of scientific 
thinking on development. We are working to boost 
social productivity and ensure people’s rights in the 
political, economic, cultural, social and other fields. By 
striving to build a harmonious society and by 
improving the material and cultural life of one fifth of 
the world’s population, China is making a true 
contribution to the building of a harmonious world. 
 China has always pursued its own development as 
a part of the global effort to promote the common 
progress of mankind. In international affairs, we are 
committed to the following goals: promoting 
participation in international affairs by all countries on 
an equal footing and democracy in international 
relations; enabling all countries to share the benefits of 
economic globalization and progress in science and 
technology for a win-win outcome; promoting 
exchanges and understanding among civilizations and 
diversity in the world; enhancing dialogue and trust 
among countries; and jointly tackling global issues. 
China unswervingly pursues a path of peaceful 
development and will continue to make further 
contributions to humankind’s cause of peace and 
development. 
 Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory. 
We will not permit any challenge to the one-China 
principle and General Assembly resolution 2758 
(XXVI). For 15 years running, since 1993, the General 
Assembly has rejected the inclusion of Taiwan-related 
issues in the agenda of the General Assembly session. 
This fully demonstrates that any move that runs 
counter to the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations Charter or attempts to distort and deny General 
Assembly resolution 2758 (XXVI) will not receive any 
support from the United Nations Member States and is 
doomed to failure. We hope that the countries 
concerned will not allow themselves to be manipulated 
by the Taiwan authorities and will stop making wrong 
moves of this kind. 
The Taiwan authorities are now obstinately 
clinging to the separatist course of “Taiwan 
independence” and are trying by all means to secure a 
referendum on applying for membership of the United 
Nations under the name Taiwan. This is another 
dangerous step towards “de jure Taiwan independence” 
taken by the Chen Shui-bian authorities. If unchecked, 
this move will gravely endanger peace and stability 
across the Taiwan Strait and in the Asia-Pacific region. 
The Chinese Government has always made every effort 
to promote with all sincerity peaceful development of 
cross-Strait relations and to seek peaceful 
reunification. However, we will never allow anyone to 
separate Taiwan from China in name or in any other 
way. We hope that the international community will 
continue to support China’s cause of peaceful 
reunification, support the Chinese people in opposing 
and repulsing separatist activities for “Taiwan 
independence” and work with us to maintain peace and 
stability across the Taiwan Straits and in the Asia-
Pacific region. 
 The Olympic Games, which represent humanity’s 
aspiration for peace, development, cooperation and 
friendship, will for the first time be held in China, a 
country both ancient and youthful, starting on 8 August 
2008. One World, One Dream   this is the theme of 
the Beijing Olympic Games. The 1.3 billion people in 
China, together with the rest of the world, are eagerly 
looking forward to the opening of the Games. The 
2008 Olympic Games are a great event for both the 
Chinese people and the other peoples of the world. We 
are confident that with the efforts made by the Chinese 
people and with strong support from the international 
community, the 2008 Olympic Games will stand out as 
a highly successful event. 
Please accept  my congratulations, Mr. President, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I wish you every success. 
 We are currently experiencing a period of 
dramatic changes. Great opportunities are accompanied 
by considerable risks. Global structures are changing. 
States, economies and societies are becoming 
networked as never before. That is what we call 
globalization. 
 The good thing about that development is that 
prosperity is increasing, and more and more people are 
escaping from poverty. The challenge that that 
development poses is that not everyone has their fair 
share of this prosperity. There are considerable 
imbalances. We thus need a global awareness, beyond 
national boundaries, of our joint responsibility in order 
to master the major challenges facing our world. 
 Climate change is undoubtedly one of the central 
challenges facing humanity today. I therefore very 
much welcome your decision, Mr. President, to make 
climate change the focus of this year’s session of the 
General Assembly. Never before have the facts been so 
clear, the consensus among scientists so great or the 
need for action so indisputable. Each and every country 
is affected by the impact of climate change. No one 
country can tackle it alone. Not to take action would 
incur immense costs and cause new global conflicts. 
 What does that mean for the way ahead? In quite 
concrete terms, it means that any contribution from 
individual States or groups of States is welcome. 
However, I would like to add most emphatically that 
such contributions can only complement a post-Kyoto 
agreement under the auspices of the United Nations. 
They can never replace it. 
 This session of the General Assembly therefore 
has to set the course for the next vital step: the climate 
conference in Bali. Environment ministers will have to 
agree in Bali on a clear road map so that negotiations 
can be successfully concluded by 2009. There are three 
key elements: a common understanding on the scale of 
emissions reduction, a common understanding on fair 
national contributions and a common understanding on 
the instruments we should use both to protect the 
climate and to foster economic growth. 
 The scope of the need for action is becoming 
increasingly clear. We must at least halve global 
emissions by the middle of the century. For this we 
have a clear guiding principle: the principle of 
common but differentiated responsibility. 
Industrialized countries must embrace ambitious 
absolute reduction targets. During the German 
presidency the European Union adopted bold targets 
for 2020. All industrialized countries will have to 
drastically reduce their per capita emissions. 
 Emerging economies will first of all have to 
decouple their economic growth from emissions. In the 
long term, per capita emissions in both industrialized 
countries and emerging economies will have to 
converge at a level compatible with our global climate 
protection target. 
 Such a process of long-term convergence offers 
all countries scope to develop. It does not demand too 
much of anyone. There is no doubt in my mind that 
only a United Nations agreement can provide the 
dependability this will require.  
 Climate protection will therefore be a litmus test 
of the international community’s ability to act 
effectively in the twenty-first century. For, on our own 
continent, we Europeans know from our daily 
experience that   although any individual country is 
too small to make a real difference   together we can 
achieve much. 
 In the light of our experience, I believe three 
principles are of crucial importance to our common 
future. First, economic strength and social 
responsibility belong together. This principle applies 
both to how States treat their citizens and to how States 
treat each other. It emphasizes the right and freedom of 
each individual to achieve their full potential. At the 
same time, it upholds cohesion and solidarity, while 
categorically rejecting isolationism and protectionism. 
 That is why we are seeking a balanced and 
comprehensive agreement on multilateral trade. In 
concrete terms, this means that we have to bring the 
Doha Round to an early and successful conclusion. Too 
much time has been wasted. We have to seize the last 
chance for negotiations this autumn. Our aim must be 
transparent financial markets and effective protection 
of intellectual property, as well as minimum legal and 
social standards. For I am convinced that there can be 
no fair competition without common ground rules. 
 We can only achieve cohesion and solidarity in a 
global development partnership. With the Millennium 
Development Goals, the international community has 
laid down binding quantifiable targets and deadlines 
for the first time. Together with its EU partners, 
Germany has undertaken to reach the United Nations 
0.7 per cent target no later than 2015. We stand by 
these pledges. 
 There can be no doubt that genuine partnership 
places all sides under an obligation   an obligation to 
step up the fight against corruption, to aim for better 
governance and to better protect human rights. We 
want to support Africa in particular. There have been 
encouraging developments on the continent but 
unfortunately, also, serious setbacks, for example in 
Zimbabwe. 
 “Growth and responsibility in the world 
economy” is, therefore, also the motto guiding this 
year’s German presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8). 
 The second principle is that we have to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations. In 
my view, there is absolutely no doubt   the United 
Nations is the place where binding joint responses can 
be found to global challenges. But the United Nations 
is in need of reform. This is true, above all, of the 
Security Council. In many crisis situations it needs to 
be able to come up quickly with universally binding 
proposals. To do this, it must have international 
legitimacy. However, the present composition of the 
Security Council no longer reflects the world today. 
There is, therefore, no alternative to adapting it to 
political realities. 
 My country has over the past years been actively 
involved in this debate. Germany is prepared to assume 
more responsibility, and to take on a permanent seat on 
the Security Council. What we need now are tangible 
results. We are by no means only at the start of our 
endeavours. The United Nations reform process has 
already produced some results, such as the report of the 
High-level Panel on United Nations system-wide 
coherence and the establishment of the Peacebuilding 
Commission. 
 But time is short. There are numerous crises we 
have to deal with right now. And notwithstanding the 
many differing factors that have led to these crises, 
they all have one thing in common: they can only be 
solved multilaterally. The key to ending them is unity 
of purpose. This is particularly true with respect to 
Iran. Iran has continuously worked on its nuclear 
programme in clear contradiction of the demands of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United 
Nations. Nobody should be in the slightest doubt as to 
the dangerous nature of this programme. Iran is 
ignoring Security Council resolutions. Iran is blatantly 
threatening Israel. 
 Let us not fool ourselves. If Iran were to acquire 
the nuclear bomb, the consequences would be 
disastrous, first and foremost for the existence of 
Israel; secondly, for the entire region; and ultimately 
for all of us in Europe and the world who attach any 
importance to the values of liberty, democracy and 
human dignity. That is why we have to prevent Iran 
from acquiring nuclear arms. 
 The international community must not allow 
itself to be divided or have its decisive response to 
Iran’s provocations undermined in any way. The world 
does not have to prove to Iran that Iran is building a 
nuclear bomb. Iran has to convince the world that it is 
not striving towards such a bomb. 
 Each and every German Chancellor before me 
has shouldered Germany’s special responsibility for the 
existence of Israel. I, too, pledge to live up to this 
responsibility that our history has bequeathed us. It is 
one of the fundamental principles that guides my 
country. In other words, Israel’s security is 
non-negotiable for me as German Chancellor. And that 
being the case, we have to do more than pay lip-service 
to it. Together with its partners, Germany will continue 
to seek a diplomatic solution. With this aim in mind, 
Germany will   if Iran does not come around   
firmly advocate additional and harsher sanctions. 
 Unity of purpose is also the key in the fight 
against international terrorism, and especially in our 
efforts aimed at security and stability in Afghanistan. 
Unity of purpose is also vital for ensuring a peaceful 
future in Kosovo, where NATO and the European 
Union play a particularly active role. We want a 
solution under United Nations auspices. All parties are 
now called upon to show a willingness to compromise. 
 We also strongly support the efforts of the Middle 
East Quartet for peace in that region. Germany is a 
staunch advocate of the vision of two States, within 
secure borders and in peace, for the Jewish people in 
Israel and for the Palestinians in Palestine. We 
welcome the fact that both parties are continuing their 
talks with great vigour, above all with a view to the 
Middle East conference scheduled for November. 
 The third principle is that we have to strengthen 
our shared immutable values. In my opinion, one of the 
great dangers of the twenty-first century is that crises 
and conflicts could give rise to a clash of civilizations. 
This must not happen. For this reason, I plead for 
tolerance   tolerance as properly understood, not 
“anything goes” masquerading as tolerance. Everybody 
must be able to follow his or her own path, but it must 
be a path within the international community, not 
outside it. 
 This path is clearly departed from wherever 
massive human rights violations are committed, as in 
Darfur. A human tragedy is being played out there. Too 
much time has already been squandered. Now is the 
time to act. The crimes perpetrated there must not go 
unpunished. This path has been departed from in 
Myanmar, where human rights have likewise been 
disregarded for years. I urge the Government not to use 
force against the peaceful demonstrators and finally to 
make way for a democratic future for the country. This 
path is also departed from when political assassinations 
are carried out, as in the case of Rafik Hariri or the 
recent cowardly attack just a few days ago in Lebanon. 
The Hariri tribunal must commence its work with all 
possible speed. I call on Syria to grant Lebanon 
diplomatic recognition at long last. 
 It is my fundamental conviction that we must, 
time and again, muster the strength to assert our shared 
values of freedom and democracy. In order to do that, 
we need an unshakeable foundation.  
 We have such a foundation: the Charter of the 
United Nations. It was written when Europe and wide 
swathes of the rest of the world lay in ruins. At the 
most basic level, it is a statement that, notwithstanding 
all the dark chapters and tortuous turns of our history, 
universal human rights do exist. In other words, what it 
all comes down to is respecting and protecting the 
dignity of each individual person. That is the 
underlying reason why we assemble here each year and 
work together for the future of our peoples. 
 Germany will do its utmost to advance that work. 
We look forward to fruitful cooperation with all 
partners in the United Nations. 
 To all the  peoples represented here, I convey the brotherly 
greetings of France. Mr. Secretary-General, you have 
an enormous responsibility, and you have the trust of 
France. 
 This is the first time that I address this Assembly 
on behalf of France. It is a solemn and moving moment 
for me. I cannot help thinking of all of those men and 
women who, at one of the most tragic moments in the 
history of humanity, as the world stood on the brink of 
barbarity, finding that prospect intolerable, succeeded 
in countering force and violence and barbarity with 
justice and peace. Thus was the United Nations born. 
 The United Nations is not a mere political 
construct. It is not a mere legal construct. It is an 
awakening of the human conscience against everything 
that threatens to destroy humanity. 
 I have never believed that the United Nations 
could one day root out the violence that lies within 
human beings. But what I do know deep down inside 
me, what we all know deep down, is that in spite of all 
its failures, without the United Nations it would have 
been impossible to put an end to conflicts that seemed 
to be insoluble. Remember the genocide of the 
Cambodian people, remember the suffering inflicted 
upon them; remember the independence of Namibia; 
remember the independence of Timor. Look at the 
Great Lakes region, or West Africa. Without the United 
Nations, the world might have experienced a third 
world war, doubtless even more terrible than the two 
previous ones. 
 France is convinced that the United Nations is the 
only remedy we have for the blindness and folly that 
sometimes take hold of human beings. 
 The message I wish to bring to you in the name 
of France is a simple one: in this world where the fate 
of each of us depends on the fate of others, the United 
Nations should not be weakened; the United Nations 
must be strengthened. Reforming the United Nations so 
as to adapt it to the realities of our world is an absolute 
priority for France. We cannot afford to wait any 
longer. The world’s problems must be addressed and 
resolved globally. No one on this Earth can alone 
protect themselves from the consequences of climate 
warming, the clash of civilizations, major epidemics. 
Against selfishness, against fanaticism, against hatred, 
it is our duty to renew that appeal to the universal 
conscience by virtue of which, for the first time in the 
history of all the peoples of the world, all nations 
agreed to meet within a common forum in order to set 
aside what divides us and talk to one another. 
This appeal to the universal conscience is an 
appeal for peace. It is an appeal for open-mindedness. 
It is an appeal for diversity. And it is an appeal for 
justice. France has always sought greatness for the sake 
of men and women, not for its own sake. Like all 
nations, France, in the course of its long history, has 
made mistakes, and has sometimes been at fault. But 
its people, the people of France, have always chosen to 
be on the side of freedom and democracy. France is 
loyal to its friends and to the values it shares with 
them. But this loyalty is not submission. This loyalty is 
not a shackle. And France intends to draw on that 
loyalty in the cause of openness to others, of openness 
to the world. I want the world to know that France is 
willing to talk to everybody in the world, in every 
continent. 
 But I would also like to say that openness is not 
renunciation. Understanding is not weakness. 
Weakness and renunciation are not factors of peace; 
they are factors of war. France and Europe in the past 
experienced the tragic consequences of such an attitude 
for themselves and for the whole world. When you are 
weak and submissive, you get ready to accept war. We 
all have a duty to ensure that that never happens again. 
There will be no peace in the world if the international 
community compromises with the right of peoples to 
self-determination and if it compromises with human 
rights. 
 There will be no peace in the world unless the 
international community is unshakeable in its 
determination to fight terrorism. There will be no peace 
in the world unless the international community stands 
united in its resolve to put an end to the wars in the 
Middle East, to put an end to the horror in Darfur, to 
the tragedy of Lebanon or to the humanitarian disaster 
in Somalia. And I weigh my words carefully. There 
will be no peace in the world if the international 
community falters in the face of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
 Iran is entitled to nuclear power for civilian 
purposes. But if we allow Iran to acquire nuclear 
weapons, there would be an unacceptable risk to 
stability in the region and in the world. I want to say 
here, in the name of France, that we can only resolve 
this crisis by combining firmness with dialogue. It is in 
that spirit that France will act. 
 I want to say here, in the name of France, that it 
is the duty of the international community to confront 
those who seek power and constantly threaten the 
fragile balance of peace and to do so by bringing to 
bear its unwavering unity and its determination to 
uphold the law. I want to say, in the name of France, 
that there will be no peace in the world without respect 
for diversity, without respect for national identities, 
without respect, I venture to say, for religions and 
beliefs, or without respect for cultures. Attachment to 
one’s faith, to one’s identity, to one’s language and 
culture, and to one’s way of life, thought and belief   
all that is legitimate, and profoundly human. To deny 
that is to sow the seeds of humiliation. It would stoke 
the fires of nationalism, fanaticism and terrorism. We 
will not avert the clash of civilizations by forcing 
everyone to think and to believe the same things. 
France intends to pursue, together with all people of 
goodwill, this battle to build a new world order of the 
twenty-first century. 
 We want a Lebanon living independently, and we 
say that France will always stand shoulder to shoulder 
with Lebanon in its desire for independence. Tomorrow 
we hope that Israelis and Palestinians will find within 
themselves the strength to live in peace. Peace is 
possible. It is possible now. And we will devote all of 
our energies to that. 
 We want to see the peaceful coexistence of the 
main religions to vanquish fundamentalism and 
fanaticism. But I want to say, with all due gravity, that 
there is too much injustice in the world for the world to 
hope to live in peace. 
 The founding fathers of the United Nations knew 
that the world’s future could be read in the eyes of a 
tortured child; a hungry child; children who watch their 
parents being humiliated; children who since birth have 
known nothing but war; children torn from their 
homes, their lands, their families. Because in those 
children’s desperate eyes there is not only suffering, 
but also all the wars and revolts that will drench the 
world in blood tomorrow. 
 Let us look at the world as it is. Let us look at 
what we have made of it. Have we wanted enough to 
make it more just? The answer is no. Have we done 
enough to achieve that end? The answer is no.  
 When the Berlin wall fell, we all dreamed that 
history would cease to be tragic. Let us look at our 
world as it is so that we can make it better. Let us 
judge our world by the yardstick of justice. Justice 
means that the Palestinian people can regain a country 
and build a State. Justice means that the Israeli people 
can enjoy the right to live in security. Justice means 
that the Lebanese people can regain their freedom. 
Justice means that the Iraqi people, in all their 
diversity, can find within themselves the path to 
reconciliation and democracy. Justice means that a 
developing country on which we wish to impose 
environmental rules, even though its inhabitants have 
barely enough to eat, can be helped to put such rules in 
place. Justice means that we cannot tap a country’s 
resources without paying a fair price for them. 
 Let us look squarely at our world. Never before 
has there been so much easy money, with so much 
wealth concentrated in the hands of a few large groups. 
Throughout the world, even in the richest countries, 
there are many men and women who no longer have 
even a hope of emerging some day from their material 
and moral distress.  
 In conclusion, I appeal to the conscience of all 
those who have a responsibility for the conduct of 
world affairs. Because if we do nothing, the poor and 
the exploited will one day rise up against the injustice 
done to them. 
 What the world needs is a new mindset: a 
genuine New Deal on a global scale, an ecological and 
economic New Deal. On behalf of France, I call on all 
States to join together to found the new world order of 
the twenty-first century, predicated on the key idea that 
the common goods of humanity must be the 
responsibility of all of humanity.  
 On behalf of France, I solemnly appeal to the 
United Nations to provide itself, in this era marked by 
the return of scarcity, with the means to guarantee that 
all people throughout the world have access to vital 
resources: water, energy, food, medicine and 
knowledge. I solemnly appeal to the United Nations to 
concern itself with the issue of fairer distribution of 
wealth and of the income derived from commodities 
and technology. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to concern itself with the moralization of 
financial capitalism. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to go further in combating corruption, which 
saps countries that are suffering and all too poor. 
 Things must change. Mindsets must change. 
Behaviour must change. This is our responsibility now, 
because tomorrow it will be too late. If we fail to act, 
we will see a resurgence of all the threats that the 
people of the post-war world believed they had 
overcome. Let us not take this risk lightly.  
 Peoples of the world, we can, together, build a 
better future for all people. It is up to us alone; it is up 
to our capacity to remain faithful to the values that 
have brought us together here today. You have 
understood. France believes that we have no more time 
to wait. France calls for action. France urges action. 
France is committed to action in the service of world 
peace. 
It is a great  honour to make my first speech to the General 
Assembly. 
 The United Nations has a duty to lead the world 
in addressing the shared threats and opportunities that 
dominate our age, and it must do so in deed as well as 
in word. That is why I want to use this platform to 
express my admiration and support for United Nations 
missions around the world, from Lebanon to Liberia, 
from Congo and Haiti to East Timor, which, even as we 
meet in New York this week, are saving lives and 
spreading hope. 
 Since 1946, when the first meeting of the General 
Assembly took place in London, the United Kingdom 
has been determined to fulfil its international 
responsibilities through the United Nations. The new 
Government in the United Kingdom, under the 
leadership of Gordon Brown, is proud to continue that 
tradition, and I reaffirm our commitment today. 
 The focus at this session has been on immediate 
and pressing issues. In the Middle East, we need urgent 
action towards a two-State solution that addresses the 
security of Israelis and the rights of Palestinians at the 
same time.  
 In Iraq, recent security gains can only be 
sustained through continued support for the 
development of the Iraqi security forces, through 
national reconciliation and through political support 
from the whole region. 
 Our international community depends on 
responsibilities as well as rights. If Iran wants to be a 
leading and respected country, it must cease its support 
for terrorist groups in Iraq and Afghanistan and end its 
defiance of three Security Council resolutions in 
respect of its nuclear programme. 
 In Zimbabwe, we need United Nations action to 
support African leadership to reverse the vicious cycle 
of economic and social devastation that now afflicts 
the country. 
 We have all seen the extraordinary scenes in 
Burma. I call on the regime to allow peaceful protest, 
encourage national dialogue and promote genuine 
reconciliation. Let us today send a message to the 
monks on the streets of Burma: we support your 
demand for a democratic Burma. And let us take a 
message from the monks on the streets of Burma: the 
human desire for freedom knows no bounds of race or 
religion or region. It is good that the Burmese 
Government has allowed Ambassador Gambari into the 
country, but it is now vital that they use his presence 
there to start the process of reconciliation. 
 But as well as addressing the traumas of our 
fellow citizens around the world, the United Nations 
must be the place where we address the longer-term 
threats. Today, I devote my speech to one of the great 
threats to stability and prosperity in the world: the 
threat of global inequality. I do so because inequalities 
are not just morally offensive; they are also dangerous. 
Inequality fuels extremism. It undermines support for 
an open, global economy. It corrodes trust and respect 
and reciprocity between nations. 
 The United Nations Charter talks of the 
“sovereign equality of States”, and it also talks of the 
“equal rights and dignity of men and women and of 
nations large and small”. The principle of equality is 
nowhere more evident than in the General Assembly 
where all States have an equal voice. But in the world 
outside this Hall, economic, social and political 
inequalities within and between States persist and 
worsen. We cannot stand united against the shared 
threats and opportunities in our world when we are so 
divided by economic and political disparities. So the 
need for Governments and international institutions to 
reduce inequalities and promote our common humanity 
is stark. 
 Traditionally, we have focused on the divide 
between developed and developing nations. However, 
the growth rates in many developing countries are 
faster than in developed economies. That is the good 
news. But there remain around a billion people in the 
world   one sixth of its population   living in 58 
countries, who have been left out of the story of human 
progress. This “bottom billion” have an average life 
expectancy of 50 years. Fourteen per cent of the 
children in the bottom billion die before their fifth 
birthday, and more than a third suffer malnutrition. The 
countries that are home to the bottom billion saw their 
national incomes fall each year during the 1980s and 
1990s. 
 Even where inequalities are narrowing between 
nations, they are widening within them. According to 
the United Nations Development Programme, in 73 
countries   containing 80 per cent of the world’s 
population   economic inequality has risen in recent 
years. 
 Every nation represented here has responsibilities 
to its own people. The drive to tackle poverty needs 
open markets. It needs the empowerment of citizens 
through democratic and transparent institutions, free 
from corruption. It needs strong and effective 
education and health services open to all. 
 But national action is not enough. Because the 
causes of inequality cross national boundaries, we need 
cooperation between nations, bilateral and multilateral, 
led by the United Nations. 
 First, three quarters of the countries where the 
bottom billion citizens reside have recent or current 
experience of civil war. Conflict is the trapdoor to 
extreme poverty. Look at Darfur: more than 200,000 
people are dead, 2 million are displaced and 4 million 
are on food aid. As the international community, we 
decided on a course of action in Security Council 
resolution 1769 (2007). Now we need to get on with it: 
an agreement on force composition, swift deployment, 
effective protection of civilians on the ground and a 
political process in which the legitimate grievance of 
the Darfur people is addressed through negotiation. In 
Afghanistan, one of the five poorest countries in the 
world, we need to back up military efforts to secure 
safe space with economic, social and political 
reconstruction. 
 Beyond those crises, we also need to improve our 
capacity to prevent the emergence of conflict. That is 
our vision of the responsibility to protect. A critical 
dimension is controlling the spread of weapons whose 
easy availability makes it so simple to set up militias 
and provoke violence and mayhem. Last year, the 
Assembly voted overwhelmingly to take forward 
United Nations work towards an arms trade treaty (see 
resolution 61/89). The Government of the United 
Kingdom will continue to press for the achievement of 
that goal. 
 Secondly, freedom from conflict is the platform 
for progress, but the battle against disease and 
illiteracy is the second stage. Despite progress in some 
countries, the world is off track to meet the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That is why, in July here 
at the United Nations, the Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom launched a call for action: to honour our own 
commitments and go further, to build a truly global 
partnership   with the private sector, trade unions, 
faith groups, civil society and cities   that can meet 
the 2015 MDG targets. That requires the developed 
world to meets its commitment to spend 0.7 per cent of 
its national incomes on development. The United 
Kingdom will meet that commitment by 2013. But that 
requires shared responsibility. Poor governance and 
corruption are the enemies of development. 
 Thirdly, progress on aid needs to be combined 
with a new global trade deal that opens up economies 
on a fair basis. Western producers continue to benefit 
from subsidies and tariffs, particularly for agriculture. 
Higher tariffs for processed goods prevent poor 
countries from diversifying their economies. That is a 
bad deal for Western consumers, and it squeezes out 
the livelihoods of producers in poor countries. Neither 
is it in rich countries’ financial self-interest, nor is it 
fair. The Government of the United Kingdom believes 
that concluding the Doha trade round this year is not 
just necessary, but also possible, and we will work to 
achieve that goal. 
 Finally, we must address the greatest long-term 
threat to our aspirations to tackle inequality: climate 
change. Climate change affects all countries, but the 
poorest countries   and the poorest people within 
those countries   will suffer the most disruption and 
devastation. I congratulate the President of the General 
Assembly on choosing climate change as a central 
theme of this general debate. And I congratulate the 
Secretary-General on his leadership on this issue. But 
we need more than debate. 
 The United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change is the only body that can conclude a 
global agreement on climate change. Therefore, in the 
next two months we need an urgent agreement on the 
steps towards progress to be taken at the December 
meeting in Bali. Beyond that, we need a road map to 
the 15th conference of parties to the Convention, to be 
held at Copenhagen in two years’ time, and agreement 
on a global deal that succeeds the end of the first 
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. 
 At the heart of such an agreement must be the 
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities: 
all countries taking on responsibilities, but making sure 
that they are equitably distributed, with the greatest 
action taken by the richest countries. The United 
Kingdom stands ready to play its part. This year, our 
climate change bill will be enacted into law in the next 
session of Parliament to place on a statutory footing 
our commitment to cut carbon emissions by at least 60 
per cent from 1990 levels by the year 2050. But we 
need similar binding commitments from all rich 
countries. 
 The challenges are therefore immense. Crisis 
resolution and conflict prevention, the Millennium 
Development Goals, a new trade deal, climate 
change   they call for all our resources. Military 
intervention is never the whole solution, but sometimes 
a solution cannot be found without armed force. 
Development budgets are necessary, but the developing 
world needs a growth plan, not just an aid plan. 
Diplomacy needs to bridge differences between 
nations, but also to reach out to civil society and 
business. 
 The United Kingdom is proud not just of its 
bilateral relations with the countries represented in the 
Assembly, but also of its commitment to multilateral 
institutions, which can be a force for good in the world. 
But international institutions need to reflect the world 
as it is, not the world as it was. The United Kingdom 
therefore welcomes the prospect of intergovernmental 
negotiations at this session to achieve agreement on 
reform of the Security Council. We support permanent 
membership for Germany, Japan, India and Brazil and 
permanent representation for Africa. We are not 
wedded to a single model of reform. Achieving 
effective change is what matters. 
 In a world where more than a billion people are 
online, where companies have bigger turnovers than 
countries and where global non-governmental 
organizations have memberships that are bigger than 
national populations, our international institutions must 
look inwards to internal reform, but also outwards to 
broader popular movements for change. 
 In the last phase of globalization, in the 
nineteenth century, the emergence of new Powers and 
the breakdown of the international order resulted in 
conflict that scarred the whole of the twentieth century. 
Unless we can build trust and reciprocity between 
nations and embody them in durable and robust 
international institutions that reconcile differences and 
nurture common values, the latest phase of 
globalization could be another false dawn. 
 Globalization is not just something to which we 
must adapt; it is something that we can and must shape 
for the achievement of our own goals. It must be put to 
use spreading power, wealth and opportunity. For my 
Government, this mission is driven by both moral 
purpose and national interest. We must address the 
insecurity and inequality that exist beyond our borders 
if we are to enhance security and prosperity within our 
borders. 
 We live in a more prosperous, more peaceful and 
more democratic world than ever before. Let us 
commit ourselves to living in a more equal world. 
Kindly accept my 
congratulations, Sir, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
My delegation assures you of its full cooperation as we 
address issues identified in the annual report of the 
Secretary-General (A/62/1) and as we responsibly and 
creatively move forward with pending reforms of the 
Organization. 
 At the outset I would like to express India’s deep 
gratitude to all Member States for the recent 
unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of 
resolution 61/271, deciding to annually observe the 
International Day of Non-Violence, on 2 October, the 
anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi. I also 
look forward to participation by Member States in the 
informal plenary meeting of the General Assembly and 
other functions being organized tomorrow at the United 
Nations to mark the first International Day of 
Non-Violence. 
A central topic for this year’s debate   
responding to climate change   is both timely and 
relevant. India’s views on it were recently set forth at 
the high-level event on climate change, which took 
place here on 24 September. Combined with the 
exchange of views in the general debate, it will no 
doubt provide a useful backdrop to the meeting of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change to be held later this year in Bali, Indonesia.  
 The impact of climate change and environmental 
degradation falls disproportionately upon developing 
countries. Developing countries are the most 
vulnerable to it, and also lack the means to tackle it. 
Measures to address climate change must be based on 
mitigation and adaptation strategies with fair burden-
sharing and measures to realize sustainable patterns of 
consumption and production. The process of burden-
sharing must also take into account where the primary 
responsibility for the present state of greenhouse gas 
concentration in the atmosphere rests and not foreclose 
rapid and sustained economic development for the 
developing world, which, in any case, is an imperative 
for adaptation. 
 Technology is the other key area that needs to be 
addressed. It is important that critical clean 
technologies be made available and affordable to 
developing countries. The intellectual property rights 
regime must balance rewards for innovators with the 
common good of humankind. Concerted international 
action to address climate change, in accordance with 
the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities, as well as 
national circumstances and social and economic 
conditions, is the need of the hour. India, for which 
energy security is a national imperative, has a very 
small individual carbon footprint, with per capita 
carbon dioxide emissions at just about a quarter of the 
world’s average. Even so, we are determined that, as 
we pursue economic growth, our per capita greenhouse 
gas emissions will not increase beyond those of the 
industrial countries. 
 Poverty and underdevelopment are amongst the 
central challenges of our times. The overarching 
requirement is for sustained economic growth to 
eradicate poverty in developing countries. However, 
economic growth must also be measured against the 
template of social inclusion. Growth alone is not 
enough if it does not produce benefits that are 
sufficiently dispersed, not only in terms of increased 
income and employment, but also for improved health, 
nutrition and education for all. 
 I affirm India’s resolve to achieve the 
internationally agreed development goals, including 
the Millennium Development Goals. The Government 
of India accords the highest priority to inclusive 
growth, including the political, legal, educational and 
economic empowerment of women, effective and 
affordable public health, and enhanced access to 
educational opportunities, especially for all those who 
are disadvantaged. 
 It is apparent that progress in the achievement of 
the internationally agreed development goals has been 
tardy. The international community, through the United 
Nations system, must more effectively support the 
efforts of developing countries to achieve the 
development goals. A comprehensive reform of the 
international financial architecture is a key ingredient 
in that process. The United Nations must play an 
important role in overseeing the reform of the 
international financial architecture. That should include 
measures to ensure a greater voice for and participation 
by developing countries in the Bretton Woods 
institutions. The process of reform must be carried to 
its logical conclusion if the credibility of those 
institutions is to be enhanced. 
 We must also address as a priority the regrettable 
inversion of global resource flows. Today, instead of 
the urgently needed inflow of resources to developing 
countries to buttress their national economic 
development plans, we are confronted with a net 
outflow from them. Official development assistance 
(ODA) showed a marked fall during 2006 and remains 
well below the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national 
product. It is primarily being used to finance debt 
relief. That this is happening after so many years of 
liberalization and globalization highlights our 
collective failure. Perhaps we should be considering 
mechanisms, such as an international debt commission, 
to redress the problem of developing country debt.  
 The least developed countries, which are 
particularly hard hit by rising energy costs, find 
themselves in an even more difficult situation. 
Enhanced and predictable resource flow to developing 
countries remains a key objective of the global 
partnership for development. India will continue to do 
what it can to help with capacity-building in other 
developing countries and to assist them through ODA 
within the limits of its capacity. By the end of the year, 
imports from least developed countries into India will 
face a zero-tariff regime. 
 Early and substantive progress at the Doha Round 
of trade negotiations, based on the primacy of the 
development dimension, is another imperative. We 
must return to the negotiating table with a redoubled 
sense of urgency, while recognizing that adherence to 
the existing mandate remains critical. Nor can the 
interests of subsistence farmers be ignored or equated 
with those of other sectors. An illogical linkage 
between agriculture and non-agricultural market access 
will only complicate the development impact of the 
Round. The overarching principle of special and 
differential treatment for developing countries remains 
a categorical imperative. 
 As part of India's commitment to the 
achievement of human rights for all, and as a member 
of the Human Rights Council, we remain actively 
involved in developing the institutional framework of 
that body, including the universal periodic review 
mechanism, based on effective international 
cooperation as a central principle in the Council’s 
methods of work. India will work towards developing 
an international normative framework for the 
promotion and protection of human rights. India is 
honoured to be one of the first signatories of the 
International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Earlier today, I 
also had the honour of depositing India’s instrument of 
ratification of the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  
 As the largest democracy in the world, India has 
developed a system of local self-government with 
democratically elected institutions of representative 
Government at all levels   the village, the district, the 
State and the nation. The effort to make participatory 
democracy more meaningful to every Indian citizen 
underpins what is perhaps one of the greatest social 
experiments in the world today, namely, the transfer of 
decision-making power to nearly one million elected 
women local Government representatives. As a result, 
women are not merely the beneficiaries of change in 
India, but are its instruments. 
 As the world’s largest democracy, it was also 
natural for India to support the establishment of the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. We made an initial 
contribution of $10 million to the Fund and remain 
actively and constructively involved in realizing the 
objectives for which it was set up. As a small token of 
our commitment to that laudable initiative, I have the 
privilege of announcing a further pledge of $10 million 
to the United Nations Democracy Fund. 
 The international system cannot be reordered 
meaningfully without a comprehensive reform of the 
United Nations. If the Organization is to remain the 
cornerstone of the international architecture in this 
century, it cannot remain mired in the realities of the 
1940s. Despite substantive implementation of the 
United Nations reform agenda that emerged from the 
2005 World Summit Outcome, such reform will 
inevitably remain incomplete without comprehensive 
reform and expansion of the Security Council and 
revitalization of the General Assembly. Elements and 
ideas on the reform of the Security Council have been 
discussed for well over a decade in numerous reports 
and interminable consultations. It is now time for 
intergovernmental negotiations to commence in order 
to make the Security Council more democratic, 
representative and responsive.  
 We, together with partners from Africa, Latin 
America and Asia, tabled a resolution on 11 September 
2007, spelling out the principles on which reform 
ought to be based if it is to be meaningful. These 
principles are expansion in both permanent and 
non-permanent categories of membership; greater 
representation for developing countries and 
representation for developed countries that is reflective 
of contemporary world realities; and comprehensive 
improvement in the working methods of the Security 
Council, including ensuring greater access for island 
and small States. We welcome recent statements from 
this podium by President Bush of the United States of 
America and other world leaders on the need for 
Security Council reform in both the permanent and 
non-permanent categories. It is high time that we 
collectively bring these ideas to implementation. 
 Reform of the United Nations would also be 
incomplete without revitalization of the General 
Assembly. The central goal of such revitalization must 
be the restoration and enhancement of the role and 
authority of the General Assembly as originally 
envisaged in the Charter. 
 Given the significance of developmental 
activities for the developing world, India sees a 
corresponding need for the reform of United Nations 
operational activities in favour of development. Since 
these activities are aimed at supporting the work of 
Member States, it follows that Members must 
determine their direction and shape through an 
intergovernmental process. The litmus test for any 
reform proposal is whether it improves the support 
extended by the United Nations to the efforts of 
programme countries. India would therefore judge 
reform proposals by their impact on the ground, by the 
resultant improvement in the effectiveness of the 
system and by the impact on transaction costs for the 
United Nations development system. 
 Steps to achieve the complete elimination of 
nuclear weapons have also only made limited headway. 
Despite some progress, the world remains far from 
achieving the objective of total elimination of nuclear 
weapons. India’s long-standing commitment to 
universal, non-discriminatory and comprehensive 
nuclear disarmament is embodied in the vision of late 
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-free and 
non-violent world. This vision was put forward nearly 
two decades ago. It remains undiminished today.  
 Indeed, it is all the more relevant today, given the 
fact that peaceful uses of nuclear energy can address 
the inexorably growing demand for new and  
non-polluting sources of energy to fuel economic 
development. We will be bringing proposals to 
Member States and this Organization to see how we 
can refocus on general and complete disarmament, 
particularly nuclear disarmament. Disarmament is our 
agreed goal, and it subsumes arms control and 
non-proliferation. 
 It is well known that India has an impeccable 
record in preventing the proliferation of sensitive 
technologies. That is in keeping with our commitment 
to being a responsible nuclear Power. India is ready to 
work with the international community to develop a 
new international consensus on non-proliferation. The 
international community needs to intensify the effort to 
address the very real threat posed by the link between 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMDs) and related materials and technologies and 
the ability of non-State actors to acquire them. The risk 
posed by the intersection between proliferation and 
terrorism is real and serious. The central objective must 
be to ensure that our solidarity in words is translated 
into action. 
 The adoption of the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy last September was a 
noteworthy development, signalling the will of the 
international community to combat this menace in a 
holistic and coordinated manner. Welcome as the 
Strategy is, there is much more that needs to be done to 
combat the menace that international terrorism has 
become. India is convinced that without the early 
adoption of a comprehensive convention against 
international terrorism, the global struggle against 
terrorism remains incomplete and likely to succeed 
only partially. We must ensure that there is zero 
tolerance for all forms of terrorism. 
 In conclusion, I would express the hope that our 
deliberations in the year ahead will lead us to 
enlightened action. With maturity and resolve we will 
successfully overcome the many challenges before us. 
Three thousand years ago, the 
people of Israel journeyed from slavery in Egypt to 
independence in the land of Israel. The Bible tells us 
that on their voyage to liberty they made a crucial stop 
and received the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai. 
 As the General Assembly gathers this year, the 
Jewish people recall that historic journey by marking 
the festival of Sukkot. And every year, at this time, our 
people remember that the long march to freedom 
requires the acceptance of humanity’s basic values. 
 For 60 years, since the rebirth of our State in our 
ancient homeland, with Jerusalem at its heart, we have 
not lost sight of this principle. The core values of 
tolerance, coexistence and peace that lie at the heart of 
every democracy must be protected within societies 
and promoted between them. This is the calling of our 
generation. 
 The conflict in our region is driven by those who 
reject these core values   those who seek power 
without responsibility, those whose aim is not to 
realize their own rights but to deny those rights for 
others. At its heart, this is a conflict not about territory, 
but about values. 
 There is, of course, a territorial dimension to our 
dispute. We know this and, as we have proven in the 
past, we are prepared for the territorial compromise 
that lasting peace entails. But we also know, especially 
after withdrawing from Lebanon and Gaza, that 
territorial withdrawal by itself will not bring peace 
unless we address the core clash of values that lies 
beneath the conflict. 
 Israel may be on the front lines of this battle, but 
it is not our fight alone. This is a global battle. The 
notion that this battle is a local one, limited to isolated 
regions, collapsed in this city with the twin towers on a 
September morning six years ago. Today, it is clear that 
the extremists are engaged in a bloody war against 
civilians and communities, against hearts and minds, in 
every corner of the world. 
 And it is clear, too, that the Middle East conflict 
is not the cause of this global extremist agenda, but a 
consequence of it. Yes, it is up to the parties in the 
Middle East to settle their political conflict, and Israel, 
for its part, desires to do so. But for success to be 
genuine and lasting, you, the nations of the world, need 
to be partners in a shared global struggle against the 
extremism and terror that feed conflict, for your sake, 
not just for ours. 
 It is in this spirit that I would like to speak today 
about resolving our particular conflict, but also about  
the wider battle being waged today   the battle that 
affects us all. This battle is global, not just because it 
targets civilians everywhere, but also because the 
extremists have taken aim at the fundamental pillars of 
every modern society   namely, democracy, tolerance 
and education. These are the new battlefields of the 
twenty-first century, and it is in these arenas, more than 
any other, that the future of our world will be decided. 
 I believe in democracy. I believe in its 
extraordinary power to produce free and peaceful 
societies founded on respect for human rights. 
Democracy is a profound ideal, but it is also a 
vulnerable one. 
 Today, in different parts of the world, extremists, 
who are opposed to the very ideals of democracy, are 
entering the democratic process, not to abandon their 
violent agenda but to advance it. As a spokesman for 
Al-Qaida recently declared, “We will use your 
democracy to destroy your democracy”. This should be 
a wake-up call for all of us. 
 It is time to reclaim democracy, and this begins 
by rejecting those who abuse it. Genuine democracy is 
about values before it is about voting. No true 
democracy on Earth allows armed militia or groups 
with racist or violent agendas to participate in 
elections. But some demonstrate a troubling double 
standard. There are some who insist on high standards 
in their own country but forget them when they look 
abroad. Violent extremists who could never run for 
office at home are treated as legitimate politicians 
when elected elsewhere. As a result, we empower those 
who use democratic means to advance anti-democratic 
ends. And we strengthen the forces of those who not 
only undermine their societies but also threaten our 
own. 
 Today, from this podium, I call on the 
international community to adopt at the global level 
what democracies apply at the national one: a universal 
set of standards for participation in genuine democratic 
elections. We need a universal democratic code that 
requires that all those seeking the legitimacy of the 
democratic process earn it by respecting such 
principles as State monopoly over the lawful use of 
force, the rejection of racism and violence and the 
protection of the rights of others. 
 The goal of such a universal code is not to dictate 
our values or to stifle legitimate voices with which we 
may disagree. Its goal is to protect core democratic 
values from those determined to use the democratic 
system against itself; and to make clear that 
participation in the democratic process is not just a 
right   it is also a responsibility. 
 I know that the temptation to engage with 
extremists can be strong. It may seem to promise 
stability and quiet. We may hope that by feeding the 
beast we can gradually tame it. As free societies, we 
pride ourselves, rightly, on our respect for difference 
and diversity. But we do a disservice to diversity when, 
in its name, we tolerate the intolerant. 
 Bitter experience has shown that buying off 
extremists is a short-term fix for which we will pay 
dearly in the long run. Instead, groups such as Hamas 
and Hizbullah must be presented with a clear choice 
between the path of violence and the path of 
legitimacy. They cannot have both. And it is this same 
stark choice that must be presented to the radical 
regime in Iran. 
 No responsible State disagrees that Iran is the 
most prominent sponsor of terrorism. It is a major 
source of instability and conflict in Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestine and across the entire Middle East; and it is 
the enemy of Arab-Israeli coexistence. No one 
disagrees that Iran denies the Holocaust and speaks 
openly of its desire to wipe a Member State   mine   
off the map. And no one disagrees that, in violation of 
Security Council resolutions, it is actively pursuing the 
means to achieve this end. 
 But there are still those who, in the name of 
consensus and engagement, continue to obstruct the 
urgent steps that are needed to bring Iran’s sinister 
ambitions to a halt. Too many see the danger, but they 
walk idly by, hoping that someone else will take care 
of it. What is the value, we have to ask, of an 
organization which is unable to take effective action in 
the face of a direct assault on the very principles it was 
founded to protect? 
 It is time for the United Nations, and the States of 
the world, to live up to their promise of never again, to 
say enough is enough, to act now and to defend their 
basic values. It is also time to see this same kind of 
moral conviction in the Human Rights Council, so that 
it can become a shield for the victims of human rights, 
not a weapon for its abusers. 
 Israel has never tried to avoid genuine discussion 
of its human rights record. But so long as the Council 
maintains its wildly disproportionate focus on Israel, it 
weakens the moral voice of the United Nations, and the 
price of this blindness is paid by the victims of human 
rights atrocities in Darfur and Myanmar and 
throughout the world. 
 There is no more accurate forecast for the future 
of a society than the lessons we teach our children. 
Unfortunately, in our region, we see children’s 
television programmes in which Mickey Mouse 
puppets teach the glory of being a suicide bomber and 
a seven-year old girl sings of her dreams of blood and 
battle. Religion, rather than being a source of hope and 
spiritual healing, is abused as a call to arms, as God is 
dragged once again onto the field of battle. 
 It is time to reclaim religion from those who have 
made it a weapon rather than a shelter. It is time to 
reclaim education from those who use it as a tool of 
hate rather than an opportunity. As always, the most 
powerful form of education, and the hardest, is to teach 
by example. We cannot expect our younger generation 
to value what we are not prepared ourselves to protect 
and pay a price for. And there is a price to pay. From 
the leader who has to withstand public pressures. From 
the businessman who has to forgo economic 
opportunity. From the teacher and spiritual guide who 
must find the inner strength to teach truth and tolerance 
in a climate of extremism and hostility. At all levels of 
society, there is a price to be paid. But if we do not pay 
it today, we, and those who follow us, will face a far 
greater bill tomorrow. 
 These thoughts are in my mind as we seek, today, 
to advance the cause of Israeli-Palestinian 
reconciliation. Reconciliation is not about deciding 
who was right or who was wrong in the past; it is about 
sharing a common vision and a common responsibility 
for the future. In the last months, Prime Minister 
Olmert and President Abbas have been engaged in a 
sincere and genuine effort to reach the widest possible 
common ground on political understandings. There is 
no substitute for the bilateral process. Failure is not an 
option, but it is for the parties themselves to define 
success. The foundation for true peace lies in the vision 
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side 
in peace and security. The world shares this vision, but 
it is also important that it clearly embrace the two core 
principles that emerge from it. 
 The first of these principles is: two States, two 
homelands. Just as Israel is homeland to the Jewish 
people, so Palestine will be established as the 
homeland and the national answer for the Palestinian 
people, including the refugees. 
 The second is: living side by side in peace and 
security. Just as a viable and prosperous Palestine in 
the West Bank and Gaza is an Israeli interest, so must a 
secure Israel be a Palestinian interest. The world 
cannot afford another terror State. 
 Guided by these principles, the parties can define 
a common border and turn the two-State vision from a 
dream into reality. To succeed, we must set our sights 
on a brighter future, while responding to the challenges 
of the present and learning the lessons of the past. As 
we make progress on concrete political understandings, 
it is just as important to change the reality on the 
ground   to show Palestinians and Israelis that the 
promise of peace exists in practice, not just on paper. 
 In recent months, Israel has taken tangible 
measures to create a better environment, and we are 
ready to do more. We know that Palestinian life is full 
of day-to-day hardship. We know also, and only too 
well, the burden of terror that Israelis bear and of our 
primary obligation to their security. Together, we can 
change this reality; we do not need to submit to it. 
 We are not naive. We can see the difficulties 
ahead and the enemies of peace that stand in our way. 
But practical progress is possible in those areas where 
there is an effective Palestinian Government that 
accepts the Quartet’s principles and implements, 
alongside Israel, the existing Road Map obligations. 
 As the parties take the risks for peace, we look to 
the international community and the Arab and Muslim 
world to offer support, not to stipulate conditions. This 
support comes in many forms. It comes through 
economic and political assistance to the new 
Palestinian Government committed to coexistence and 
seeking to build the foundations of a peaceful and 
prosperous State. It comes through the clear 
endorsement of any political understandings reached 
between the parties. It comes through enhancing and 
deepening regional ties and cooperation between the 
Arab world and Israel, while in parallel we advance 
towards Israeli-Palestinian peace. And, finally, it 
comes by confronting those determined to prevent us 
from succeeding. 
 We must stand up to those who have no respect 
for human life or human liberty, those who hold 
captive soldiers - Gilad Shalit, Udi Goldwasser and 
Eldad Regev - whose families are with us today and 
whose pain remains always in our hearts. 
 We must stand up to those who, after we 
withdrew from Gaza to give peace a chance, chose not 
to build but to destroy and who choose, on a daily 
basis, to target Israeli homes and kindergartens with 
their missiles. 
 And we must stand up to those who see 
democracy as a tool to advance hate, who see tolerance 
as a one-way street and who see education as a means 
of poisoning the minds of the next generation. 
 I believe that, despite all the obstacles, there is a 
new moment of opportunity and an alliance of interest 
that favours peace. Time is of the essence. We owe it to 
ourselves and to our children to find both the courage 
and the wisdom to make the right choices in the right 
way. 
 On this festival of Sukkot, Jews commemorate 
the journey from slavery to freedom by leaving their 
homes to live in fragile huts, like the shelters in which 
our ancestors lived on their way to the Promised Land. 
For 3,000 years, these temporary huts, open to the 
elements, have been a reminder that stability and 
security are ensured not only by the structures that we 
build but also by the values that we share. Perhaps it is 
for this reason that the Sukkah, this fragile shelter, has 
become the Jewish symbol of peace. 
 We turn to Jerusalem and say in our prayers every 
day: Spread over us the canopy of your peace. May it 
be in our days, and for all nations. 
As we meet for the 
sixty-second session of the General Assembly, we look 
again to the United Nations as the global forum to 
address the challenges which affect us all. 
 Climate change is serious and urgent, as many 
have said in this Hall. We welcome that it has been the 
theme of our general debate this year. The science is 
clear. Climate change is real and will impact on all 
parts of the world. To meet the global challenge of 
climate change, there must be widespread and effective 
international action. It will be important to get all 
economies onto low carbon pathways over time. 
Market mechanisms will have a significant role to play. 
Individual countries will face different challenges. 
Different national circumstances must be taken into 
account. 
 The United Nations climate change conference in 
Bali in December will be a fresh opportunity to 
re-energize our efforts in addressing climate change. 
New Zealand wants to see a Bali road map emerge in 
December to set us on the course for an effective future 
response. New Zealand welcomes the momentum that 
is being generated by other high-level meetings in the 
lead-up to Bali, including the recent Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation Leaders’ Declaration. 
 Last week’s high-level event deserves special 
mention. We congratulate the Secretary-General for his 
efforts in cultivating the political goodwill that will be 
vital if we are to reach agreement in Bali.  
 Taking action as an international community also 
means taking action domestically. In recent weeks, 
New Zealand has announced a number of domestic 
measures to address climate change. An emissions 
trading scheme will be established from 1 January 
2008 and will form the cornerstone of our efforts to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It will, over time, 
cover all sectors and all gases. 
 We have also identified a number of longer-term 
domestic goals, which will move New Zealand down 
the path to carbon neutrality. They will provide 
benefits, including healthier homes, cleaner air and 
improved public transport. While climate change is 
certainly a challenge for us all, it is also an opportunity 
to move towards a more sustainable world. 
 With regard to the Millennium Development 
Goals, we recognize that having passed the halfway 
point to 2015, the international community needs to 
step up its efforts to achieve them. At the same time, 
there is scope for the United Nations development 
system to be strengthened. We welcome the newly 
established initiatives in the Economic and Social 
Council   the Annual Ministerial Review and the 
Development Cooperation Forum   as practical ways 
to share information about what is working and where 
we can improve our efforts at country level. 
 New Zealand is also committed to improving 
system-wide coherence at the United Nations in the 
fields of development, humanitarian issues and the 
environment. We attach particular importance to 
working for a strengthened, coherent, gender 
architecture and towards effective gender 
mainstreaming across all United Nations entities. 
 New Zealand welcomes the completion of the 
United Nations Pacific-based development agencies’ 
strategic framework for the Pacific. We are keen to 
work closely with United Nations agencies in the 
Pacific to achieve positive outcomes for our partners in 
the areas of human rights, sexual and reproductive 
heath, HIV/AIDS, child immunization and women’s 
leadership. 
 A strong, prosperous and stable Pacific is a key 
foreign policy priority for New Zealand. We place a 
high priority on fostering solidarity and cooperation in 
the Pacific to tackle the challenges the region faces in 
democracy, security and economic development. 
Around half of New Zealand’s development assistance 
goes towards the Pacific.  
 New Zealand provides assistance in the region in 
Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and 
Bougainville in Papua New Guinea, with each situation 
calling for a different response. 
 The Timorese people, their leaders and the 
international community have all made a huge effort 
over the past year to return Timor-Leste to a more 
secure and stable path. New Zealand has participated in 
those efforts through our contributions to the 
International Security Forces and to the United Nations 
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). Timor-
Leste will require a sustained commitment from 
UNMIT.  
 The situation in Fiji continues to be of concern to 
New Zealand. As a neighbour of Fiji with a long-
standing and very close relationship, New Zealand 
worked hard to avert last December’s coup, including 
by convening a meeting to mediate between the then 
Prime Minister and the military commander. We very 
much regret that this failed to dissuade the coup 
makers from their illegal and unconstitutional path. 
 New Zealand strongly and actively supports the 
steps that have been taken by the Pacific Islands Forum 
to encourage an early return to constitutional 
government in Fiji. We would welcome a firm 
commitment from the interim administration to work 
towards elections within the timeframe endorsed by the 
Forum. Given that commitment, New Zealand would 
begin to restore a more normal bilateral relationship 
through which we could cooperate in addressing Fiji’s 
undoubtedly complex problems. 
 I also want to take this opportunity to address one 
issue in particular raised in the Solomon Islands 
statement on Monday (see ). It was 
suggested, inter alia, that the presence of the Regional 
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), 
was an “occupation”, and that RAMSI’s operation 
transgressed Article 52 of the United Nations Charter. 
New Zealand has always been committed to upholding 
the purposes and principles of the Charter in every 
respect. In our view, RAMSI is entirely consistent with 
those purposes and principles. It is a specific example 
of Chapter VIII of the Charter in operation. To suggest 
it is contrary to the Charter is in our view wrong. 
RAMSI was established in response to a formal request 
from the Solomon Islands. Its presence in the Solomon 
Islands is sanctioned by treaty and by the domestic law 
of the Solomon Islands. That was recently reaffirmed 
by the Solomon Islands Parliament. Moreover, RAMSI 
stems from the endorsement by Pacific Islands Forum 
Foreign Ministers of a programme of action under the 
Forum Leaders’ Biketawa Declaration. That provides a 
framework for regional responses in times of crisis or 
when members request assistance   exactly the 
situation in this case. 
 Amid all these challenges, I would like to report 
on activity being undertaken by Tokelau, the tiny 
territory 500 kilometres north of Samoa that New 
Zealand administers. The people of Tokelau, all 1,500 
of them on three atolls, have decided that they wish to 
undertake an act of self-determination to decide 
whether they wish to change their present status. A 
vote in February 2006 narrowly missed the threshold 
set by Tokelau for a change of status. They will again 
vote on that issue from 20 to 24 October. 
 As members of the Special Committee on 
Decolonization know, New Zealand supports Tokelau’s 
right to choose, but has stood back from any wish to 
determine the direction of any change. That decision is 
entirely for the people of Tokelau. New Zealand will 
support their decision. 
 Advancement of the rule of law at the national 
and international levels is essential for the realization 
of sustained economic growth, development and 
human rights. New Zealand encourages members to 
provide their full support to the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) by acceding to the Rome Statute of the 
ICC. We also call on all United Nations Member 
States, especially State parties to the Rome Stature, to 
fully cooperate with the Court in carrying out its 
current work. Universality and full support are crucial 
if we are to end the impunity of the perpetrators of the 
most serious crimes of international concern, such as 
those carried out in Darfur, where International 
Criminal Court arrest warrants are outstanding. 
 Efforts to protect and maintain the international 
rule of law can only be effective when built on a 
foundation of international peace and security. 
 Interfaith and intercultural dialogue can help to 
counter religious extremism by encouraging 
understanding and respect among different faith 
communities and cultures. 
 In May, New Zealand hosted two significant 
gatherings aimed at advancing global response to 
interfaith and intercultural issues in a practical way. We 
regard the United Nations’ Alliance of Civilizations as 
the key multilateral process among the growing 
number of international and regional initiatives in this 
area. 
 With respect to nuclear proliferation, New 
Zealand welcomes the strong signals that have been 
sent to North Korea and Iran by the Security Council. 
 On a different topic, New Zealand is convinced 
that the humanitarian harm posed by cluster munitions 
must be addressed urgently. We believe that negotiation 
of a treaty to deal with the problems caused by cluster 
mines is well overdue. We will host a meeting on this 
initiative in February of next year. 
 We are pleased, too, to promote a new initiative 
at the General Assembly this year calling for action to 
lower the operational status of nuclear weapons. 
Maintaining nuclear weapons at a high level of 
readiness increases the likelihood of these weapons 
being used, with catastrophic consequences. 
 The humanitarian disaster and conflict in Darfur 
threaten security in the entire East African region. New 
Zealand applauds the efforts by Members to establish 
the new African Union-United Nations Hybrid 
Operation in Darfur. 
 New Zealand is deeply concerned at the current 
political, economic and humanitarian situation in 
Zimbabwe. We welcome the efforts being made to find 
acceptable solutions to the problems Zimbabwe faces. 
We sincerely hope that these efforts continue and that 
solutions can be found that will benefit all 
Zimbabweans and will enable free and fair elections to 
be held. 
 New Zealand remains profoundly concerned at 
the situation in Myanmar. Protestors have been killed, 
shot at, beaten and arrested. This violent treatment is 
reprehensible. Engaging in peaceful protests is a 
fundamental human right. New Zealand, therefore, 
joins others in calling for the immediate release of 
those detained in recent weeks, along with the many 
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, who 
have been held without trial for much longer periods. 
 The Myanmar regime should be held responsible 
for the personal safety and treatment of all the people it 
has detained. We call on the authorities there to stop 
the violence and to encourage a process of genuine 
dialogue with pro-democracy leaders and ethnic 
minorities. 
 New Zealand fully supports United Nations 
efforts to resolve the immediate and longer term 
situation in Myanmar. We welcomed the visit to 
Myanmar of Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari. We fully 
support continued discussion of the situation of 
Myanmar in the Security Council with a view to 
considering what further steps might be taken by the 
international community. 
 Turning now to human rights, New Zealand will 
stand for election to the Human Rights Council for 
2009 to 2012. We want to do our part to help this 
fledging United Nations organization achieve its full 
potential as the pre-eminent global human rights body. 
 A human rights issue of particular importance to 
New Zealand is the death penalty. Adoption of a 
resolution on a global moratorium on this inhumane 
form of punishment would represent a historic step 
towards global efforts to abolish the death penalty. 
 In closing, New Zealand has been a committed 
and active participant in the United Nations since its 
formation. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called 
on Member States to deliver to the best of our abilities 
at the United Nations, recognizing the need for faster, 
more effective action, as well as for a more results-
driven Organization that strives to have the highest 
standards of transparency and professional ethics. New 
Zealand whole-heartedly agrees.  
 We look forward to working closely with the 
Secretary-General, with you, Mr. President and with 
other Member States in all of our efforts to build a 
stronger United Nations for a better world. 
Traditionally, the General Assembly sums up 
the results of the ending political year. This requires 
serious and joint consideration. It is essential to 
identify agreed solutions for today’s global problems 
based on the collective analysis of current international 
affairs. It appears that no one is challenging that 
security and prosperity are inseparable in an 
increasingly globalized world. Our approach should be 
similarly comprehensive, taking into account the 
inseparable link between the issues of peace and 
development, which has been amply proven by our 
recent experience.  
 The expanding range of conflicts in international 
politics through the exacerbation of regional crises, the 
increasing threat of terrorism, the risk of the spread of 
weapons of mass destruction and stagnation on 
disarmament jeopardize international stability, divert 
resources from constructive uses and undermines the 
potential for sustainable worldwide economic growth. 
And it is such growth that is our common fundamental 
goal. Poverty and economic backwardness expand the 
breeding ground for extremism.  
 On the other hand, developments over the past 
year provide convincing proof that an essentially new 
geopolitical situation has been developing in the world, 
one that is defined primarily by emerging multipolarity. 
We need to agree on what inferences we can draw from 
this. In his Munich speech in February, President 
Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation called for an 
open and sincere dialogue that would enable us to work 
out a common understanding of the current historical 
epoch and of the modus operandi it obliges our nations 
to adopt.  
 The international landscape is changing, due to 
newly emerging centres of global growth. Today, 
nobody can cope with global challenges single-
handedly. Neither diktat nor bipolar dominance can 
fulfil the task of world governance. What is needed is 
collective leadership by major States; this should be 
representative both geographically and in terms of 
civilizations. The basis for such an informal 
mechanism can be provided only by the United Nations 
with its unique legitimacy.  
 Multilateral diplomacy based on international law 
has come to the fore. Like any society of free people, a 
world of free nations needs universal regulatory 
principles to ensure predictability and confidence in 
international affairs. The way to achieve this goal lies 
through strengthening the United Nations system by 
further adapting it to modern global realities. Decisions 
here should be based on the broadest possible 
consensus among Member States and on the universal 
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. It is 
from that perspective that we view the reform 
initiatives proposed by Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon.  
 It will be in our common interest to make more 
active use of United Nations peacekeeping capabilities. 
These could be improved by more effective use of a 
body such as the Military Staff Committee. The 
initiative put forward by the President of Russia in 
2000 to enhance the work of the Military Staff 
Committee remains relevant. Naturally, a renewed 
Committee should operate with the participation of all 
members of the Security Council, as provided for in 
the United Nations Charter.  
 Much remains to be done also in improving the 
interaction of the United Nations with regional 
organizations that have proven their ability to 
effectively participate in resolving security and 
development issues. A positive interrelationship 
between the principles of multilateralism and 
regionalism is obviously very important. At present, 
more than 50 per cent of international trade is carried 
out under regional trade agreements. Global trade 
regulation mechanisms cannot be effective without 
regional integration, which is key to the economic 
well-being of all the regions of the world.  
 Russia is actively signing and using regional 
trade agreements to achieve mutual liberalization of 
trade. Russia intends to use its current chairmanship of 
the Eurasian Economic Community to give a more 
practical focus to the organization, which since 2003 
has had observer status in the General Assembly. 
Russia, along with other sponsors, will submit to the 
General Assembly a draft resolution on cooperation 
between the United Nations and the Eurasian 
Economic Community, aimed at providing a more 
systemic basis and facilitating the timely realization of 
the Millennium Development Goals. We also hope that 
United Nations Member States would honour the 
Eurasian Development Bank the status of observer in 
the General Assembly. We shall actively promote the 
attainment of these objectives, including in the 
framework of the process to reinvigorate the 
Commonwealth of Independent States and build up 
strategic offensive capabilities.  
 The international community’s efforts should 
remain focused on reaching the Millennium 
Development Goals. We are concerned that today, 
seven years since the Millennium Summit, many 
developing countries, especially the least developed 
countries, are still significantly behind schedule in 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Particular attention should be paid to the specific needs 
of the African continent.  
 Russia fully shares the principles of global 
partnership in the interest of development, as approved 
at the Monterrey International Conference on 
Financing for Development and intends to increase its 
input to our common efforts in that area. We shall 
consistently strengthen our position as a donor country 
in accordance with the approach to Russian 
participation in international development assistance 
approved by President Putin in June 2007.  
 We are confident that concrete steps to ensure 
sustainable socio-economic development in all regions 
are a sure remedy against threats to peace and security.  
 There is a pressing need to use any means 
available to strengthen the leading role of the United 
Nations in fighting terrorism. Here, the Organization’s 
activities should be based on a comprehensive 
framework, including the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted last year as 
resolution 60/288, and on a comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism. The Collective Security 
Treaty Organization is contributing to these efforts and 
has established useful interaction with the United 
Nations.  
Our efforts to resolve regional conflicts and 
urgent social and economic problems should form part 
of our counter-terrorism efforts.  
 Iraq has become a source of destabilization for 
the whole region. Ensuring security, not to mention 
economic development, in that country requires a new 
strategy focused on reaching genuine national 
reconciliation with the participation of all of Iraq’s 
neighbours and with the support of the international 
community. We call upon the Secretary-General to take 
an active role in this issue, given the additional power 
the United Nations can wield towards an Iraqi 
settlement. The participants in recent multilateral 
meetings on Iraq have upheld that approach, and we 
support the decision endorsed at those meetings.  
 The indivisibility of security is to be seen clearly 
in the Middle East. Early solution of the Palestine 
problem based on the two-State concept and the 
achievement of a comprehensive Middle East 
settlement underpinned by the international legal 
platform developed by the United Nations are next on 
the agenda. We are convinced that this goal could be 
advanced by holding a representative international 
conference preceded by thorough preparation. We 
consider the United States initiative to convene in 
November a multiparty meeting on a Middle East 
settlement as a step in that direction. We appreciate the 
preliminary considerations voiced by the United States 
side regarding the agenda and composition of that 
event. We reaffirm the importance of involving the 
Quartet of international mediators and the Arab League 
in the preparations.  
 Settlement of the Kosovo problem is only 
possible within the framework of international and law 
based on negotiations. Unilateral steps will not lead to 
a lasting peace and will create the risk of 
destabilization in the Balkans and other regions.  
 Complex problems require an integrated 
approach. This is particularly true for the situation 
around Iran. The goal of nuclear non-proliferation is an 
absolute priority. At the same time, we should not 
ignore the task of engaging Iran in constructive efforts 
to resolve regional and international issues.  
 Urgent steps are needed to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime while providing all States 
with legitimate access to the benefits of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The joint initiative of the 
Presidents of Russia and the United States, put forward 
at their Kennebunkport meeting, is aimed at starting 
joint practical work in this field.  
 We are confident that today peace should be 
based on willingness to cooperate, especially on 
matters directly affecting strategic stability. In this 
context, we cannot neglect the unilateral plans in the 
area of missile defence. President Putin has proposed a 
constructive alternative: collaborative work with the 
participation of Russia, the United States and Europe, 
and subsequently with that of other countries. Such 
work could lead to a genuinely global strategic alliance 
encompassing the entire Euro-Atlantic region, which 
would allow us to move forward in establishing an 
open system of collective security. Our proposals are 
under discussion, and we hope that the collective 
approach will prevail. 
 The principle of the indivisibility of security 
should form the basis for resolving the situation around 
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. 
Russia stands ready to engage in that process, and 
proposals are well known. We expect that these 
proposals will be seriously discussed during the 
upcoming consultations. 
 The possibility of deploying weapons in outer 
space poses a serious threat. The magnitude of that 
threat is determined by the global coverage of the 
deployment, which can endanger all States without 
exception. We consistently oppose the deployment in 
space of weapons of any type, and we call upon the 
international community to conclude an agreement to 
that effect. 
 Another outstanding global issue is the effective 
prevention of climate change, which requires agreed 
and scientifically based solutions that are realistic and 
balanced and that do not undercut countries’ right to 
development. Russia has always stood for a 
constructive dialogue with a view to giving a genuinely 
universal character to the international climate 
protection regime. We hope that the important meetings 
that took place this week in New York and Washington 
will facilitate thorough preparations for a successful 
launch in December in Bali of negotiations on joint 
post-2012 efforts. 
 The spiritual and moral foundations of human 
solidarity are of increasingly vital importance. The 
spiritual values of all world religions demand that we 
achieve intercivilizational accord and fight 
manifestations of xenophobia and racism, as well as 
the resurgence of neo-Nazi trends. Those are the tasks 
to be tackled within the framework of the Alliance of 
Civilizations, which we support.  The World Summit of 
Religious Leaders held in Moscow last year added a 
new dimension to this endeavour. We propose to build 
upon the results of the Summit and to think about 
establishing, under United Nations auspices, a special 
forum   a kind of consultative council of religions   
for exchanges of views among representatives of major 
world faiths. 
 Russia will spare no effort to strengthen 
multilateral cooperation within the framework of the 
United Nations. I am convinced that with a continued 
commitment to the principles of the United Nations 
Charter, we can make progress in the creation of an 
effective system of collective security, as was the will 
of the founding fathers of the world Organization.
Thank you for the opportunity 
to address the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
 Sixty years ago, representatives from 16 nations 
gathered to begin deliberations on a new international 
bill of rights. The document they produced is called the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and it stands 
as a landmark achievement in the history of human 
liberty. The Declaration opens by recognizing the 
inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of 
all members of the human family as the foundation of 
freedom and justice and peace in the world. As we 
gather for the sixty-second session of the General 
Assembly, the standards of the Declaration must guide 
our work in this world.  
 Achieving the promise of the Declaration requires 
confronting long-term threats. It also requires 
answering the immediate needs of today. 
 We nations in this Hall have our differences. Yet, 
there are some areas where we can all agree. When 
innocent people are trapped in a life of murder and 
fear, the Declaration is not being upheld. When 
millions of children starve to death or perish from a 
mosquito bite, we are not doing our duty in the world. 
When whole societies are cut off from the prosperity of 
the global economy, we are all worse off. Changing 
these underlying conditions is what the Declaration 
calls the work of larger freedom, and it must be the 
work of every nation in this Assembly. 
 This great institution must work for great 
purposes, to free people from tyranny and violence, 
hunger and disease, illiteracy and ignorance and 
poverty and despair. Every member of the United 
Nations must join in this mission of liberation. The 
first mission of the United Nations requires liberating 
people from tyranny and violence. The first article of 
the Universal Declaration begins by stating that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. This truth is denied by terrorists and extremists 
who kill the innocent with the aim of imposing their 
hateful vision on humanity. The followers of this 
violent ideology are a threat to civilized people 
everywhere. All civilized nations must work together 
to stop them by sharing intelligence about their 
networks and choking off their finances and bringing to 
justice their operatives. In the long run, the best way to 
defeat extremists is to defeat their dark ideology with a 
more hopeful vision   the vision of liberty that 
founded this body. 
 The United States salutes the nations that have 
recently taken strides towards liberty, including 
Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone and Morocco. The Palestinian territories 
have moderate leaders   mainstream leaders   who 
are working to build free institutions that fight terror, 
enforce the law and respond to the needs of their 
people. The international community must support 
these leaders so that we can advance the vision of two 
democratic States   Israel and Palestine   living side 
by side in peace and security. 
 Brave citizens in Lebanon and Afghanistan and 
Iraq have made the choice for democracy. Yet, the 
extremists have responded by targeting them for 
murder. This is not a show of strength; it is evidence of 
fear; and the extremists are doing everything within 
their power to bring down these young democracies. 
The people of Lebanon and Afghanistan and Iraq have 
asked for our help, and every civilized nation has a 
responsibility to stand with them. Every civilized 
nation also has a responsibility to stand up for the 
people suffering under dictatorship. In Belarus, North 
Korea, Syria and Iran, brutal regimes deny their people 
the fundamental rights enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration. 
 Americans are outraged by the situation in 
Burma, where a military junta has imposed a 19-year 
reign of fear. Basic freedoms of speech, assembly and 
worship are severely restricted. Ethnic minorities are 
persecuted. Forced child labour, human trafficking and 
rape are common. The regime is holding more than 
1,000 political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, 
whose party was elected overwhelmingly by the 
Burmese people in 1990. 
 The ruling junta remains unyielding, yet the 
people’s desire for freedom is unmistakable. This 
morning, I am announcing a series of steps to help 
bring peaceful change to Burma. The United States will 
tighten economic sanctions on the leaders of the 
regime and their financial backers. We will impose an 
expanded visa ban on those responsible for the most 
egregious violations of human rights   as well as their 
family members. We will continue to support the 
efforts of humanitarian groups working to alleviate 
suffering in Burma. And I urge the United Nations and 
all nations to use their diplomatic and economic 
leverage to help the Burmese people reclaim their 
freedom. 
 In Cuba, the long rule of a cruel dictator is 
nearing its end. The Cuban people are ready for their 
freedom. And as that nation enters a period of 
transition, the United Nations must insist on free 
speech, free assembly and, ultimately, free and 
competitive elections. 
 In Zimbabwe, ordinary citizens suffer under a 
tyrannical regime. The Government has cracked down 
on peaceful calls for reform and has forced millions to 
flee their homeland. The behaviour of the Mugabe 
regime is an assault on its people and an affront to the 
principles of the Universal Declaration. The United 
Nations must insist on change in Harare and must insist 
on freedom for the people of Zimbabwe. 
 In Sudan, innocent civilians are suffering 
repression; and in the Darfur region, many are losing 
their lives to genocide. America has responded with 
tough sanctions against those responsible for the 
violence. We have provided more than $2 billion in 
humanitarian and peacekeeping aid. I look forward to 
attending a Security Council meeting that will focus on 
Darfur, chaired by the French President. I appreciate 
France’s leadership in helping to stabilize Sudan’s 
neighbours. The United Nations must answer this 
challenge to conscience and live up to its promise to 
promptly deploy peacekeeping forces to Darfur. 
 Secondly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from hunger and disease. 
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and of his 
family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical 
care. Around the world, the United Nations is carrying 
out noble efforts to live up to these words. 
 Feeding the hungry has long been a special 
calling for my nation. Today, more than half the 
world’s food assistance comes from America. We send 
emergency food stocks to starving people, from camps 
in Sudan to slums around the world. I have proposed 
an innovative initiative to alleviate hunger under which 
America would purchase the crops of local farmers in 
Africa and elsewhere, rather than shipping in food 
from the developed world. This would help build up 
local agriculture and break the cycle of famine in the 
developing world, and I urge our United States 
Congress to support this initiative. 
 Many in this Hall are bringing the spirit of 
generosity to fighting HIV/AIDS and malaria. Five 
years ago, in sub-Saharan Africa, an AIDS diagnosis 
was widely considered a death sentence, and fewer 
than 50,000 people infected with the virus were 
receiving treatment. The world responded by creating 
the Global Fund, which is working with Governments 
and the private sector to fight the disease around the 
world. The United States decided to take these efforts a 
step further by launching the $15 billion Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief. Since 2003, this effort has 
helped bring cutting-edge medicines to more than a 
million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It is a good start. 
So earlier this year, I proposed to double our initial 
commitment   to $30 billion. By coming together, the 
world can turn the tide against HIV/AIDS, once and for 
all. 
 Malaria is another common killer. In some 
countries, malaria takes as many lives as HIV/AIDS, 
the vast majority of them children under the age of 
five. Every one of these deaths is unnecessary, because 
the disease is preventable and treatable. The world 
knows what it takes to stop malaria   bed nets, indoor 
spraying and medicine to treat the disease. Two years 
ago, America launched a $1.2 billion malaria initiative. 
Other nations and the private sector are making vital 
contributions as well. I call on every Member State to 
maintain its focus, to find new ways to join this cause 
and to bring us closer to the day when deaths caused by 
malaria are no more. 
 Thirdly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from the chains of illiteracy 
and ignorance. Article 26 of the Universal Declaration 
states that everyone has the right to education. When 
nations make the investments needed to educate their 
people, the whole world benefits. Better education 
unleashes the talent and potential of citizens and adds 
to the prosperity of all of us. Better education promotes 
better health and greater independence. Better 
education increases the strength of democracy and 
weakens the appeal of violent ideologies. So the United 
States is joining with nations around the world to help 
them provide a better education for their people. 
 A good education starts with good teachers. In 
partnership with other nations, America has helped 
train more than 600,000 teachers and administrators. A 
good education requires good textbooks. So, in 
partnership with other nations, America has distributed 
tens of millions of textbooks. A good education 
requires access to good schools. So, in partnership with 
other nations, America is helping nations raise 
standards in their schools at home and providing 
scholarships to help students come to schools in the 
United States. And in all our education efforts, our 
nation is working to expand access for women and 
girls so that the opportunity to get a decent education is 
open to all. 
 Finally, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from poverty and despair. 
Article 23 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment and to just and favourable conditions of 
work. In the twenty-first century, this requires ensuring 
that people in poor countries have the same 
opportunity to benefit from the global economy that 
citizens of wealthy countries have. 
 The United Nations provides vital economic 
assistance designed to help developing nations grow 
their economies and reach their potential. The United 
States agrees with that position. We have dramatically 
increased our own development assistance, and we are 
delivering that aid in innovative ways. We started the 
Millennium Challenge Account to reward nations that 
govern justly, fight corruption, invest in their people 
and promote economic freedom. With this aid, we are 
reaching out to developing nations in partnership, not 
paternalism. And we are ensuring that our aid dollars 
reach those who need them and achieve results. 
 In the long run, the best way to lift people out of 
poverty is through trade and investment. A nation that 
is open and trading with the world will create 
economic rewards that far exceed anything it could get 
through foreign aid. During the 1990s, developing 
nations that significantly lowered tariffs saw their per 
capita income grow about three times faster than other 
developing countries. Open markets ignite growth, 
encourage investment, increase transparency, 
strengthen the rule of law and help countries help 
themselves. 
 The international community now has a historic 
chance to open markets around the world by 
concluding a successful Doha Round of trade talks. A 
successful Doha outcome would mean real and 
substantial openings in agriculture, goods and services, 
and real and substantial reductions in trade-distorting 
subsidies. The world’s largest trading nations, 
including major developing countries, have a special 
responsibility to make the tough political decisions to 
reduce trade barriers. America has the wi11 and 
flexibility to make those necessary decisions. Our 
negotiators are demonstrating that spirit in Geneva. I 
urge other leaders to direct their negotiators to do the 
same. And I am optimistic that we can reach a good 
Doha agreement and seize this once-in-a-generation 
opportunity. 
 In the meantime, America wi11 continue to 
pursue agreements that open trade and investment 
wherever we can. We recently signed free-trade 
agreements with Peru, Colombia, Panama and South 
Korea. These agreements embody the values of open 
markets, transparent and fair regulation, respect for 
private property and resolving disputes under rules of 
international law. These are good agreements. They are 
now ready for a congressional vote, and I urge our 
Congress to approve them as soon as possible. 
 As America works with the United Nations to 
alleviate immediate needs, we are also coming together 
to address longer-term challenges. Together, we are 
preparing for pandemics that could cause death and 
suffering on a global scale. Together, we are working 
to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. Together, we are confronting the 
challenges of energy security, environmental quality 
and climate change. I appreciate the discussions on 
climate change led by the Secretary-General last night. 
I look forward to further discussions at the meeting of 
major economies in Washington later this week. 
 The goals I have outlined today cannot be 
achieved overnight, and they cannot be achieved 
without reform of this vital institution. The United 
States is committed to a strong and vibrant United 
Nations. Yet the American people are disappointed by 
the failures of the Human Rights Council. That body 
has been silent on repression by regimes from Havana 
and Caracas to Pyongyang and Tehran, while focusing 
its criticism excessively on Israel. To be credible on 
human rights in the world, the United Nations must 
first reform its own Human Rights Council. 
 Some have also called for reform of the structure 
of the Security Council, including an expansion of its 
membership. The United States is open to this 
prospect. We believe that Japan is well qualified for 
permanent membership on the Security Council and 
that other nations should be considered as well. The 
United States will listen to all good ideas, and we will 
support changes to the Security Council as part of 
broader United Nations reform. And in all we do, I call 
on Member States to work for an institution that 
adheres to strict ethical standards and lives up to the 
high principles of the Universal Declaration. 
 With the commitment and courage of those in this 
Hall, we can build a world where people are free to 
speak, assemble and worship as they wish   a world 
where children in every nation grow up healthy, get a 
decent education and look to the future with hope   a 
world where opportunity crosses every border. America 
will lead towards that vision, in which all are created 
equal and free to pursue their dreams. That is the 
founding conviction of my country. It is the promise 
that established this body. And, with our determination, 
it can be the future of our world.  
Let me begin by adding my 
voice to the many salutations directed to Mr. Ban 
Ki-moon on being elected as the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. I wish him a fruitful tenure of 
office, trusting that through his work the poor of the 
world will have good reason to increase their 
confidence in this Organization of the nations of the 
world. 
 Again, I reiterate the many thanks to Her 
Excellency Ms. Haya Rashed Al Khalifa, for the good 
work she did as the President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. Equally, my congratulations go 
to Mr. Srgjan Kerim on his election as the President of 
the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
 We meet here today, under the theme of 
responding to climate change, at this session, which 
marks the half-way point in the freely agreed period 
during which the nations of the world committed 
themselves to work, individually and collectively, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Billions of the people of the world know as a 
matter of fact that the consequences of climate 
change   be it droughts, floods or unpredictable and 
extreme weather patterns   undermine our common 
efforts to achieve the MDGs. Today, we all understand 
that the costs of doing nothing about climate change far 
outweigh those of taking concrete measures to address 
this challenge. It is clear that delaying action on this 
matter of climate change will hit poor countries and 
communities hardest. Yet the pace of climate change 
negotiations is out of step with the urgency indicated 
by science. 
 I would therefore urge that we collectively aim 
for a significant advance in the multilateral 
negotiations when our negotiators meet in Bali in 
December this year. Together, we must ensure that we 
build a fair, effective, flexible and inclusive climate 
regime under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, 
and we must agree to this as a matter of urgency. 
Though we have different responsibilities, and 
developed countries clearly have an obligation to take 
the lead, we all have a common duty to do more and 
act within our respective capabilities and in accordance 
with our national circumstances. 
 The World Summit on Sustainable Development 
correctly reaffirmed sustainable development as a 
central element of the global action against poverty and 
the protection of the environment and identified 
important linkages between poverty, the environment 
and the use of natural resources. These linkages are 
real to billions of the poor; the combination of their 
empty stomachs, their degraded environment and their 
exploited natural resources, for which they benefit 
nothing, defines hopelessness and a heart-wrenching 
existence. 
 Many of these wretched of the Earth know from 
their bitter experience how their resource-rich areas 
were transformed into arid, uninhabitable and desolate 
areas forcing migration to better-endowed regions, thus 
exacerbating conflicts and the struggle for scarce 
resources. 
 Gathered here as representatives of the peoples of 
the world, we know very well that climate change, 
poverty and underdevelopment are not acts of God but 
human-made. 
 Clearly, the starting point for a future climate 
regime must be equity. A core balance between 
sustainable development and climate imperatives will 
have to be the basis of any agreement on a 
strengthened climate regime. Any deal on fair use of 
the ecological space will have to be balanced by a deal 
giving all countries a fair chance in the development 
space. 
 Under the aegis of the United Nations, but also 
within our regional bodies, we have adopted many 
programmes and declarations, with clear 
implementation targets aimed at addressing the 
challenges of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment. As this conclave knows very well, 
the many lofty agreements include, among others, 
those adopted at the Rio Earth Summit, the 
Copenhagen Social Summit, the Millennium Summit, 
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the 
Monterrey International Conference on Financing for 
Development. At all these summits and others, we have 
adopted declarations using moving and solemn words 
that express our profound understanding of the gravity 
of the challenges facing the modern world and have 
unequivocally committed ourselves to defeating any 
and all of the miserable and dehumanizing conditions 
facing large parts of humanity. 
 Indeed, this collective asserted, in paragraph 11 
of the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2):  
  “We will spare no effort to free our fellow 
men, women and children from the abject and 
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty. ... 
We are committed to making the right to 
development a reality for everyone and to freeing 
the entire human race from want.” 
Yet the poor, whose hopes have been raised many times 
as we have made declaration after declaration against 
poverty and underdevelopment   and as we are doing 
now on climate change   can be forgiven for thinking 
that this important global leadership often sounds like 
an empty vessel.  
 That this collective is able to express, always 
eloquently, the dire circumstances characterizing 
poverty is without doubt. However, this Organization, 
which should pride itself on visible actions and results 
in the fight against climate change and poverty, finds it 
difficult to demonstrate decisive progress in that 
regard. The reasons for that are not hard to find. 
Although the concepts of freedom, justice and equality 
are universal and fully embraced by the United 
Nations, this global Organization has not itself 
transformed and designed necessary institutions of 
governance that are consistent with the noble ideals 
that drive modern democratic societies. 
 Because the nations of the world are defined by 
the dominant and the dominated, the dominant have 
always become the decision-makers in the important 
global forums, including at this seat of global 
governance. Accordingly, the skewed distribution of 
world power   political, economic, military, 
technological and social   replicates itself in 
multilateral institutions, much to the disadvantage of 
the majority of the poor people of the world. 
 Indeed, even as we agree on the important 
programmes that should bring a better life to the 
billions of poor, the rich and the powerful have 
consistently sought to ensure that, whatever happens, 
the existing power relations are not altered and 
therefore that the status quo remains. The results of 
that situation are that the United Nations can and does 
correctly identify problems and appropriate solutions 
necessary for making the world a better place for all of 
humanity. Naturally, the dominant and the powerful 
very often respond positively to agreed programmes if 
these would advance their own narrow interests. 
 At the same time, the poor will continue to strive 
for improvement of their wretched conditions. They 
therefore see the United Nations as a natural 
instrument for helping to accelerate the process of 
change for the better. Hence, they correctly see 
implementation of all United Nations programmes as 
being central to the efforts relating to climate change 
and the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. 
 Yet the cold reality is that it will be difficult for 
the United Nations, in its present form, to fully 
implement its own decisions and therefore to help the 
poor to swiftly achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs). Indeed, until the ideals of freedom, 
justice and equality characterize this premier world 
body itself, the dominant will forever dictate to the 
dominated, and the interests of the dominated   which 
are those of the majority of humanity   will be 
deferred in perpetuity. Thus, noble statements will 
continue to be uttered on all matters facing the 
majority of the people of the world, such as the need to 
successfully conclude the Doha Development Round, 
while little is done to implement the many critical 
agreements necessary to pull the poor out of the morass 
of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 We in my own country are of the firm belief that 
we will achieve the MDGs. Having emerged from more 
than three centuries of colonialism and apartheid, we 
inherited two interlinked economies, which we 
characterize as the first and second economies. The 
two economies   one developed and globally 
connected and the other localized and informal   
display many features of a global system of apartheid. 
As South Africans, we have sought to strengthen the 
first economy and to use it as a base for the transfer of 
resources to strengthen and modernize the second 
economy, and thus embark on the process of changing 
the lives of those who subsist in the second economy. 
 Indeed, without the requisite resource transfers, it 
will not be possible to achieve the MDGs, because our 
second economy cannot on its own generate the 
resources needed to bring a better life to millions of 
poor South Africans. I mention this because, as we all 
accept, central to the global attainment of the MDGs is 
the critical matter of resource transfers from the rich 
countries of the North to the poor countries of the 
South. 
 Many developing countries   especially those of 
my own continent, Africa   do not have the material 
base from which to address and attain the MDGs on 
their own. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for 
massive resource transfers through development 
assistance, investment, trade, technology transfers and 
human resource development to these poor countries if 
we are to achieve the MDGs and successfully adapt to 
the devastating impacts of climate change. 
 If we do not succeed in building a climate change 
regime that balances adaptation and mitigation, 
underpinned by the transfer of technology and financial 
resources, we will place an unmanageable burden on 
future generations. In that regard, given Africa’s 
specific and dire challenges, we believe it is important 
to enter into a partnership with Africa using the African 
Union’s programme the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD), which the Assembly has 
adopted, so that the measures that the continent has 
undertaken, with limited resources, for the regeneration 
of all the African countries can be strengthened by 
support from the international community, guided by 
the programmes of the United Nations. 
 As history teaches us, it was because of the 
massive resource transfers in the aftermath of the 
Second World War that Western Europe recovered and 
was set on its development path. A similar intervention 
helped to put a number of Asian countries on their own 
development trajectory. The question we should ask is, 
why is there an absence of the same resolve to assist 
poor nations today? The global village to which we 
constantly refer should encourage us to expand human 
solidarity. Thus, we would build a durable bridge over 
the river dividing our common global village and 
regrettably ensuring that one human being lives a 
fulfilling life while another experiences a miserable 
existence. 
 Representing the citizens of the world, we have 
set for ourselves programmes requiring that all of us 
work together to create better living conditions for 
humanity and ensure that we achieve that which is 
necessary for our mutual prosperity. 
 Together, rich and poor, developed and 
developing, North and South, we can and must truly 
hold hands and address the challenges of climate 
change and sustainable development, work together to 
defeat poverty and underdevelopment and ensure that 
every human being is saved from the indecencies and 
humiliations that are inseparable from poverty. But to 
do that, we need first and foremost to implement the 
decisions that we have adopted freely in this eminent 
house of the representatives of the global community. 
And so, let our actions speak louder than our words.  
I  wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I am convinced that under your able 
leadership, the current session will be a fruitful one. I 
also wish to thank Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa for 
her contribution during her presidency of the previous 
session. 
 The current international environment is highly 
complex. Mankind is facing both unprecedented 
opportunities and challenges. There is a growing trend 
towards peace, development and cooperation in the 
world. But, on the other hand, traditional and non-
traditional security threats are intertwined; hotspot 
issues are acute; the gap between the North and South 
is widening; trade protectionism is resurfacing; and 
developing countries generally remain in a 
disadvantaged position. The steady trend towards 
economic globalization and towards a multi-polar 
world is fostering a new way of thinking about 
international relations. 
 In this Hall two years ago, Chinese President Hu 
Jintao called on mankind to build a harmonious world 
with lasting peace and common prosperity in the 
twenty-first century (see A/60/PV.5). The core message 
of his call is that, while recognizing the diversity of the 
world, differences of interests and diversity of cultures, 
we should harmonize interests, defuse conflicts and 
promote cooperation for win-win progress in a 
peaceful and cooperative manner. 
 In its 62-year history, the United Nations has 
played an irreplaceable role in promoting humankind’s 
cause of peace and development. The current session of 
the General Assembly should focus on promoting 
harmonious coexistence among countries. Resolving 
hotspot issues and peacefully settling international 
disputes through dialogue and cooperation are not only 
explicitly called for by the United Nations Charter. 
They are also the right way to uphold world peace and 
stability and achieve mutual benefit and a win-win 
situation for all. 
 China remains committed to seeking a peaceful 
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula 
through dialogue to uphold peace and stability on the 
peninsula and throughout North-East Asia. The Six-
Party Talks have become an important platform for the 
parties concerned to maintain dialogue and 
consultations on achieving denuclearization on the 
peninsula, normalizing relations between the countries 
concerned and building a new harmonious architecture 
in North-East Asia. We will continue to play a 
constructive role in advancing the process of the Six-
Party Talks and the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula. 
 Diplomatic negotiations are the best option for 
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue peacefully and 
meeting the common interests of the international 
community. China opposes nuclear-weapon 
proliferation and stands for upholding the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. No non-proliferation effort 
should deviate from the goal of upholding international 
peace and stability. Countries should honour their due 
international obligations, and their right to peaceful use 
of nuclear energy should be fully respected. China 
urges the parties concerned to show flexibility and 
resume negotiations at an early date. China will 
continue to contribute its share to the peaceful 
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 The Palestine-Israel conflict is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. China supports the just cause of the 
Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the restoration 
of their lawful national rights, and it sincerely hopes 
that Arab countries and Israel will promptly end their 
disputes through political negotiations on the basis of 
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of 
land for peace. China calls on Palestine to strengthen 
its unity and welcomes the initiative to hold an 
international conference on the Middle East. We hope 
that the Iraqi people will continue to work for national 
reconciliation and restore peace and stability at an 
early date, and that this will lead to a comprehensive, 
just and lasting resolution of the Middle East issue. 
 The trilateral dialogue and consultation among 
the United Nations, the African Union and the 
Sudanese Government on an equal footing is an 
effective mechanism for resolving the Darfur issue. 
The international community should work to sustain 
the current sound momentum and give full play to the 
role of the trilateral mechanism as the main channel. 
We should adhere to dual-track strategy, promote 
balanced progress in peacekeeping operations and the 
political process and seek a lasting solution to the 
Darfur issue through making progress in the security, 
political, humanitarian, economic and social areas. 
China is committed to a proper settlement of the Darfur 
issue. It has provided humanitarian assistance to Darfur 
on a number of occasions and will send a military 
engineering unit to join the peacekeeping operations 
there. China will continue to firmly support the peace 
and national reconciliation process in the Sudan and 
will contribute to the resolution of the Darfur issue and 
peace, stability and development in the Sudan. 
 At its current session, the General Assembly 
should promote the peaceful development of all 
countries. Poverty is a major source of disputes, and 
only development can eliminate poverty. Human 
development concerns us all. Obviously, it is 
impossible to build common prosperity when there is a 
huge chasm between the North and the South. The 
international community should act with a sense of 
urgency and redouble its efforts to deliver the 
Millennium Development Goals, narrow the North-
South gap and, in particular, meet Africa’s special 
development needs. Developed countries should 
increase assistance, further open their domestic 
markets, transfer more technologies to developing 
countries and provide greater debt relief to them. 
 For their part, developing countries, on their part, 
should adopt development strategies and policies 
suited to their national conditions and boost their 
economic development. We should support an open, 
equitable and fair multilateral trade regime and oppose 
trade protectionism. We should work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations and make it a development round. 
Reform of the international economic system should 
fully reflect changes in the world economy and should 
give developing countries more say and greater 
representation in the international economic system. 
 China gives a high priority to strengthening 
international cooperation on development as it 
develops itself. We seek coordinated and balanced 
global development. While a developing country itself, 
China has all along provided assistance to African 
countries and other developing countries, according to 
its ability, and has helped them to improve their 
capacity for independent and sustainable development. 
That is because we believe that lasting peace and the 
common prosperity of the world is possible only with 
the development of developing countries. 
 To help Africa attain stability, security and 
sustainable development is the common responsibility 
of the international community. China and African 
countries enjoy mutual political respect and equality 
and economic mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. 
They support one another and maintain close 
consultation in international affairs. We draw on one 
another’s strengths in governance to promote 
development. Thanks to our joint efforts, China-Africa 
cooperation has yielded fruitful results. Such 
cooperation is well received by the African countries, 
and it has brought great benefits to both the Chinese 
and African peoples. China’s cooperation with Africa 
facilitates Africa’s cooperation with other countries and 
is not targeted against any third party. 
 The current session of the General Assembly 
should be devoted to promoting harmony between man 
and nature. Development in the world has both 
advanced material progress and caused ecological 
imbalance and environmental pollution. To protect our 
common homeland is a matter of vital importance for 
our common future. 
 Climate change is an environmental issue, but 
ultimately it is an issue of development. It has arisen in 
the course of development and can be resolved only 
through development. We should uphold the 
framework of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol 
and adhere to the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities. Developed countries 
should face up to their responsibilities, fulfil their 
commitments on emissions reduction in earnest and 
continue to take the lead in emissions reduction after 
2012. We should strengthen international cooperation 
on energy, resources and the environment, step up 
efforts to develop and introduce energy-conserving 
technologies, environmental protection technologies 
and low-carbon energy technologies, and establish 
reasonable mechanisms for financing and technology 
transfer. That will enable developing countries to gain 
access to and afford advanced environmental-
protection technologies, enhance capacity to respond to 
climate change and effectively address climate change 
through achieving sustainable development. 
 China takes climate change seriously. Though its 
current per capita carbon dioxide emissions are less 
than one third of the average of developed countries, 
China, acting in a way that is highly responsible to 
mankind, has taken many effective measures to tackle 
climate change, including adopting a series of laws and 
regulations and setting the goals of reducing energy 
intensity and increasing forest cover. The Chinese 
Government has set the following targets: to reduce 
energy intensity and total discharge of major pollutants 
by about 20 per cent and 10 per cent respectively and 
to increase the forest cover rate to 20 per cent for the 
period between the end of 2005 and 2010. Under its 
National Climate Change Programme, China will take 
an active part in international cooperation in climate 
change and contribute its share to protecting the global 
climate. 
 Advancing United Nations reform and enabling 
the Organization to play a more important role in 
maintaining world peace, promoting common 
development and strengthening cooperation among 
countries is crucial to building a harmonious world. 
China supports the reform of the United Nations. The 
reform decisions made at the high-level meeting 
marking the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations 
held in 2005 should be implemented in a 
comprehensive and balanced manner. Priority should 
be given to reform in the area of development, and the 
United Nations should increase its input in that area. 
The Human Rights Council should build on the 
outcome of reform in its previous phase and become a 
platform for dialogue and cooperation rather than an 
arena for political confrontation. Security Council 
reform should give priority to increasing the 
representation of developing countries and give small 
and medium-sized countries more opportunities to 
participate in decision-making. Reform proposals 
should be based on the widest possible consensus. 
China is ready to work with all other parties to turn 
reform into a process of strengthening consultation and 
dialogue and promoting solidarity and cooperation 
among all United Nations Member States. 
 China is committed to building a society of 
democracy, the rule of law, equity and justice, integrity 
and amity, vitality, stability and order, where people 
live in harmony with nature. To achieve that goal, 
China is fully implementing the outcomes of scientific 
thinking on development. We are working to boost 
social productivity and ensure people’s rights in the 
political, economic, cultural, social and other fields. By 
striving to build a harmonious society and by 
improving the material and cultural life of one fifth of 
the world’s population, China is making a true 
contribution to the building of a harmonious world. 
 China has always pursued its own development as 
a part of the global effort to promote the common 
progress of mankind. In international affairs, we are 
committed to the following goals: promoting 
participation in international affairs by all countries on 
an equal footing and democracy in international 
relations; enabling all countries to share the benefits of 
economic globalization and progress in science and 
technology for a win-win outcome; promoting 
exchanges and understanding among civilizations and 
diversity in the world; enhancing dialogue and trust 
among countries; and jointly tackling global issues. 
China unswervingly pursues a path of peaceful 
development and will continue to make further 
contributions to humankind’s cause of peace and 
development. 
 Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory. 
We will not permit any challenge to the one-China 
principle and General Assembly resolution 2758 
(XXVI). For 15 years running, since 1993, the General 
Assembly has rejected the inclusion of Taiwan-related 
issues in the agenda of the General Assembly session. 
This fully demonstrates that any move that runs 
counter to the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations Charter or attempts to distort and deny General 
Assembly resolution 2758 (XXVI) will not receive any 
support from the United Nations Member States and is 
doomed to failure. We hope that the countries 
concerned will not allow themselves to be manipulated 
by the Taiwan authorities and will stop making wrong 
moves of this kind. 
The Taiwan authorities are now obstinately 
clinging to the separatist course of “Taiwan 
independence” and are trying by all means to secure a 
referendum on applying for membership of the United 
Nations under the name Taiwan. This is another 
dangerous step towards “de jure Taiwan independence” 
taken by the Chen Shui-bian authorities. If unchecked, 
this move will gravely endanger peace and stability 
across the Taiwan Strait and in the Asia-Pacific region. 
The Chinese Government has always made every effort 
to promote with all sincerity peaceful development of 
cross-Strait relations and to seek peaceful 
reunification. However, we will never allow anyone to 
separate Taiwan from China in name or in any other 
way. We hope that the international community will 
continue to support China’s cause of peaceful 
reunification, support the Chinese people in opposing 
and repulsing separatist activities for “Taiwan 
independence” and work with us to maintain peace and 
stability across the Taiwan Straits and in the Asia-
Pacific region. 
 The Olympic Games, which represent humanity’s 
aspiration for peace, development, cooperation and 
friendship, will for the first time be held in China, a 
country both ancient and youthful, starting on 8 August 
2008. One World, One Dream   this is the theme of 
the Beijing Olympic Games. The 1.3 billion people in 
China, together with the rest of the world, are eagerly 
looking forward to the opening of the Games. The 
2008 Olympic Games are a great event for both the 
Chinese people and the other peoples of the world. We 
are confident that with the efforts made by the Chinese 
people and with strong support from the international 
community, the 2008 Olympic Games will stand out as 
a highly successful event. 
Please accept  my congratulations, Mr. President, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I wish you every success. 
 We are currently experiencing a period of 
dramatic changes. Great opportunities are accompanied 
by considerable risks. Global structures are changing. 
States, economies and societies are becoming 
networked as never before. That is what we call 
globalization. 
 The good thing about that development is that 
prosperity is increasing, and more and more people are 
escaping from poverty. The challenge that that 
development poses is that not everyone has their fair 
share of this prosperity. There are considerable 
imbalances. We thus need a global awareness, beyond 
national boundaries, of our joint responsibility in order 
to master the major challenges facing our world. 
 Climate change is undoubtedly one of the central 
challenges facing humanity today. I therefore very 
much welcome your decision, Mr. President, to make 
climate change the focus of this year’s session of the 
General Assembly. Never before have the facts been so 
clear, the consensus among scientists so great or the 
need for action so indisputable. Each and every country 
is affected by the impact of climate change. No one 
country can tackle it alone. Not to take action would 
incur immense costs and cause new global conflicts. 
 What does that mean for the way ahead? In quite 
concrete terms, it means that any contribution from 
individual States or groups of States is welcome. 
However, I would like to add most emphatically that 
such contributions can only complement a post-Kyoto 
agreement under the auspices of the United Nations. 
They can never replace it. 
 This session of the General Assembly therefore 
has to set the course for the next vital step: the climate 
conference in Bali. Environment ministers will have to 
agree in Bali on a clear road map so that negotiations 
can be successfully concluded by 2009. There are three 
key elements: a common understanding on the scale of 
emissions reduction, a common understanding on fair 
national contributions and a common understanding on 
the instruments we should use both to protect the 
climate and to foster economic growth. 
 The scope of the need for action is becoming 
increasingly clear. We must at least halve global 
emissions by the middle of the century. For this we 
have a clear guiding principle: the principle of 
common but differentiated responsibility. 
Industrialized countries must embrace ambitious 
absolute reduction targets. During the German 
presidency the European Union adopted bold targets 
for 2020. All industrialized countries will have to 
drastically reduce their per capita emissions. 
 Emerging economies will first of all have to 
decouple their economic growth from emissions. In the 
long term, per capita emissions in both industrialized 
countries and emerging economies will have to 
converge at a level compatible with our global climate 
protection target. 
 Such a process of long-term convergence offers 
all countries scope to develop. It does not demand too 
much of anyone. There is no doubt in my mind that 
only a United Nations agreement can provide the 
dependability this will require.  
 Climate protection will therefore be a litmus test 
of the international community’s ability to act 
effectively in the twenty-first century. For, on our own 
continent, we Europeans know from our daily 
experience that   although any individual country is 
too small to make a real difference   together we can 
achieve much. 
 In the light of our experience, I believe three 
principles are of crucial importance to our common 
future. First, economic strength and social 
responsibility belong together. This principle applies 
both to how States treat their citizens and to how States 
treat each other. It emphasizes the right and freedom of 
each individual to achieve their full potential. At the 
same time, it upholds cohesion and solidarity, while 
categorically rejecting isolationism and protectionism. 
 That is why we are seeking a balanced and 
comprehensive agreement on multilateral trade. In 
concrete terms, this means that we have to bring the 
Doha Round to an early and successful conclusion. Too 
much time has been wasted. We have to seize the last 
chance for negotiations this autumn. Our aim must be 
transparent financial markets and effective protection 
of intellectual property, as well as minimum legal and 
social standards. For I am convinced that there can be 
no fair competition without common ground rules. 
 We can only achieve cohesion and solidarity in a 
global development partnership. With the Millennium 
Development Goals, the international community has 
laid down binding quantifiable targets and deadlines 
for the first time. Together with its EU partners, 
Germany has undertaken to reach the United Nations 
0.7 per cent target no later than 2015. We stand by 
these pledges. 
 There can be no doubt that genuine partnership 
places all sides under an obligation   an obligation to 
step up the fight against corruption, to aim for better 
governance and to better protect human rights. We 
want to support Africa in particular. There have been 
encouraging developments on the continent but 
unfortunately, also, serious setbacks, for example in 
Zimbabwe. 
 “Growth and responsibility in the world 
economy” is, therefore, also the motto guiding this 
year’s German presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8). 
 The second principle is that we have to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations. In 
my view, there is absolutely no doubt   the United 
Nations is the place where binding joint responses can 
be found to global challenges. But the United Nations 
is in need of reform. This is true, above all, of the 
Security Council. In many crisis situations it needs to 
be able to come up quickly with universally binding 
proposals. To do this, it must have international 
legitimacy. However, the present composition of the 
Security Council no longer reflects the world today. 
There is, therefore, no alternative to adapting it to 
political realities. 
 My country has over the past years been actively 
involved in this debate. Germany is prepared to assume 
more responsibility, and to take on a permanent seat on 
the Security Council. What we need now are tangible 
results. We are by no means only at the start of our 
endeavours. The United Nations reform process has 
already produced some results, such as the report of the 
High-level Panel on United Nations system-wide 
coherence and the establishment of the Peacebuilding 
Commission. 
 But time is short. There are numerous crises we 
have to deal with right now. And notwithstanding the 
many differing factors that have led to these crises, 
they all have one thing in common: they can only be 
solved multilaterally. The key to ending them is unity 
of purpose. This is particularly true with respect to 
Iran. Iran has continuously worked on its nuclear 
programme in clear contradiction of the demands of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United 
Nations. Nobody should be in the slightest doubt as to 
the dangerous nature of this programme. Iran is 
ignoring Security Council resolutions. Iran is blatantly 
threatening Israel. 
 Let us not fool ourselves. If Iran were to acquire 
the nuclear bomb, the consequences would be 
disastrous, first and foremost for the existence of 
Israel; secondly, for the entire region; and ultimately 
for all of us in Europe and the world who attach any 
importance to the values of liberty, democracy and 
human dignity. That is why we have to prevent Iran 
from acquiring nuclear arms. 
 The international community must not allow 
itself to be divided or have its decisive response to 
Iran’s provocations undermined in any way. The world 
does not have to prove to Iran that Iran is building a 
nuclear bomb. Iran has to convince the world that it is 
not striving towards such a bomb. 
 Each and every German Chancellor before me 
has shouldered Germany’s special responsibility for the 
existence of Israel. I, too, pledge to live up to this 
responsibility that our history has bequeathed us. It is 
one of the fundamental principles that guides my 
country. In other words, Israel’s security is 
non-negotiable for me as German Chancellor. And that 
being the case, we have to do more than pay lip-service 
to it. Together with its partners, Germany will continue 
to seek a diplomatic solution. With this aim in mind, 
Germany will   if Iran does not come around   
firmly advocate additional and harsher sanctions. 
 Unity of purpose is also the key in the fight 
against international terrorism, and especially in our 
efforts aimed at security and stability in Afghanistan. 
Unity of purpose is also vital for ensuring a peaceful 
future in Kosovo, where NATO and the European 
Union play a particularly active role. We want a 
solution under United Nations auspices. All parties are 
now called upon to show a willingness to compromise. 
 We also strongly support the efforts of the Middle 
East Quartet for peace in that region. Germany is a 
staunch advocate of the vision of two States, within 
secure borders and in peace, for the Jewish people in 
Israel and for the Palestinians in Palestine. We 
welcome the fact that both parties are continuing their 
talks with great vigour, above all with a view to the 
Middle East conference scheduled for November. 
 The third principle is that we have to strengthen 
our shared immutable values. In my opinion, one of the 
great dangers of the twenty-first century is that crises 
and conflicts could give rise to a clash of civilizations. 
This must not happen. For this reason, I plead for 
tolerance   tolerance as properly understood, not 
“anything goes” masquerading as tolerance. Everybody 
must be able to follow his or her own path, but it must 
be a path within the international community, not 
outside it. 
 This path is clearly departed from wherever 
massive human rights violations are committed, as in 
Darfur. A human tragedy is being played out there. Too 
much time has already been squandered. Now is the 
time to act. The crimes perpetrated there must not go 
unpunished. This path has been departed from in 
Myanmar, where human rights have likewise been 
disregarded for years. I urge the Government not to use 
force against the peaceful demonstrators and finally to 
make way for a democratic future for the country. This 
path is also departed from when political assassinations 
are carried out, as in the case of Rafik Hariri or the 
recent cowardly attack just a few days ago in Lebanon. 
The Hariri tribunal must commence its work with all 
possible speed. I call on Syria to grant Lebanon 
diplomatic recognition at long last. 
 It is my fundamental conviction that we must, 
time and again, muster the strength to assert our shared 
values of freedom and democracy. In order to do that, 
we need an unshakeable foundation.  
 We have such a foundation: the Charter of the 
United Nations. It was written when Europe and wide 
swathes of the rest of the world lay in ruins. At the 
most basic level, it is a statement that, notwithstanding 
all the dark chapters and tortuous turns of our history, 
universal human rights do exist. In other words, what it 
all comes down to is respecting and protecting the 
dignity of each individual person. That is the 
underlying reason why we assemble here each year and 
work together for the future of our peoples. 
 Germany will do its utmost to advance that work. 
We look forward to fruitful cooperation with all 
partners in the United Nations. 
 To all the  peoples represented here, I convey the brotherly 
greetings of France. Mr. Secretary-General, you have 
an enormous responsibility, and you have the trust of 
France. 
 This is the first time that I address this Assembly 
on behalf of France. It is a solemn and moving moment 
for me. I cannot help thinking of all of those men and 
women who, at one of the most tragic moments in the 
history of humanity, as the world stood on the brink of 
barbarity, finding that prospect intolerable, succeeded 
in countering force and violence and barbarity with 
justice and peace. Thus was the United Nations born. 
 The United Nations is not a mere political 
construct. It is not a mere legal construct. It is an 
awakening of the human conscience against everything 
that threatens to destroy humanity. 
 I have never believed that the United Nations 
could one day root out the violence that lies within 
human beings. But what I do know deep down inside 
me, what we all know deep down, is that in spite of all 
its failures, without the United Nations it would have 
been impossible to put an end to conflicts that seemed 
to be insoluble. Remember the genocide of the 
Cambodian people, remember the suffering inflicted 
upon them; remember the independence of Namibia; 
remember the independence of Timor. Look at the 
Great Lakes region, or West Africa. Without the United 
Nations, the world might have experienced a third 
world war, doubtless even more terrible than the two 
previous ones. 
 France is convinced that the United Nations is the 
only remedy we have for the blindness and folly that 
sometimes take hold of human beings. 
 The message I wish to bring to you in the name 
of France is a simple one: in this world where the fate 
of each of us depends on the fate of others, the United 
Nations should not be weakened; the United Nations 
must be strengthened. Reforming the United Nations so 
as to adapt it to the realities of our world is an absolute 
priority for France. We cannot afford to wait any 
longer. The world’s problems must be addressed and 
resolved globally. No one on this Earth can alone 
protect themselves from the consequences of climate 
warming, the clash of civilizations, major epidemics. 
Against selfishness, against fanaticism, against hatred, 
it is our duty to renew that appeal to the universal 
conscience by virtue of which, for the first time in the 
history of all the peoples of the world, all nations 
agreed to meet within a common forum in order to set 
aside what divides us and talk to one another. 
This appeal to the universal conscience is an 
appeal for peace. It is an appeal for open-mindedness. 
It is an appeal for diversity. And it is an appeal for 
justice. France has always sought greatness for the sake 
of men and women, not for its own sake. Like all 
nations, France, in the course of its long history, has 
made mistakes, and has sometimes been at fault. But 
its people, the people of France, have always chosen to 
be on the side of freedom and democracy. France is 
loyal to its friends and to the values it shares with 
them. But this loyalty is not submission. This loyalty is 
not a shackle. And France intends to draw on that 
loyalty in the cause of openness to others, of openness 
to the world. I want the world to know that France is 
willing to talk to everybody in the world, in every 
continent. 
 But I would also like to say that openness is not 
renunciation. Understanding is not weakness. 
Weakness and renunciation are not factors of peace; 
they are factors of war. France and Europe in the past 
experienced the tragic consequences of such an attitude 
for themselves and for the whole world. When you are 
weak and submissive, you get ready to accept war. We 
all have a duty to ensure that that never happens again. 
There will be no peace in the world if the international 
community compromises with the right of peoples to 
self-determination and if it compromises with human 
rights. 
 There will be no peace in the world unless the 
international community is unshakeable in its 
determination to fight terrorism. There will be no peace 
in the world unless the international community stands 
united in its resolve to put an end to the wars in the 
Middle East, to put an end to the horror in Darfur, to 
the tragedy of Lebanon or to the humanitarian disaster 
in Somalia. And I weigh my words carefully. There 
will be no peace in the world if the international 
community falters in the face of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
 Iran is entitled to nuclear power for civilian 
purposes. But if we allow Iran to acquire nuclear 
weapons, there would be an unacceptable risk to 
stability in the region and in the world. I want to say 
here, in the name of France, that we can only resolve 
this crisis by combining firmness with dialogue. It is in 
that spirit that France will act. 
 I want to say here, in the name of France, that it 
is the duty of the international community to confront 
those who seek power and constantly threaten the 
fragile balance of peace and to do so by bringing to 
bear its unwavering unity and its determination to 
uphold the law. I want to say, in the name of France, 
that there will be no peace in the world without respect 
for diversity, without respect for national identities, 
without respect, I venture to say, for religions and 
beliefs, or without respect for cultures. Attachment to 
one’s faith, to one’s identity, to one’s language and 
culture, and to one’s way of life, thought and belief   
all that is legitimate, and profoundly human. To deny 
that is to sow the seeds of humiliation. It would stoke 
the fires of nationalism, fanaticism and terrorism. We 
will not avert the clash of civilizations by forcing 
everyone to think and to believe the same things. 
France intends to pursue, together with all people of 
goodwill, this battle to build a new world order of the 
twenty-first century. 
 We want a Lebanon living independently, and we 
say that France will always stand shoulder to shoulder 
with Lebanon in its desire for independence. Tomorrow 
we hope that Israelis and Palestinians will find within 
themselves the strength to live in peace. Peace is 
possible. It is possible now. And we will devote all of 
our energies to that. 
 We want to see the peaceful coexistence of the 
main religions to vanquish fundamentalism and 
fanaticism. But I want to say, with all due gravity, that 
there is too much injustice in the world for the world to 
hope to live in peace. 
 The founding fathers of the United Nations knew 
that the world’s future could be read in the eyes of a 
tortured child; a hungry child; children who watch their 
parents being humiliated; children who since birth have 
known nothing but war; children torn from their 
homes, their lands, their families. Because in those 
children’s desperate eyes there is not only suffering, 
but also all the wars and revolts that will drench the 
world in blood tomorrow. 
 Let us look at the world as it is. Let us look at 
what we have made of it. Have we wanted enough to 
make it more just? The answer is no. Have we done 
enough to achieve that end? The answer is no.  
 When the Berlin wall fell, we all dreamed that 
history would cease to be tragic. Let us look at our 
world as it is so that we can make it better. Let us 
judge our world by the yardstick of justice. Justice 
means that the Palestinian people can regain a country 
and build a State. Justice means that the Israeli people 
can enjoy the right to live in security. Justice means 
that the Lebanese people can regain their freedom. 
Justice means that the Iraqi people, in all their 
diversity, can find within themselves the path to 
reconciliation and democracy. Justice means that a 
developing country on which we wish to impose 
environmental rules, even though its inhabitants have 
barely enough to eat, can be helped to put such rules in 
place. Justice means that we cannot tap a country’s 
resources without paying a fair price for them. 
 Let us look squarely at our world. Never before 
has there been so much easy money, with so much 
wealth concentrated in the hands of a few large groups. 
Throughout the world, even in the richest countries, 
there are many men and women who no longer have 
even a hope of emerging some day from their material 
and moral distress.  
 In conclusion, I appeal to the conscience of all 
those who have a responsibility for the conduct of 
world affairs. Because if we do nothing, the poor and 
the exploited will one day rise up against the injustice 
done to them. 
 What the world needs is a new mindset: a 
genuine New Deal on a global scale, an ecological and 
economic New Deal. On behalf of France, I call on all 
States to join together to found the new world order of 
the twenty-first century, predicated on the key idea that 
the common goods of humanity must be the 
responsibility of all of humanity.  
 On behalf of France, I solemnly appeal to the 
United Nations to provide itself, in this era marked by 
the return of scarcity, with the means to guarantee that 
all people throughout the world have access to vital 
resources: water, energy, food, medicine and 
knowledge. I solemnly appeal to the United Nations to 
concern itself with the issue of fairer distribution of 
wealth and of the income derived from commodities 
and technology. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to concern itself with the moralization of 
financial capitalism. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to go further in combating corruption, which 
saps countries that are suffering and all too poor. 
 Things must change. Mindsets must change. 
Behaviour must change. This is our responsibility now, 
because tomorrow it will be too late. If we fail to act, 
we will see a resurgence of all the threats that the 
people of the post-war world believed they had 
overcome. Let us not take this risk lightly.  
 Peoples of the world, we can, together, build a 
better future for all people. It is up to us alone; it is up 
to our capacity to remain faithful to the values that 
have brought us together here today. You have 
understood. France believes that we have no more time 
to wait. France calls for action. France urges action. 
France is committed to action in the service of world 
peace. 
It is a great  honour to make my first speech to the General 
Assembly. 
 The United Nations has a duty to lead the world 
in addressing the shared threats and opportunities that 
dominate our age, and it must do so in deed as well as 
in word. That is why I want to use this platform to 
express my admiration and support for United Nations 
missions around the world, from Lebanon to Liberia, 
from Congo and Haiti to East Timor, which, even as we 
meet in New York this week, are saving lives and 
spreading hope. 
 Since 1946, when the first meeting of the General 
Assembly took place in London, the United Kingdom 
has been determined to fulfil its international 
responsibilities through the United Nations. The new 
Government in the United Kingdom, under the 
leadership of Gordon Brown, is proud to continue that 
tradition, and I reaffirm our commitment today. 
 The focus at this session has been on immediate 
and pressing issues. In the Middle East, we need urgent 
action towards a two-State solution that addresses the 
security of Israelis and the rights of Palestinians at the 
same time.  
 In Iraq, recent security gains can only be 
sustained through continued support for the 
development of the Iraqi security forces, through 
national reconciliation and through political support 
from the whole region. 
 Our international community depends on 
responsibilities as well as rights. If Iran wants to be a 
leading and respected country, it must cease its support 
for terrorist groups in Iraq and Afghanistan and end its 
defiance of three Security Council resolutions in 
respect of its nuclear programme. 
 In Zimbabwe, we need United Nations action to 
support African leadership to reverse the vicious cycle 
of economic and social devastation that now afflicts 
the country. 
 We have all seen the extraordinary scenes in 
Burma. I call on the regime to allow peaceful protest, 
encourage national dialogue and promote genuine 
reconciliation. Let us today send a message to the 
monks on the streets of Burma: we support your 
demand for a democratic Burma. And let us take a 
message from the monks on the streets of Burma: the 
human desire for freedom knows no bounds of race or 
religion or region. It is good that the Burmese 
Government has allowed Ambassador Gambari into the 
country, but it is now vital that they use his presence 
there to start the process of reconciliation. 
 But as well as addressing the traumas of our 
fellow citizens around the world, the United Nations 
must be the place where we address the longer-term 
threats. Today, I devote my speech to one of the great 
threats to stability and prosperity in the world: the 
threat of global inequality. I do so because inequalities 
are not just morally offensive; they are also dangerous. 
Inequality fuels extremism. It undermines support for 
an open, global economy. It corrodes trust and respect 
and reciprocity between nations. 
 The United Nations Charter talks of the 
“sovereign equality of States”, and it also talks of the 
“equal rights and dignity of men and women and of 
nations large and small”. The principle of equality is 
nowhere more evident than in the General Assembly 
where all States have an equal voice. But in the world 
outside this Hall, economic, social and political 
inequalities within and between States persist and 
worsen. We cannot stand united against the shared 
threats and opportunities in our world when we are so 
divided by economic and political disparities. So the 
need for Governments and international institutions to 
reduce inequalities and promote our common humanity 
is stark. 
 Traditionally, we have focused on the divide 
between developed and developing nations. However, 
the growth rates in many developing countries are 
faster than in developed economies. That is the good 
news. But there remain around a billion people in the 
world   one sixth of its population   living in 58 
countries, who have been left out of the story of human 
progress. This “bottom billion” have an average life 
expectancy of 50 years. Fourteen per cent of the 
children in the bottom billion die before their fifth 
birthday, and more than a third suffer malnutrition. The 
countries that are home to the bottom billion saw their 
national incomes fall each year during the 1980s and 
1990s. 
 Even where inequalities are narrowing between 
nations, they are widening within them. According to 
the United Nations Development Programme, in 73 
countries   containing 80 per cent of the world’s 
population   economic inequality has risen in recent 
years. 
 Every nation represented here has responsibilities 
to its own people. The drive to tackle poverty needs 
open markets. It needs the empowerment of citizens 
through democratic and transparent institutions, free 
from corruption. It needs strong and effective 
education and health services open to all. 
 But national action is not enough. Because the 
causes of inequality cross national boundaries, we need 
cooperation between nations, bilateral and multilateral, 
led by the United Nations. 
 First, three quarters of the countries where the 
bottom billion citizens reside have recent or current 
experience of civil war. Conflict is the trapdoor to 
extreme poverty. Look at Darfur: more than 200,000 
people are dead, 2 million are displaced and 4 million 
are on food aid. As the international community, we 
decided on a course of action in Security Council 
resolution 1769 (2007). Now we need to get on with it: 
an agreement on force composition, swift deployment, 
effective protection of civilians on the ground and a 
political process in which the legitimate grievance of 
the Darfur people is addressed through negotiation. In 
Afghanistan, one of the five poorest countries in the 
world, we need to back up military efforts to secure 
safe space with economic, social and political 
reconstruction. 
 Beyond those crises, we also need to improve our 
capacity to prevent the emergence of conflict. That is 
our vision of the responsibility to protect. A critical 
dimension is controlling the spread of weapons whose 
easy availability makes it so simple to set up militias 
and provoke violence and mayhem. Last year, the 
Assembly voted overwhelmingly to take forward 
United Nations work towards an arms trade treaty (see 
resolution 61/89). The Government of the United 
Kingdom will continue to press for the achievement of 
that goal. 
 Secondly, freedom from conflict is the platform 
for progress, but the battle against disease and 
illiteracy is the second stage. Despite progress in some 
countries, the world is off track to meet the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That is why, in July here 
at the United Nations, the Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom launched a call for action: to honour our own 
commitments and go further, to build a truly global 
partnership   with the private sector, trade unions, 
faith groups, civil society and cities   that can meet 
the 2015 MDG targets. That requires the developed 
world to meets its commitment to spend 0.7 per cent of 
its national incomes on development. The United 
Kingdom will meet that commitment by 2013. But that 
requires shared responsibility. Poor governance and 
corruption are the enemies of development. 
 Thirdly, progress on aid needs to be combined 
with a new global trade deal that opens up economies 
on a fair basis. Western producers continue to benefit 
from subsidies and tariffs, particularly for agriculture. 
Higher tariffs for processed goods prevent poor 
countries from diversifying their economies. That is a 
bad deal for Western consumers, and it squeezes out 
the livelihoods of producers in poor countries. Neither 
is it in rich countries’ financial self-interest, nor is it 
fair. The Government of the United Kingdom believes 
that concluding the Doha trade round this year is not 
just necessary, but also possible, and we will work to 
achieve that goal. 
 Finally, we must address the greatest long-term 
threat to our aspirations to tackle inequality: climate 
change. Climate change affects all countries, but the 
poorest countries   and the poorest people within 
those countries   will suffer the most disruption and 
devastation. I congratulate the President of the General 
Assembly on choosing climate change as a central 
theme of this general debate. And I congratulate the 
Secretary-General on his leadership on this issue. But 
we need more than debate. 
 The United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change is the only body that can conclude a 
global agreement on climate change. Therefore, in the 
next two months we need an urgent agreement on the 
steps towards progress to be taken at the December 
meeting in Bali. Beyond that, we need a road map to 
the 15th conference of parties to the Convention, to be 
held at Copenhagen in two years’ time, and agreement 
on a global deal that succeeds the end of the first 
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. 
 At the heart of such an agreement must be the 
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities: 
all countries taking on responsibilities, but making sure 
that they are equitably distributed, with the greatest 
action taken by the richest countries. The United 
Kingdom stands ready to play its part. This year, our 
climate change bill will be enacted into law in the next 
session of Parliament to place on a statutory footing 
our commitment to cut carbon emissions by at least 60 
per cent from 1990 levels by the year 2050. But we 
need similar binding commitments from all rich 
countries. 
 The challenges are therefore immense. Crisis 
resolution and conflict prevention, the Millennium 
Development Goals, a new trade deal, climate 
change   they call for all our resources. Military 
intervention is never the whole solution, but sometimes 
a solution cannot be found without armed force. 
Development budgets are necessary, but the developing 
world needs a growth plan, not just an aid plan. 
Diplomacy needs to bridge differences between 
nations, but also to reach out to civil society and 
business. 
 The United Kingdom is proud not just of its 
bilateral relations with the countries represented in the 
Assembly, but also of its commitment to multilateral 
institutions, which can be a force for good in the world. 
But international institutions need to reflect the world 
as it is, not the world as it was. The United Kingdom 
therefore welcomes the prospect of intergovernmental 
negotiations at this session to achieve agreement on 
reform of the Security Council. We support permanent 
membership for Germany, Japan, India and Brazil and 
permanent representation for Africa. We are not 
wedded to a single model of reform. Achieving 
effective change is what matters. 
 In a world where more than a billion people are 
online, where companies have bigger turnovers than 
countries and where global non-governmental 
organizations have memberships that are bigger than 
national populations, our international institutions must 
look inwards to internal reform, but also outwards to 
broader popular movements for change. 
 In the last phase of globalization, in the 
nineteenth century, the emergence of new Powers and 
the breakdown of the international order resulted in 
conflict that scarred the whole of the twentieth century. 
Unless we can build trust and reciprocity between 
nations and embody them in durable and robust 
international institutions that reconcile differences and 
nurture common values, the latest phase of 
globalization could be another false dawn. 
 Globalization is not just something to which we 
must adapt; it is something that we can and must shape 
for the achievement of our own goals. It must be put to 
use spreading power, wealth and opportunity. For my 
Government, this mission is driven by both moral 
purpose and national interest. We must address the 
insecurity and inequality that exist beyond our borders 
if we are to enhance security and prosperity within our 
borders. 
 We live in a more prosperous, more peaceful and 
more democratic world than ever before. Let us 
commit ourselves to living in a more equal world. 
Kindly accept my 
congratulations, Sir, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
My delegation assures you of its full cooperation as we 
address issues identified in the annual report of the 
Secretary-General (A/62/1) and as we responsibly and 
creatively move forward with pending reforms of the 
Organization. 
 At the outset I would like to express India’s deep 
gratitude to all Member States for the recent 
unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of 
resolution 61/271, deciding to annually observe the 
International Day of Non-Violence, on 2 October, the 
anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi. I also 
look forward to participation by Member States in the 
informal plenary meeting of the General Assembly and 
other functions being organized tomorrow at the United 
Nations to mark the first International Day of 
Non-Violence. 
A central topic for this year’s debate   
responding to climate change   is both timely and 
relevant. India’s views on it were recently set forth at 
the high-level event on climate change, which took 
place here on 24 September. Combined with the 
exchange of views in the general debate, it will no 
doubt provide a useful backdrop to the meeting of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change to be held later this year in Bali, Indonesia.  
 The impact of climate change and environmental 
degradation falls disproportionately upon developing 
countries. Developing countries are the most 
vulnerable to it, and also lack the means to tackle it. 
Measures to address climate change must be based on 
mitigation and adaptation strategies with fair burden-
sharing and measures to realize sustainable patterns of 
consumption and production. The process of burden-
sharing must also take into account where the primary 
responsibility for the present state of greenhouse gas 
concentration in the atmosphere rests and not foreclose 
rapid and sustained economic development for the 
developing world, which, in any case, is an imperative 
for adaptation. 
 Technology is the other key area that needs to be 
addressed. It is important that critical clean 
technologies be made available and affordable to 
developing countries. The intellectual property rights 
regime must balance rewards for innovators with the 
common good of humankind. Concerted international 
action to address climate change, in accordance with 
the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities, as well as 
national circumstances and social and economic 
conditions, is the need of the hour. India, for which 
energy security is a national imperative, has a very 
small individual carbon footprint, with per capita 
carbon dioxide emissions at just about a quarter of the 
world’s average. Even so, we are determined that, as 
we pursue economic growth, our per capita greenhouse 
gas emissions will not increase beyond those of the 
industrial countries. 
 Poverty and underdevelopment are amongst the 
central challenges of our times. The overarching 
requirement is for sustained economic growth to 
eradicate poverty in developing countries. However, 
economic growth must also be measured against the 
template of social inclusion. Growth alone is not 
enough if it does not produce benefits that are 
sufficiently dispersed, not only in terms of increased 
income and employment, but also for improved health, 
nutrition and education for all. 
 I affirm India’s resolve to achieve the 
internationally agreed development goals, including 
the Millennium Development Goals. The Government 
of India accords the highest priority to inclusive 
growth, including the political, legal, educational and 
economic empowerment of women, effective and 
affordable public health, and enhanced access to 
educational opportunities, especially for all those who 
are disadvantaged. 
 It is apparent that progress in the achievement of 
the internationally agreed development goals has been 
tardy. The international community, through the United 
Nations system, must more effectively support the 
efforts of developing countries to achieve the 
development goals. A comprehensive reform of the 
international financial architecture is a key ingredient 
in that process. The United Nations must play an 
important role in overseeing the reform of the 
international financial architecture. That should include 
measures to ensure a greater voice for and participation 
by developing countries in the Bretton Woods 
institutions. The process of reform must be carried to 
its logical conclusion if the credibility of those 
institutions is to be enhanced. 
 We must also address as a priority the regrettable 
inversion of global resource flows. Today, instead of 
the urgently needed inflow of resources to developing 
countries to buttress their national economic 
development plans, we are confronted with a net 
outflow from them. Official development assistance 
(ODA) showed a marked fall during 2006 and remains 
well below the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national 
product. It is primarily being used to finance debt 
relief. That this is happening after so many years of 
liberalization and globalization highlights our 
collective failure. Perhaps we should be considering 
mechanisms, such as an international debt commission, 
to redress the problem of developing country debt.  
 The least developed countries, which are 
particularly hard hit by rising energy costs, find 
themselves in an even more difficult situation. 
Enhanced and predictable resource flow to developing 
countries remains a key objective of the global 
partnership for development. India will continue to do 
what it can to help with capacity-building in other 
developing countries and to assist them through ODA 
within the limits of its capacity. By the end of the year, 
imports from least developed countries into India will 
face a zero-tariff regime. 
 Early and substantive progress at the Doha Round 
of trade negotiations, based on the primacy of the 
development dimension, is another imperative. We 
must return to the negotiating table with a redoubled 
sense of urgency, while recognizing that adherence to 
the existing mandate remains critical. Nor can the 
interests of subsistence farmers be ignored or equated 
with those of other sectors. An illogical linkage 
between agriculture and non-agricultural market access 
will only complicate the development impact of the 
Round. The overarching principle of special and 
differential treatment for developing countries remains 
a categorical imperative. 
 As part of India's commitment to the 
achievement of human rights for all, and as a member 
of the Human Rights Council, we remain actively 
involved in developing the institutional framework of 
that body, including the universal periodic review 
mechanism, based on effective international 
cooperation as a central principle in the Council’s 
methods of work. India will work towards developing 
an international normative framework for the 
promotion and protection of human rights. India is 
honoured to be one of the first signatories of the 
International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Earlier today, I 
also had the honour of depositing India’s instrument of 
ratification of the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  
 As the largest democracy in the world, India has 
developed a system of local self-government with 
democratically elected institutions of representative 
Government at all levels   the village, the district, the 
State and the nation. The effort to make participatory 
democracy more meaningful to every Indian citizen 
underpins what is perhaps one of the greatest social 
experiments in the world today, namely, the transfer of 
decision-making power to nearly one million elected 
women local Government representatives. As a result, 
women are not merely the beneficiaries of change in 
India, but are its instruments. 
 As the world’s largest democracy, it was also 
natural for India to support the establishment of the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. We made an initial 
contribution of $10 million to the Fund and remain 
actively and constructively involved in realizing the 
objectives for which it was set up. As a small token of 
our commitment to that laudable initiative, I have the 
privilege of announcing a further pledge of $10 million 
to the United Nations Democracy Fund. 
 The international system cannot be reordered 
meaningfully without a comprehensive reform of the 
United Nations. If the Organization is to remain the 
cornerstone of the international architecture in this 
century, it cannot remain mired in the realities of the 
1940s. Despite substantive implementation of the 
United Nations reform agenda that emerged from the 
2005 World Summit Outcome, such reform will 
inevitably remain incomplete without comprehensive 
reform and expansion of the Security Council and 
revitalization of the General Assembly. Elements and 
ideas on the reform of the Security Council have been 
discussed for well over a decade in numerous reports 
and interminable consultations. It is now time for 
intergovernmental negotiations to commence in order 
to make the Security Council more democratic, 
representative and responsive.  
 We, together with partners from Africa, Latin 
America and Asia, tabled a resolution on 11 September 
2007, spelling out the principles on which reform 
ought to be based if it is to be meaningful. These 
principles are expansion in both permanent and 
non-permanent categories of membership; greater 
representation for developing countries and 
representation for developed countries that is reflective 
of contemporary world realities; and comprehensive 
improvement in the working methods of the Security 
Council, including ensuring greater access for island 
and small States. We welcome recent statements from 
this podium by President Bush of the United States of 
America and other world leaders on the need for 
Security Council reform in both the permanent and 
non-permanent categories. It is high time that we 
collectively bring these ideas to implementation. 
 Reform of the United Nations would also be 
incomplete without revitalization of the General 
Assembly. The central goal of such revitalization must 
be the restoration and enhancement of the role and 
authority of the General Assembly as originally 
envisaged in the Charter. 
 Given the significance of developmental 
activities for the developing world, India sees a 
corresponding need for the reform of United Nations 
operational activities in favour of development. Since 
these activities are aimed at supporting the work of 
Member States, it follows that Members must 
determine their direction and shape through an 
intergovernmental process. The litmus test for any 
reform proposal is whether it improves the support 
extended by the United Nations to the efforts of 
programme countries. India would therefore judge 
reform proposals by their impact on the ground, by the 
resultant improvement in the effectiveness of the 
system and by the impact on transaction costs for the 
United Nations development system. 
 Steps to achieve the complete elimination of 
nuclear weapons have also only made limited headway. 
Despite some progress, the world remains far from 
achieving the objective of total elimination of nuclear 
weapons. India’s long-standing commitment to 
universal, non-discriminatory and comprehensive 
nuclear disarmament is embodied in the vision of late 
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-free and 
non-violent world. This vision was put forward nearly 
two decades ago. It remains undiminished today.  
 Indeed, it is all the more relevant today, given the 
fact that peaceful uses of nuclear energy can address 
the inexorably growing demand for new and  
non-polluting sources of energy to fuel economic 
development. We will be bringing proposals to 
Member States and this Organization to see how we 
can refocus on general and complete disarmament, 
particularly nuclear disarmament. Disarmament is our 
agreed goal, and it subsumes arms control and 
non-proliferation. 
 It is well known that India has an impeccable 
record in preventing the proliferation of sensitive 
technologies. That is in keeping with our commitment 
to being a responsible nuclear Power. India is ready to 
work with the international community to develop a 
new international consensus on non-proliferation. The 
international community needs to intensify the effort to 
address the very real threat posed by the link between 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMDs) and related materials and technologies and 
the ability of non-State actors to acquire them. The risk 
posed by the intersection between proliferation and 
terrorism is real and serious. The central objective must 
be to ensure that our solidarity in words is translated 
into action. 
 The adoption of the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy last September was a 
noteworthy development, signalling the will of the 
international community to combat this menace in a 
holistic and coordinated manner. Welcome as the 
Strategy is, there is much more that needs to be done to 
combat the menace that international terrorism has 
become. India is convinced that without the early 
adoption of a comprehensive convention against 
international terrorism, the global struggle against 
terrorism remains incomplete and likely to succeed 
only partially. We must ensure that there is zero 
tolerance for all forms of terrorism. 
 In conclusion, I would express the hope that our 
deliberations in the year ahead will lead us to 
enlightened action. With maturity and resolve we will 
successfully overcome the many challenges before us. 
Three thousand years ago, the 
people of Israel journeyed from slavery in Egypt to 
independence in the land of Israel. The Bible tells us 
that on their voyage to liberty they made a crucial stop 
and received the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai. 
 As the General Assembly gathers this year, the 
Jewish people recall that historic journey by marking 
the festival of Sukkot. And every year, at this time, our 
people remember that the long march to freedom 
requires the acceptance of humanity’s basic values. 
 For 60 years, since the rebirth of our State in our 
ancient homeland, with Jerusalem at its heart, we have 
not lost sight of this principle. The core values of 
tolerance, coexistence and peace that lie at the heart of 
every democracy must be protected within societies 
and promoted between them. This is the calling of our 
generation. 
 The conflict in our region is driven by those who 
reject these core values   those who seek power 
without responsibility, those whose aim is not to 
realize their own rights but to deny those rights for 
others. At its heart, this is a conflict not about territory, 
but about values. 
 There is, of course, a territorial dimension to our 
dispute. We know this and, as we have proven in the 
past, we are prepared for the territorial compromise 
that lasting peace entails. But we also know, especially 
after withdrawing from Lebanon and Gaza, that 
territorial withdrawal by itself will not bring peace 
unless we address the core clash of values that lies 
beneath the conflict. 
 Israel may be on the front lines of this battle, but 
it is not our fight alone. This is a global battle. The 
notion that this battle is a local one, limited to isolated 
regions, collapsed in this city with the twin towers on a 
September morning six years ago. Today, it is clear that 
the extremists are engaged in a bloody war against 
civilians and communities, against hearts and minds, in 
every corner of the world. 
 And it is clear, too, that the Middle East conflict 
is not the cause of this global extremist agenda, but a 
consequence of it. Yes, it is up to the parties in the 
Middle East to settle their political conflict, and Israel, 
for its part, desires to do so. But for success to be 
genuine and lasting, you, the nations of the world, need 
to be partners in a shared global struggle against the 
extremism and terror that feed conflict, for your sake, 
not just for ours. 
 It is in this spirit that I would like to speak today 
about resolving our particular conflict, but also about  
the wider battle being waged today   the battle that 
affects us all. This battle is global, not just because it 
targets civilians everywhere, but also because the 
extremists have taken aim at the fundamental pillars of 
every modern society   namely, democracy, tolerance 
and education. These are the new battlefields of the 
twenty-first century, and it is in these arenas, more than 
any other, that the future of our world will be decided. 
 I believe in democracy. I believe in its 
extraordinary power to produce free and peaceful 
societies founded on respect for human rights. 
Democracy is a profound ideal, but it is also a 
vulnerable one. 
 Today, in different parts of the world, extremists, 
who are opposed to the very ideals of democracy, are 
entering the democratic process, not to abandon their 
violent agenda but to advance it. As a spokesman for 
Al-Qaida recently declared, “We will use your 
democracy to destroy your democracy”. This should be 
a wake-up call for all of us. 
 It is time to reclaim democracy, and this begins 
by rejecting those who abuse it. Genuine democracy is 
about values before it is about voting. No true 
democracy on Earth allows armed militia or groups 
with racist or violent agendas to participate in 
elections. But some demonstrate a troubling double 
standard. There are some who insist on high standards 
in their own country but forget them when they look 
abroad. Violent extremists who could never run for 
office at home are treated as legitimate politicians 
when elected elsewhere. As a result, we empower those 
who use democratic means to advance anti-democratic 
ends. And we strengthen the forces of those who not 
only undermine their societies but also threaten our 
own. 
 Today, from this podium, I call on the 
international community to adopt at the global level 
what democracies apply at the national one: a universal 
set of standards for participation in genuine democratic 
elections. We need a universal democratic code that 
requires that all those seeking the legitimacy of the 
democratic process earn it by respecting such 
principles as State monopoly over the lawful use of 
force, the rejection of racism and violence and the 
protection of the rights of others. 
 The goal of such a universal code is not to dictate 
our values or to stifle legitimate voices with which we 
may disagree. Its goal is to protect core democratic 
values from those determined to use the democratic 
system against itself; and to make clear that 
participation in the democratic process is not just a 
right   it is also a responsibility. 
 I know that the temptation to engage with 
extremists can be strong. It may seem to promise 
stability and quiet. We may hope that by feeding the 
beast we can gradually tame it. As free societies, we 
pride ourselves, rightly, on our respect for difference 
and diversity. But we do a disservice to diversity when, 
in its name, we tolerate the intolerant. 
 Bitter experience has shown that buying off 
extremists is a short-term fix for which we will pay 
dearly in the long run. Instead, groups such as Hamas 
and Hizbullah must be presented with a clear choice 
between the path of violence and the path of 
legitimacy. They cannot have both. And it is this same 
stark choice that must be presented to the radical 
regime in Iran. 
 No responsible State disagrees that Iran is the 
most prominent sponsor of terrorism. It is a major 
source of instability and conflict in Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestine and across the entire Middle East; and it is 
the enemy of Arab-Israeli coexistence. No one 
disagrees that Iran denies the Holocaust and speaks 
openly of its desire to wipe a Member State   mine   
off the map. And no one disagrees that, in violation of 
Security Council resolutions, it is actively pursuing the 
means to achieve this end. 
 But there are still those who, in the name of 
consensus and engagement, continue to obstruct the 
urgent steps that are needed to bring Iran’s sinister 
ambitions to a halt. Too many see the danger, but they 
walk idly by, hoping that someone else will take care 
of it. What is the value, we have to ask, of an 
organization which is unable to take effective action in 
the face of a direct assault on the very principles it was 
founded to protect? 
 It is time for the United Nations, and the States of 
the world, to live up to their promise of never again, to 
say enough is enough, to act now and to defend their 
basic values. It is also time to see this same kind of 
moral conviction in the Human Rights Council, so that 
it can become a shield for the victims of human rights, 
not a weapon for its abusers. 
 Israel has never tried to avoid genuine discussion 
of its human rights record. But so long as the Council 
maintains its wildly disproportionate focus on Israel, it 
weakens the moral voice of the United Nations, and the 
price of this blindness is paid by the victims of human 
rights atrocities in Darfur and Myanmar and 
throughout the world. 
 There is no more accurate forecast for the future 
of a society than the lessons we teach our children. 
Unfortunately, in our region, we see children’s 
television programmes in which Mickey Mouse 
puppets teach the glory of being a suicide bomber and 
a seven-year old girl sings of her dreams of blood and 
battle. Religion, rather than being a source of hope and 
spiritual healing, is abused as a call to arms, as God is 
dragged once again onto the field of battle. 
 It is time to reclaim religion from those who have 
made it a weapon rather than a shelter. It is time to 
reclaim education from those who use it as a tool of 
hate rather than an opportunity. As always, the most 
powerful form of education, and the hardest, is to teach 
by example. We cannot expect our younger generation 
to value what we are not prepared ourselves to protect 
and pay a price for. And there is a price to pay. From 
the leader who has to withstand public pressures. From 
the businessman who has to forgo economic 
opportunity. From the teacher and spiritual guide who 
must find the inner strength to teach truth and tolerance 
in a climate of extremism and hostility. At all levels of 
society, there is a price to be paid. But if we do not pay 
it today, we, and those who follow us, will face a far 
greater bill tomorrow. 
 These thoughts are in my mind as we seek, today, 
to advance the cause of Israeli-Palestinian 
reconciliation. Reconciliation is not about deciding 
who was right or who was wrong in the past; it is about 
sharing a common vision and a common responsibility 
for the future. In the last months, Prime Minister 
Olmert and President Abbas have been engaged in a 
sincere and genuine effort to reach the widest possible 
common ground on political understandings. There is 
no substitute for the bilateral process. Failure is not an 
option, but it is for the parties themselves to define 
success. The foundation for true peace lies in the vision 
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side 
in peace and security. The world shares this vision, but 
it is also important that it clearly embrace the two core 
principles that emerge from it. 
 The first of these principles is: two States, two 
homelands. Just as Israel is homeland to the Jewish 
people, so Palestine will be established as the 
homeland and the national answer for the Palestinian 
people, including the refugees. 
 The second is: living side by side in peace and 
security. Just as a viable and prosperous Palestine in 
the West Bank and Gaza is an Israeli interest, so must a 
secure Israel be a Palestinian interest. The world 
cannot afford another terror State. 
 Guided by these principles, the parties can define 
a common border and turn the two-State vision from a 
dream into reality. To succeed, we must set our sights 
on a brighter future, while responding to the challenges 
of the present and learning the lessons of the past. As 
we make progress on concrete political understandings, 
it is just as important to change the reality on the 
ground   to show Palestinians and Israelis that the 
promise of peace exists in practice, not just on paper. 
 In recent months, Israel has taken tangible 
measures to create a better environment, and we are 
ready to do more. We know that Palestinian life is full 
of day-to-day hardship. We know also, and only too 
well, the burden of terror that Israelis bear and of our 
primary obligation to their security. Together, we can 
change this reality; we do not need to submit to it. 
 We are not naive. We can see the difficulties 
ahead and the enemies of peace that stand in our way. 
But practical progress is possible in those areas where 
there is an effective Palestinian Government that 
accepts the Quartet’s principles and implements, 
alongside Israel, the existing Road Map obligations. 
 As the parties take the risks for peace, we look to 
the international community and the Arab and Muslim 
world to offer support, not to stipulate conditions. This 
support comes in many forms. It comes through 
economic and political assistance to the new 
Palestinian Government committed to coexistence and 
seeking to build the foundations of a peaceful and 
prosperous State. It comes through the clear 
endorsement of any political understandings reached 
between the parties. It comes through enhancing and 
deepening regional ties and cooperation between the 
Arab world and Israel, while in parallel we advance 
towards Israeli-Palestinian peace. And, finally, it 
comes by confronting those determined to prevent us 
from succeeding. 
 We must stand up to those who have no respect 
for human life or human liberty, those who hold 
captive soldiers - Gilad Shalit, Udi Goldwasser and 
Eldad Regev - whose families are with us today and 
whose pain remains always in our hearts. 
 We must stand up to those who, after we 
withdrew from Gaza to give peace a chance, chose not 
to build but to destroy and who choose, on a daily 
basis, to target Israeli homes and kindergartens with 
their missiles. 
 And we must stand up to those who see 
democracy as a tool to advance hate, who see tolerance 
as a one-way street and who see education as a means 
of poisoning the minds of the next generation. 
 I believe that, despite all the obstacles, there is a 
new moment of opportunity and an alliance of interest 
that favours peace. Time is of the essence. We owe it to 
ourselves and to our children to find both the courage 
and the wisdom to make the right choices in the right 
way. 
 On this festival of Sukkot, Jews commemorate 
the journey from slavery to freedom by leaving their 
homes to live in fragile huts, like the shelters in which 
our ancestors lived on their way to the Promised Land. 
For 3,000 years, these temporary huts, open to the 
elements, have been a reminder that stability and 
security are ensured not only by the structures that we 
build but also by the values that we share. Perhaps it is 
for this reason that the Sukkah, this fragile shelter, has 
become the Jewish symbol of peace. 
 We turn to Jerusalem and say in our prayers every 
day: Spread over us the canopy of your peace. May it 
be in our days, and for all nations. 
As we meet for the 
sixty-second session of the General Assembly, we look 
again to the United Nations as the global forum to 
address the challenges which affect us all. 
 Climate change is serious and urgent, as many 
have said in this Hall. We welcome that it has been the 
theme of our general debate this year. The science is 
clear. Climate change is real and will impact on all 
parts of the world. To meet the global challenge of 
climate change, there must be widespread and effective 
international action. It will be important to get all 
economies onto low carbon pathways over time. 
Market mechanisms will have a significant role to play. 
Individual countries will face different challenges. 
Different national circumstances must be taken into 
account. 
 The United Nations climate change conference in 
Bali in December will be a fresh opportunity to 
re-energize our efforts in addressing climate change. 
New Zealand wants to see a Bali road map emerge in 
December to set us on the course for an effective future 
response. New Zealand welcomes the momentum that 
is being generated by other high-level meetings in the 
lead-up to Bali, including the recent Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation Leaders’ Declaration. 
 Last week’s high-level event deserves special 
mention. We congratulate the Secretary-General for his 
efforts in cultivating the political goodwill that will be 
vital if we are to reach agreement in Bali.  
 Taking action as an international community also 
means taking action domestically. In recent weeks, 
New Zealand has announced a number of domestic 
measures to address climate change. An emissions 
trading scheme will be established from 1 January 
2008 and will form the cornerstone of our efforts to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It will, over time, 
cover all sectors and all gases. 
 We have also identified a number of longer-term 
domestic goals, which will move New Zealand down 
the path to carbon neutrality. They will provide 
benefits, including healthier homes, cleaner air and 
improved public transport. While climate change is 
certainly a challenge for us all, it is also an opportunity 
to move towards a more sustainable world. 
 With regard to the Millennium Development 
Goals, we recognize that having passed the halfway 
point to 2015, the international community needs to 
step up its efforts to achieve them. At the same time, 
there is scope for the United Nations development 
system to be strengthened. We welcome the newly 
established initiatives in the Economic and Social 
Council   the Annual Ministerial Review and the 
Development Cooperation Forum   as practical ways 
to share information about what is working and where 
we can improve our efforts at country level. 
 New Zealand is also committed to improving 
system-wide coherence at the United Nations in the 
fields of development, humanitarian issues and the 
environment. We attach particular importance to 
working for a strengthened, coherent, gender 
architecture and towards effective gender 
mainstreaming across all United Nations entities. 
 New Zealand welcomes the completion of the 
United Nations Pacific-based development agencies’ 
strategic framework for the Pacific. We are keen to 
work closely with United Nations agencies in the 
Pacific to achieve positive outcomes for our partners in 
the areas of human rights, sexual and reproductive 
heath, HIV/AIDS, child immunization and women’s 
leadership. 
 A strong, prosperous and stable Pacific is a key 
foreign policy priority for New Zealand. We place a 
high priority on fostering solidarity and cooperation in 
the Pacific to tackle the challenges the region faces in 
democracy, security and economic development. 
Around half of New Zealand’s development assistance 
goes towards the Pacific.  
 New Zealand provides assistance in the region in 
Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and 
Bougainville in Papua New Guinea, with each situation 
calling for a different response. 
 The Timorese people, their leaders and the 
international community have all made a huge effort 
over the past year to return Timor-Leste to a more 
secure and stable path. New Zealand has participated in 
those efforts through our contributions to the 
International Security Forces and to the United Nations 
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). Timor-
Leste will require a sustained commitment from 
UNMIT.  
 The situation in Fiji continues to be of concern to 
New Zealand. As a neighbour of Fiji with a long-
standing and very close relationship, New Zealand 
worked hard to avert last December’s coup, including 
by convening a meeting to mediate between the then 
Prime Minister and the military commander. We very 
much regret that this failed to dissuade the coup 
makers from their illegal and unconstitutional path. 
 New Zealand strongly and actively supports the 
steps that have been taken by the Pacific Islands Forum 
to encourage an early return to constitutional 
government in Fiji. We would welcome a firm 
commitment from the interim administration to work 
towards elections within the timeframe endorsed by the 
Forum. Given that commitment, New Zealand would 
begin to restore a more normal bilateral relationship 
through which we could cooperate in addressing Fiji’s 
undoubtedly complex problems. 
 I also want to take this opportunity to address one 
issue in particular raised in the Solomon Islands 
statement on Monday (see ). It was 
suggested, inter alia, that the presence of the Regional 
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), 
was an “occupation”, and that RAMSI’s operation 
transgressed Article 52 of the United Nations Charter. 
New Zealand has always been committed to upholding 
the purposes and principles of the Charter in every 
respect. In our view, RAMSI is entirely consistent with 
those purposes and principles. It is a specific example 
of Chapter VIII of the Charter in operation. To suggest 
it is contrary to the Charter is in our view wrong. 
RAMSI was established in response to a formal request 
from the Solomon Islands. Its presence in the Solomon 
Islands is sanctioned by treaty and by the domestic law 
of the Solomon Islands. That was recently reaffirmed 
by the Solomon Islands Parliament. Moreover, RAMSI 
stems from the endorsement by Pacific Islands Forum 
Foreign Ministers of a programme of action under the 
Forum Leaders’ Biketawa Declaration. That provides a 
framework for regional responses in times of crisis or 
when members request assistance   exactly the 
situation in this case. 
 Amid all these challenges, I would like to report 
on activity being undertaken by Tokelau, the tiny 
territory 500 kilometres north of Samoa that New 
Zealand administers. The people of Tokelau, all 1,500 
of them on three atolls, have decided that they wish to 
undertake an act of self-determination to decide 
whether they wish to change their present status. A 
vote in February 2006 narrowly missed the threshold 
set by Tokelau for a change of status. They will again 
vote on that issue from 20 to 24 October. 
 As members of the Special Committee on 
Decolonization know, New Zealand supports Tokelau’s 
right to choose, but has stood back from any wish to 
determine the direction of any change. That decision is 
entirely for the people of Tokelau. New Zealand will 
support their decision. 
 Advancement of the rule of law at the national 
and international levels is essential for the realization 
of sustained economic growth, development and 
human rights. New Zealand encourages members to 
provide their full support to the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) by acceding to the Rome Statute of the 
ICC. We also call on all United Nations Member 
States, especially State parties to the Rome Stature, to 
fully cooperate with the Court in carrying out its 
current work. Universality and full support are crucial 
if we are to end the impunity of the perpetrators of the 
most serious crimes of international concern, such as 
those carried out in Darfur, where International 
Criminal Court arrest warrants are outstanding. 
 Efforts to protect and maintain the international 
rule of law can only be effective when built on a 
foundation of international peace and security. 
 Interfaith and intercultural dialogue can help to 
counter religious extremism by encouraging 
understanding and respect among different faith 
communities and cultures. 
 In May, New Zealand hosted two significant 
gatherings aimed at advancing global response to 
interfaith and intercultural issues in a practical way. We 
regard the United Nations’ Alliance of Civilizations as 
the key multilateral process among the growing 
number of international and regional initiatives in this 
area. 
 With respect to nuclear proliferation, New 
Zealand welcomes the strong signals that have been 
sent to North Korea and Iran by the Security Council. 
 On a different topic, New Zealand is convinced 
that the humanitarian harm posed by cluster munitions 
must be addressed urgently. We believe that negotiation 
of a treaty to deal with the problems caused by cluster 
mines is well overdue. We will host a meeting on this 
initiative in February of next year. 
 We are pleased, too, to promote a new initiative 
at the General Assembly this year calling for action to 
lower the operational status of nuclear weapons. 
Maintaining nuclear weapons at a high level of 
readiness increases the likelihood of these weapons 
being used, with catastrophic consequences. 
 The humanitarian disaster and conflict in Darfur 
threaten security in the entire East African region. New 
Zealand applauds the efforts by Members to establish 
the new African Union-United Nations Hybrid 
Operation in Darfur. 
 New Zealand is deeply concerned at the current 
political, economic and humanitarian situation in 
Zimbabwe. We welcome the efforts being made to find 
acceptable solutions to the problems Zimbabwe faces. 
We sincerely hope that these efforts continue and that 
solutions can be found that will benefit all 
Zimbabweans and will enable free and fair elections to 
be held. 
 New Zealand remains profoundly concerned at 
the situation in Myanmar. Protestors have been killed, 
shot at, beaten and arrested. This violent treatment is 
reprehensible. Engaging in peaceful protests is a 
fundamental human right. New Zealand, therefore, 
joins others in calling for the immediate release of 
those detained in recent weeks, along with the many 
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, who 
have been held without trial for much longer periods. 
 The Myanmar regime should be held responsible 
for the personal safety and treatment of all the people it 
has detained. We call on the authorities there to stop 
the violence and to encourage a process of genuine 
dialogue with pro-democracy leaders and ethnic 
minorities. 
 New Zealand fully supports United Nations 
efforts to resolve the immediate and longer term 
situation in Myanmar. We welcomed the visit to 
Myanmar of Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari. We fully 
support continued discussion of the situation of 
Myanmar in the Security Council with a view to 
considering what further steps might be taken by the 
international community. 
 Turning now to human rights, New Zealand will 
stand for election to the Human Rights Council for 
2009 to 2012. We want to do our part to help this 
fledging United Nations organization achieve its full 
potential as the pre-eminent global human rights body. 
 A human rights issue of particular importance to 
New Zealand is the death penalty. Adoption of a 
resolution on a global moratorium on this inhumane 
form of punishment would represent a historic step 
towards global efforts to abolish the death penalty. 
 In closing, New Zealand has been a committed 
and active participant in the United Nations since its 
formation. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called 
on Member States to deliver to the best of our abilities 
at the United Nations, recognizing the need for faster, 
more effective action, as well as for a more results-
driven Organization that strives to have the highest 
standards of transparency and professional ethics. New 
Zealand whole-heartedly agrees.  
 We look forward to working closely with the 
Secretary-General, with you, Mr. President and with 
other Member States in all of our efforts to build a 
stronger United Nations for a better world. 
Traditionally, the General Assembly sums up 
the results of the ending political year. This requires 
serious and joint consideration. It is essential to 
identify agreed solutions for today’s global problems 
based on the collective analysis of current international 
affairs. It appears that no one is challenging that 
security and prosperity are inseparable in an 
increasingly globalized world. Our approach should be 
similarly comprehensive, taking into account the 
inseparable link between the issues of peace and 
development, which has been amply proven by our 
recent experience.  
 The expanding range of conflicts in international 
politics through the exacerbation of regional crises, the 
increasing threat of terrorism, the risk of the spread of 
weapons of mass destruction and stagnation on 
disarmament jeopardize international stability, divert 
resources from constructive uses and undermines the 
potential for sustainable worldwide economic growth. 
And it is such growth that is our common fundamental 
goal. Poverty and economic backwardness expand the 
breeding ground for extremism.  
 On the other hand, developments over the past 
year provide convincing proof that an essentially new 
geopolitical situation has been developing in the world, 
one that is defined primarily by emerging multipolarity. 
We need to agree on what inferences we can draw from 
this. In his Munich speech in February, President 
Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation called for an 
open and sincere dialogue that would enable us to work 
out a common understanding of the current historical 
epoch and of the modus operandi it obliges our nations 
to adopt.  
 The international landscape is changing, due to 
newly emerging centres of global growth. Today, 
nobody can cope with global challenges single-
handedly. Neither diktat nor bipolar dominance can 
fulfil the task of world governance. What is needed is 
collective leadership by major States; this should be 
representative both geographically and in terms of 
civilizations. The basis for such an informal 
mechanism can be provided only by the United Nations 
with its unique legitimacy.  
 Multilateral diplomacy based on international law 
has come to the fore. Like any society of free people, a 
world of free nations needs universal regulatory 
principles to ensure predictability and confidence in 
international affairs. The way to achieve this goal lies 
through strengthening the United Nations system by 
further adapting it to modern global realities. Decisions 
here should be based on the broadest possible 
consensus among Member States and on the universal 
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. It is 
from that perspective that we view the reform 
initiatives proposed by Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon.  
 It will be in our common interest to make more 
active use of United Nations peacekeeping capabilities. 
These could be improved by more effective use of a 
body such as the Military Staff Committee. The 
initiative put forward by the President of Russia in 
2000 to enhance the work of the Military Staff 
Committee remains relevant. Naturally, a renewed 
Committee should operate with the participation of all 
members of the Security Council, as provided for in 
the United Nations Charter.  
 Much remains to be done also in improving the 
interaction of the United Nations with regional 
organizations that have proven their ability to 
effectively participate in resolving security and 
development issues. A positive interrelationship 
between the principles of multilateralism and 
regionalism is obviously very important. At present, 
more than 50 per cent of international trade is carried 
out under regional trade agreements. Global trade 
regulation mechanisms cannot be effective without 
regional integration, which is key to the economic 
well-being of all the regions of the world.  
 Russia is actively signing and using regional 
trade agreements to achieve mutual liberalization of 
trade. Russia intends to use its current chairmanship of 
the Eurasian Economic Community to give a more 
practical focus to the organization, which since 2003 
has had observer status in the General Assembly. 
Russia, along with other sponsors, will submit to the 
General Assembly a draft resolution on cooperation 
between the United Nations and the Eurasian 
Economic Community, aimed at providing a more 
systemic basis and facilitating the timely realization of 
the Millennium Development Goals. We also hope that 
United Nations Member States would honour the 
Eurasian Development Bank the status of observer in 
the General Assembly. We shall actively promote the 
attainment of these objectives, including in the 
framework of the process to reinvigorate the 
Commonwealth of Independent States and build up 
strategic offensive capabilities.  
 The international community’s efforts should 
remain focused on reaching the Millennium 
Development Goals. We are concerned that today, 
seven years since the Millennium Summit, many 
developing countries, especially the least developed 
countries, are still significantly behind schedule in 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Particular attention should be paid to the specific needs 
of the African continent.  
 Russia fully shares the principles of global 
partnership in the interest of development, as approved 
at the Monterrey International Conference on 
Financing for Development and intends to increase its 
input to our common efforts in that area. We shall 
consistently strengthen our position as a donor country 
in accordance with the approach to Russian 
participation in international development assistance 
approved by President Putin in June 2007.  
 We are confident that concrete steps to ensure 
sustainable socio-economic development in all regions 
are a sure remedy against threats to peace and security.  
 There is a pressing need to use any means 
available to strengthen the leading role of the United 
Nations in fighting terrorism. Here, the Organization’s 
activities should be based on a comprehensive 
framework, including the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted last year as 
resolution 60/288, and on a comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism. The Collective Security 
Treaty Organization is contributing to these efforts and 
has established useful interaction with the United 
Nations.  
Our efforts to resolve regional conflicts and 
urgent social and economic problems should form part 
of our counter-terrorism efforts.  
 Iraq has become a source of destabilization for 
the whole region. Ensuring security, not to mention 
economic development, in that country requires a new 
strategy focused on reaching genuine national 
reconciliation with the participation of all of Iraq’s 
neighbours and with the support of the international 
community. We call upon the Secretary-General to take 
an active role in this issue, given the additional power 
the United Nations can wield towards an Iraqi 
settlement. The participants in recent multilateral 
meetings on Iraq have upheld that approach, and we 
support the decision endorsed at those meetings.  
 The indivisibility of security is to be seen clearly 
in the Middle East. Early solution of the Palestine 
problem based on the two-State concept and the 
achievement of a comprehensive Middle East 
settlement underpinned by the international legal 
platform developed by the United Nations are next on 
the agenda. We are convinced that this goal could be 
advanced by holding a representative international 
conference preceded by thorough preparation. We 
consider the United States initiative to convene in 
November a multiparty meeting on a Middle East 
settlement as a step in that direction. We appreciate the 
preliminary considerations voiced by the United States 
side regarding the agenda and composition of that 
event. We reaffirm the importance of involving the 
Quartet of international mediators and the Arab League 
in the preparations.  
 Settlement of the Kosovo problem is only 
possible within the framework of international and law 
based on negotiations. Unilateral steps will not lead to 
a lasting peace and will create the risk of 
destabilization in the Balkans and other regions.  
 Complex problems require an integrated 
approach. This is particularly true for the situation 
around Iran. The goal of nuclear non-proliferation is an 
absolute priority. At the same time, we should not 
ignore the task of engaging Iran in constructive efforts 
to resolve regional and international issues.  
 Urgent steps are needed to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime while providing all States 
with legitimate access to the benefits of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The joint initiative of the 
Presidents of Russia and the United States, put forward 
at their Kennebunkport meeting, is aimed at starting 
joint practical work in this field.  
 We are confident that today peace should be 
based on willingness to cooperate, especially on 
matters directly affecting strategic stability. In this 
context, we cannot neglect the unilateral plans in the 
area of missile defence. President Putin has proposed a 
constructive alternative: collaborative work with the 
participation of Russia, the United States and Europe, 
and subsequently with that of other countries. Such 
work could lead to a genuinely global strategic alliance 
encompassing the entire Euro-Atlantic region, which 
would allow us to move forward in establishing an 
open system of collective security. Our proposals are 
under discussion, and we hope that the collective 
approach will prevail. 
 The principle of the indivisibility of security 
should form the basis for resolving the situation around 
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. 
Russia stands ready to engage in that process, and 
proposals are well known. We expect that these 
proposals will be seriously discussed during the 
upcoming consultations. 
 The possibility of deploying weapons in outer 
space poses a serious threat. The magnitude of that 
threat is determined by the global coverage of the 
deployment, which can endanger all States without 
exception. We consistently oppose the deployment in 
space of weapons of any type, and we call upon the 
international community to conclude an agreement to 
that effect. 
 Another outstanding global issue is the effective 
prevention of climate change, which requires agreed 
and scientifically based solutions that are realistic and 
balanced and that do not undercut countries’ right to 
development. Russia has always stood for a 
constructive dialogue with a view to giving a genuinely 
universal character to the international climate 
protection regime. We hope that the important meetings 
that took place this week in New York and Washington 
will facilitate thorough preparations for a successful 
launch in December in Bali of negotiations on joint 
post-2012 efforts. 
 The spiritual and moral foundations of human 
solidarity are of increasingly vital importance. The 
spiritual values of all world religions demand that we 
achieve intercivilizational accord and fight 
manifestations of xenophobia and racism, as well as 
the resurgence of neo-Nazi trends. Those are the tasks 
to be tackled within the framework of the Alliance of 
Civilizations, which we support.  The World Summit of 
Religious Leaders held in Moscow last year added a 
new dimension to this endeavour. We propose to build 
upon the results of the Summit and to think about 
establishing, under United Nations auspices, a special 
forum   a kind of consultative council of religions   
for exchanges of views among representatives of major 
world faiths. 
 Russia will spare no effort to strengthen 
multilateral cooperation within the framework of the 
United Nations. I am convinced that with a continued 
commitment to the principles of the United Nations 
Charter, we can make progress in the creation of an 
effective system of collective security, as was the will 
of the founding fathers of the world Organization.
Thank you for the opportunity 
to address the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
 Sixty years ago, representatives from 16 nations 
gathered to begin deliberations on a new international 
bill of rights. The document they produced is called the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and it stands 
as a landmark achievement in the history of human 
liberty. The Declaration opens by recognizing the 
inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of 
all members of the human family as the foundation of 
freedom and justice and peace in the world. As we 
gather for the sixty-second session of the General 
Assembly, the standards of the Declaration must guide 
our work in this world.  
 Achieving the promise of the Declaration requires 
confronting long-term threats. It also requires 
answering the immediate needs of today. 
 We nations in this Hall have our differences. Yet, 
there are some areas where we can all agree. When 
innocent people are trapped in a life of murder and 
fear, the Declaration is not being upheld. When 
millions of children starve to death or perish from a 
mosquito bite, we are not doing our duty in the world. 
When whole societies are cut off from the prosperity of 
the global economy, we are all worse off. Changing 
these underlying conditions is what the Declaration 
calls the work of larger freedom, and it must be the 
work of every nation in this Assembly. 
 This great institution must work for great 
purposes, to free people from tyranny and violence, 
hunger and disease, illiteracy and ignorance and 
poverty and despair. Every member of the United 
Nations must join in this mission of liberation. The 
first mission of the United Nations requires liberating 
people from tyranny and violence. The first article of 
the Universal Declaration begins by stating that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. This truth is denied by terrorists and extremists 
who kill the innocent with the aim of imposing their 
hateful vision on humanity. The followers of this 
violent ideology are a threat to civilized people 
everywhere. All civilized nations must work together 
to stop them by sharing intelligence about their 
networks and choking off their finances and bringing to 
justice their operatives. In the long run, the best way to 
defeat extremists is to defeat their dark ideology with a 
more hopeful vision   the vision of liberty that 
founded this body. 
 The United States salutes the nations that have 
recently taken strides towards liberty, including 
Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone and Morocco. The Palestinian territories 
have moderate leaders   mainstream leaders   who 
are working to build free institutions that fight terror, 
enforce the law and respond to the needs of their 
people. The international community must support 
these leaders so that we can advance the vision of two 
democratic States   Israel and Palestine   living side 
by side in peace and security. 
 Brave citizens in Lebanon and Afghanistan and 
Iraq have made the choice for democracy. Yet, the 
extremists have responded by targeting them for 
murder. This is not a show of strength; it is evidence of 
fear; and the extremists are doing everything within 
their power to bring down these young democracies. 
The people of Lebanon and Afghanistan and Iraq have 
asked for our help, and every civilized nation has a 
responsibility to stand with them. Every civilized 
nation also has a responsibility to stand up for the 
people suffering under dictatorship. In Belarus, North 
Korea, Syria and Iran, brutal regimes deny their people 
the fundamental rights enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration. 
 Americans are outraged by the situation in 
Burma, where a military junta has imposed a 19-year 
reign of fear. Basic freedoms of speech, assembly and 
worship are severely restricted. Ethnic minorities are 
persecuted. Forced child labour, human trafficking and 
rape are common. The regime is holding more than 
1,000 political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, 
whose party was elected overwhelmingly by the 
Burmese people in 1990. 
 The ruling junta remains unyielding, yet the 
people’s desire for freedom is unmistakable. This 
morning, I am announcing a series of steps to help 
bring peaceful change to Burma. The United States will 
tighten economic sanctions on the leaders of the 
regime and their financial backers. We will impose an 
expanded visa ban on those responsible for the most 
egregious violations of human rights   as well as their 
family members. We will continue to support the 
efforts of humanitarian groups working to alleviate 
suffering in Burma. And I urge the United Nations and 
all nations to use their diplomatic and economic 
leverage to help the Burmese people reclaim their 
freedom. 
 In Cuba, the long rule of a cruel dictator is 
nearing its end. The Cuban people are ready for their 
freedom. And as that nation enters a period of 
transition, the United Nations must insist on free 
speech, free assembly and, ultimately, free and 
competitive elections. 
 In Zimbabwe, ordinary citizens suffer under a 
tyrannical regime. The Government has cracked down 
on peaceful calls for reform and has forced millions to 
flee their homeland. The behaviour of the Mugabe 
regime is an assault on its people and an affront to the 
principles of the Universal Declaration. The United 
Nations must insist on change in Harare and must insist 
on freedom for the people of Zimbabwe. 
 In Sudan, innocent civilians are suffering 
repression; and in the Darfur region, many are losing 
their lives to genocide. America has responded with 
tough sanctions against those responsible for the 
violence. We have provided more than $2 billion in 
humanitarian and peacekeeping aid. I look forward to 
attending a Security Council meeting that will focus on 
Darfur, chaired by the French President. I appreciate 
France’s leadership in helping to stabilize Sudan’s 
neighbours. The United Nations must answer this 
challenge to conscience and live up to its promise to 
promptly deploy peacekeeping forces to Darfur. 
 Secondly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from hunger and disease. 
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and of his 
family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical 
care. Around the world, the United Nations is carrying 
out noble efforts to live up to these words. 
 Feeding the hungry has long been a special 
calling for my nation. Today, more than half the 
world’s food assistance comes from America. We send 
emergency food stocks to starving people, from camps 
in Sudan to slums around the world. I have proposed 
an innovative initiative to alleviate hunger under which 
America would purchase the crops of local farmers in 
Africa and elsewhere, rather than shipping in food 
from the developed world. This would help build up 
local agriculture and break the cycle of famine in the 
developing world, and I urge our United States 
Congress to support this initiative. 
 Many in this Hall are bringing the spirit of 
generosity to fighting HIV/AIDS and malaria. Five 
years ago, in sub-Saharan Africa, an AIDS diagnosis 
was widely considered a death sentence, and fewer 
than 50,000 people infected with the virus were 
receiving treatment. The world responded by creating 
the Global Fund, which is working with Governments 
and the private sector to fight the disease around the 
world. The United States decided to take these efforts a 
step further by launching the $15 billion Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief. Since 2003, this effort has 
helped bring cutting-edge medicines to more than a 
million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It is a good start. 
So earlier this year, I proposed to double our initial 
commitment   to $30 billion. By coming together, the 
world can turn the tide against HIV/AIDS, once and for 
all. 
 Malaria is another common killer. In some 
countries, malaria takes as many lives as HIV/AIDS, 
the vast majority of them children under the age of 
five. Every one of these deaths is unnecessary, because 
the disease is preventable and treatable. The world 
knows what it takes to stop malaria   bed nets, indoor 
spraying and medicine to treat the disease. Two years 
ago, America launched a $1.2 billion malaria initiative. 
Other nations and the private sector are making vital 
contributions as well. I call on every Member State to 
maintain its focus, to find new ways to join this cause 
and to bring us closer to the day when deaths caused by 
malaria are no more. 
 Thirdly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from the chains of illiteracy 
and ignorance. Article 26 of the Universal Declaration 
states that everyone has the right to education. When 
nations make the investments needed to educate their 
people, the whole world benefits. Better education 
unleashes the talent and potential of citizens and adds 
to the prosperity of all of us. Better education promotes 
better health and greater independence. Better 
education increases the strength of democracy and 
weakens the appeal of violent ideologies. So the United 
States is joining with nations around the world to help 
them provide a better education for their people. 
 A good education starts with good teachers. In 
partnership with other nations, America has helped 
train more than 600,000 teachers and administrators. A 
good education requires good textbooks. So, in 
partnership with other nations, America has distributed 
tens of millions of textbooks. A good education 
requires access to good schools. So, in partnership with 
other nations, America is helping nations raise 
standards in their schools at home and providing 
scholarships to help students come to schools in the 
United States. And in all our education efforts, our 
nation is working to expand access for women and 
girls so that the opportunity to get a decent education is 
open to all. 
 Finally, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from poverty and despair. 
Article 23 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment and to just and favourable conditions of 
work. In the twenty-first century, this requires ensuring 
that people in poor countries have the same 
opportunity to benefit from the global economy that 
citizens of wealthy countries have. 
 The United Nations provides vital economic 
assistance designed to help developing nations grow 
their economies and reach their potential. The United 
States agrees with that position. We have dramatically 
increased our own development assistance, and we are 
delivering that aid in innovative ways. We started the 
Millennium Challenge Account to reward nations that 
govern justly, fight corruption, invest in their people 
and promote economic freedom. With this aid, we are 
reaching out to developing nations in partnership, not 
paternalism. And we are ensuring that our aid dollars 
reach those who need them and achieve results. 
 In the long run, the best way to lift people out of 
poverty is through trade and investment. A nation that 
is open and trading with the world will create 
economic rewards that far exceed anything it could get 
through foreign aid. During the 1990s, developing 
nations that significantly lowered tariffs saw their per 
capita income grow about three times faster than other 
developing countries. Open markets ignite growth, 
encourage investment, increase transparency, 
strengthen the rule of law and help countries help 
themselves. 
 The international community now has a historic 
chance to open markets around the world by 
concluding a successful Doha Round of trade talks. A 
successful Doha outcome would mean real and 
substantial openings in agriculture, goods and services, 
and real and substantial reductions in trade-distorting 
subsidies. The world’s largest trading nations, 
including major developing countries, have a special 
responsibility to make the tough political decisions to 
reduce trade barriers. America has the wi11 and 
flexibility to make those necessary decisions. Our 
negotiators are demonstrating that spirit in Geneva. I 
urge other leaders to direct their negotiators to do the 
same. And I am optimistic that we can reach a good 
Doha agreement and seize this once-in-a-generation 
opportunity. 
 In the meantime, America wi11 continue to 
pursue agreements that open trade and investment 
wherever we can. We recently signed free-trade 
agreements with Peru, Colombia, Panama and South 
Korea. These agreements embody the values of open 
markets, transparent and fair regulation, respect for 
private property and resolving disputes under rules of 
international law. These are good agreements. They are 
now ready for a congressional vote, and I urge our 
Congress to approve them as soon as possible. 
 As America works with the United Nations to 
alleviate immediate needs, we are also coming together 
to address longer-term challenges. Together, we are 
preparing for pandemics that could cause death and 
suffering on a global scale. Together, we are working 
to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. Together, we are confronting the 
challenges of energy security, environmental quality 
and climate change. I appreciate the discussions on 
climate change led by the Secretary-General last night. 
I look forward to further discussions at the meeting of 
major economies in Washington later this week. 
 The goals I have outlined today cannot be 
achieved overnight, and they cannot be achieved 
without reform of this vital institution. The United 
States is committed to a strong and vibrant United 
Nations. Yet the American people are disappointed by 
the failures of the Human Rights Council. That body 
has been silent on repression by regimes from Havana 
and Caracas to Pyongyang and Tehran, while focusing 
its criticism excessively on Israel. To be credible on 
human rights in the world, the United Nations must 
first reform its own Human Rights Council. 
 Some have also called for reform of the structure 
of the Security Council, including an expansion of its 
membership. The United States is open to this 
prospect. We believe that Japan is well qualified for 
permanent membership on the Security Council and 
that other nations should be considered as well. The 
United States will listen to all good ideas, and we will 
support changes to the Security Council as part of 
broader United Nations reform. And in all we do, I call 
on Member States to work for an institution that 
adheres to strict ethical standards and lives up to the 
high principles of the Universal Declaration. 
 With the commitment and courage of those in this 
Hall, we can build a world where people are free to 
speak, assemble and worship as they wish   a world 
where children in every nation grow up healthy, get a 
decent education and look to the future with hope   a 
world where opportunity crosses every border. America 
will lead towards that vision, in which all are created 
equal and free to pursue their dreams. That is the 
founding conviction of my country. It is the promise 
that established this body. And, with our determination, 
it can be the future of our world.  
Let me begin by adding my 
voice to the many salutations directed to Mr. Ban 
Ki-moon on being elected as the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. I wish him a fruitful tenure of 
office, trusting that through his work the poor of the 
world will have good reason to increase their 
confidence in this Organization of the nations of the 
world. 
 Again, I reiterate the many thanks to Her 
Excellency Ms. Haya Rashed Al Khalifa, for the good 
work she did as the President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. Equally, my congratulations go 
to Mr. Srgjan Kerim on his election as the President of 
the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
 We meet here today, under the theme of 
responding to climate change, at this session, which 
marks the half-way point in the freely agreed period 
during which the nations of the world committed 
themselves to work, individually and collectively, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Billions of the people of the world know as a 
matter of fact that the consequences of climate 
change   be it droughts, floods or unpredictable and 
extreme weather patterns   undermine our common 
efforts to achieve the MDGs. Today, we all understand 
that the costs of doing nothing about climate change far 
outweigh those of taking concrete measures to address 
this challenge. It is clear that delaying action on this 
matter of climate change will hit poor countries and 
communities hardest. Yet the pace of climate change 
negotiations is out of step with the urgency indicated 
by science. 
 I would therefore urge that we collectively aim 
for a significant advance in the multilateral 
negotiations when our negotiators meet in Bali in 
December this year. Together, we must ensure that we 
build a fair, effective, flexible and inclusive climate 
regime under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, 
and we must agree to this as a matter of urgency. 
Though we have different responsibilities, and 
developed countries clearly have an obligation to take 
the lead, we all have a common duty to do more and 
act within our respective capabilities and in accordance 
with our national circumstances. 
 The World Summit on Sustainable Development 
correctly reaffirmed sustainable development as a 
central element of the global action against poverty and 
the protection of the environment and identified 
important linkages between poverty, the environment 
and the use of natural resources. These linkages are 
real to billions of the poor; the combination of their 
empty stomachs, their degraded environment and their 
exploited natural resources, for which they benefit 
nothing, defines hopelessness and a heart-wrenching 
existence. 
 Many of these wretched of the Earth know from 
their bitter experience how their resource-rich areas 
were transformed into arid, uninhabitable and desolate 
areas forcing migration to better-endowed regions, thus 
exacerbating conflicts and the struggle for scarce 
resources. 
 Gathered here as representatives of the peoples of 
the world, we know very well that climate change, 
poverty and underdevelopment are not acts of God but 
human-made. 
 Clearly, the starting point for a future climate 
regime must be equity. A core balance between 
sustainable development and climate imperatives will 
have to be the basis of any agreement on a 
strengthened climate regime. Any deal on fair use of 
the ecological space will have to be balanced by a deal 
giving all countries a fair chance in the development 
space. 
 Under the aegis of the United Nations, but also 
within our regional bodies, we have adopted many 
programmes and declarations, with clear 
implementation targets aimed at addressing the 
challenges of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment. As this conclave knows very well, 
the many lofty agreements include, among others, 
those adopted at the Rio Earth Summit, the 
Copenhagen Social Summit, the Millennium Summit, 
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the 
Monterrey International Conference on Financing for 
Development. At all these summits and others, we have 
adopted declarations using moving and solemn words 
that express our profound understanding of the gravity 
of the challenges facing the modern world and have 
unequivocally committed ourselves to defeating any 
and all of the miserable and dehumanizing conditions 
facing large parts of humanity. 
 Indeed, this collective asserted, in paragraph 11 
of the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2):  
  “We will spare no effort to free our fellow 
men, women and children from the abject and 
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty. ... 
We are committed to making the right to 
development a reality for everyone and to freeing 
the entire human race from want.” 
Yet the poor, whose hopes have been raised many times 
as we have made declaration after declaration against 
poverty and underdevelopment   and as we are doing 
now on climate change   can be forgiven for thinking 
that this important global leadership often sounds like 
an empty vessel.  
 That this collective is able to express, always 
eloquently, the dire circumstances characterizing 
poverty is without doubt. However, this Organization, 
which should pride itself on visible actions and results 
in the fight against climate change and poverty, finds it 
difficult to demonstrate decisive progress in that 
regard. The reasons for that are not hard to find. 
Although the concepts of freedom, justice and equality 
are universal and fully embraced by the United 
Nations, this global Organization has not itself 
transformed and designed necessary institutions of 
governance that are consistent with the noble ideals 
that drive modern democratic societies. 
 Because the nations of the world are defined by 
the dominant and the dominated, the dominant have 
always become the decision-makers in the important 
global forums, including at this seat of global 
governance. Accordingly, the skewed distribution of 
world power   political, economic, military, 
technological and social   replicates itself in 
multilateral institutions, much to the disadvantage of 
the majority of the poor people of the world. 
 Indeed, even as we agree on the important 
programmes that should bring a better life to the 
billions of poor, the rich and the powerful have 
consistently sought to ensure that, whatever happens, 
the existing power relations are not altered and 
therefore that the status quo remains. The results of 
that situation are that the United Nations can and does 
correctly identify problems and appropriate solutions 
necessary for making the world a better place for all of 
humanity. Naturally, the dominant and the powerful 
very often respond positively to agreed programmes if 
these would advance their own narrow interests. 
 At the same time, the poor will continue to strive 
for improvement of their wretched conditions. They 
therefore see the United Nations as a natural 
instrument for helping to accelerate the process of 
change for the better. Hence, they correctly see 
implementation of all United Nations programmes as 
being central to the efforts relating to climate change 
and the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. 
 Yet the cold reality is that it will be difficult for 
the United Nations, in its present form, to fully 
implement its own decisions and therefore to help the 
poor to swiftly achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs). Indeed, until the ideals of freedom, 
justice and equality characterize this premier world 
body itself, the dominant will forever dictate to the 
dominated, and the interests of the dominated   which 
are those of the majority of humanity   will be 
deferred in perpetuity. Thus, noble statements will 
continue to be uttered on all matters facing the 
majority of the people of the world, such as the need to 
successfully conclude the Doha Development Round, 
while little is done to implement the many critical 
agreements necessary to pull the poor out of the morass 
of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 We in my own country are of the firm belief that 
we will achieve the MDGs. Having emerged from more 
than three centuries of colonialism and apartheid, we 
inherited two interlinked economies, which we 
characterize as the first and second economies. The 
two economies   one developed and globally 
connected and the other localized and informal   
display many features of a global system of apartheid. 
As South Africans, we have sought to strengthen the 
first economy and to use it as a base for the transfer of 
resources to strengthen and modernize the second 
economy, and thus embark on the process of changing 
the lives of those who subsist in the second economy. 
 Indeed, without the requisite resource transfers, it 
will not be possible to achieve the MDGs, because our 
second economy cannot on its own generate the 
resources needed to bring a better life to millions of 
poor South Africans. I mention this because, as we all 
accept, central to the global attainment of the MDGs is 
the critical matter of resource transfers from the rich 
countries of the North to the poor countries of the 
South. 
 Many developing countries   especially those of 
my own continent, Africa   do not have the material 
base from which to address and attain the MDGs on 
their own. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for 
massive resource transfers through development 
assistance, investment, trade, technology transfers and 
human resource development to these poor countries if 
we are to achieve the MDGs and successfully adapt to 
the devastating impacts of climate change. 
 If we do not succeed in building a climate change 
regime that balances adaptation and mitigation, 
underpinned by the transfer of technology and financial 
resources, we will place an unmanageable burden on 
future generations. In that regard, given Africa’s 
specific and dire challenges, we believe it is important 
to enter into a partnership with Africa using the African 
Union’s programme the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD), which the Assembly has 
adopted, so that the measures that the continent has 
undertaken, with limited resources, for the regeneration 
of all the African countries can be strengthened by 
support from the international community, guided by 
the programmes of the United Nations. 
 As history teaches us, it was because of the 
massive resource transfers in the aftermath of the 
Second World War that Western Europe recovered and 
was set on its development path. A similar intervention 
helped to put a number of Asian countries on their own 
development trajectory. The question we should ask is, 
why is there an absence of the same resolve to assist 
poor nations today? The global village to which we 
constantly refer should encourage us to expand human 
solidarity. Thus, we would build a durable bridge over 
the river dividing our common global village and 
regrettably ensuring that one human being lives a 
fulfilling life while another experiences a miserable 
existence. 
 Representing the citizens of the world, we have 
set for ourselves programmes requiring that all of us 
work together to create better living conditions for 
humanity and ensure that we achieve that which is 
necessary for our mutual prosperity. 
 Together, rich and poor, developed and 
developing, North and South, we can and must truly 
hold hands and address the challenges of climate 
change and sustainable development, work together to 
defeat poverty and underdevelopment and ensure that 
every human being is saved from the indecencies and 
humiliations that are inseparable from poverty. But to 
do that, we need first and foremost to implement the 
decisions that we have adopted freely in this eminent 
house of the representatives of the global community. 
And so, let our actions speak louder than our words.  
I  wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I am convinced that under your able 
leadership, the current session will be a fruitful one. I 
also wish to thank Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa for 
her contribution during her presidency of the previous 
session. 
 The current international environment is highly 
complex. Mankind is facing both unprecedented 
opportunities and challenges. There is a growing trend 
towards peace, development and cooperation in the 
world. But, on the other hand, traditional and non-
traditional security threats are intertwined; hotspot 
issues are acute; the gap between the North and South 
is widening; trade protectionism is resurfacing; and 
developing countries generally remain in a 
disadvantaged position. The steady trend towards 
economic globalization and towards a multi-polar 
world is fostering a new way of thinking about 
international relations. 
 In this Hall two years ago, Chinese President Hu 
Jintao called on mankind to build a harmonious world 
with lasting peace and common prosperity in the 
twenty-first century (see A/60/PV.5). The core message 
of his call is that, while recognizing the diversity of the 
world, differences of interests and diversity of cultures, 
we should harmonize interests, defuse conflicts and 
promote cooperation for win-win progress in a 
peaceful and cooperative manner. 
 In its 62-year history, the United Nations has 
played an irreplaceable role in promoting humankind’s 
cause of peace and development. The current session of 
the General Assembly should focus on promoting 
harmonious coexistence among countries. Resolving 
hotspot issues and peacefully settling international 
disputes through dialogue and cooperation are not only 
explicitly called for by the United Nations Charter. 
They are also the right way to uphold world peace and 
stability and achieve mutual benefit and a win-win 
situation for all. 
 China remains committed to seeking a peaceful 
solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula 
through dialogue to uphold peace and stability on the 
peninsula and throughout North-East Asia. The Six-
Party Talks have become an important platform for the 
parties concerned to maintain dialogue and 
consultations on achieving denuclearization on the 
peninsula, normalizing relations between the countries 
concerned and building a new harmonious architecture 
in North-East Asia. We will continue to play a 
constructive role in advancing the process of the Six-
Party Talks and the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula. 
 Diplomatic negotiations are the best option for 
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue peacefully and 
meeting the common interests of the international 
community. China opposes nuclear-weapon 
proliferation and stands for upholding the international 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. No non-proliferation effort 
should deviate from the goal of upholding international 
peace and stability. Countries should honour their due 
international obligations, and their right to peaceful use 
of nuclear energy should be fully respected. China 
urges the parties concerned to show flexibility and 
resume negotiations at an early date. China will 
continue to contribute its share to the peaceful 
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. 
 The Palestine-Israel conflict is at the core of the 
Middle East issue. China supports the just cause of the 
Palestinian and other Arab peoples and the restoration 
of their lawful national rights, and it sincerely hopes 
that Arab countries and Israel will promptly end their 
disputes through political negotiations on the basis of 
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of 
land for peace. China calls on Palestine to strengthen 
its unity and welcomes the initiative to hold an 
international conference on the Middle East. We hope 
that the Iraqi people will continue to work for national 
reconciliation and restore peace and stability at an 
early date, and that this will lead to a comprehensive, 
just and lasting resolution of the Middle East issue. 
 The trilateral dialogue and consultation among 
the United Nations, the African Union and the 
Sudanese Government on an equal footing is an 
effective mechanism for resolving the Darfur issue. 
The international community should work to sustain 
the current sound momentum and give full play to the 
role of the trilateral mechanism as the main channel. 
We should adhere to dual-track strategy, promote 
balanced progress in peacekeeping operations and the 
political process and seek a lasting solution to the 
Darfur issue through making progress in the security, 
political, humanitarian, economic and social areas. 
China is committed to a proper settlement of the Darfur 
issue. It has provided humanitarian assistance to Darfur 
on a number of occasions and will send a military 
engineering unit to join the peacekeeping operations 
there. China will continue to firmly support the peace 
and national reconciliation process in the Sudan and 
will contribute to the resolution of the Darfur issue and 
peace, stability and development in the Sudan. 
 At its current session, the General Assembly 
should promote the peaceful development of all 
countries. Poverty is a major source of disputes, and 
only development can eliminate poverty. Human 
development concerns us all. Obviously, it is 
impossible to build common prosperity when there is a 
huge chasm between the North and the South. The 
international community should act with a sense of 
urgency and redouble its efforts to deliver the 
Millennium Development Goals, narrow the North-
South gap and, in particular, meet Africa’s special 
development needs. Developed countries should 
increase assistance, further open their domestic 
markets, transfer more technologies to developing 
countries and provide greater debt relief to them. 
 For their part, developing countries, on their part, 
should adopt development strategies and policies 
suited to their national conditions and boost their 
economic development. We should support an open, 
equitable and fair multilateral trade regime and oppose 
trade protectionism. We should work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations and make it a development round. 
Reform of the international economic system should 
fully reflect changes in the world economy and should 
give developing countries more say and greater 
representation in the international economic system. 
 China gives a high priority to strengthening 
international cooperation on development as it 
develops itself. We seek coordinated and balanced 
global development. While a developing country itself, 
China has all along provided assistance to African 
countries and other developing countries, according to 
its ability, and has helped them to improve their 
capacity for independent and sustainable development. 
That is because we believe that lasting peace and the 
common prosperity of the world is possible only with 
the development of developing countries. 
 To help Africa attain stability, security and 
sustainable development is the common responsibility 
of the international community. China and African 
countries enjoy mutual political respect and equality 
and economic mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. 
They support one another and maintain close 
consultation in international affairs. We draw on one 
another’s strengths in governance to promote 
development. Thanks to our joint efforts, China-Africa 
cooperation has yielded fruitful results. Such 
cooperation is well received by the African countries, 
and it has brought great benefits to both the Chinese 
and African peoples. China’s cooperation with Africa 
facilitates Africa’s cooperation with other countries and 
is not targeted against any third party. 
 The current session of the General Assembly 
should be devoted to promoting harmony between man 
and nature. Development in the world has both 
advanced material progress and caused ecological 
imbalance and environmental pollution. To protect our 
common homeland is a matter of vital importance for 
our common future. 
 Climate change is an environmental issue, but 
ultimately it is an issue of development. It has arisen in 
the course of development and can be resolved only 
through development. We should uphold the 
framework of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol 
and adhere to the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities. Developed countries 
should face up to their responsibilities, fulfil their 
commitments on emissions reduction in earnest and 
continue to take the lead in emissions reduction after 
2012. We should strengthen international cooperation 
on energy, resources and the environment, step up 
efforts to develop and introduce energy-conserving 
technologies, environmental protection technologies 
and low-carbon energy technologies, and establish 
reasonable mechanisms for financing and technology 
transfer. That will enable developing countries to gain 
access to and afford advanced environmental-
protection technologies, enhance capacity to respond to 
climate change and effectively address climate change 
through achieving sustainable development. 
 China takes climate change seriously. Though its 
current per capita carbon dioxide emissions are less 
than one third of the average of developed countries, 
China, acting in a way that is highly responsible to 
mankind, has taken many effective measures to tackle 
climate change, including adopting a series of laws and 
regulations and setting the goals of reducing energy 
intensity and increasing forest cover. The Chinese 
Government has set the following targets: to reduce 
energy intensity and total discharge of major pollutants 
by about 20 per cent and 10 per cent respectively and 
to increase the forest cover rate to 20 per cent for the 
period between the end of 2005 and 2010. Under its 
National Climate Change Programme, China will take 
an active part in international cooperation in climate 
change and contribute its share to protecting the global 
climate. 
 Advancing United Nations reform and enabling 
the Organization to play a more important role in 
maintaining world peace, promoting common 
development and strengthening cooperation among 
countries is crucial to building a harmonious world. 
China supports the reform of the United Nations. The 
reform decisions made at the high-level meeting 
marking the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations 
held in 2005 should be implemented in a 
comprehensive and balanced manner. Priority should 
be given to reform in the area of development, and the 
United Nations should increase its input in that area. 
The Human Rights Council should build on the 
outcome of reform in its previous phase and become a 
platform for dialogue and cooperation rather than an 
arena for political confrontation. Security Council 
reform should give priority to increasing the 
representation of developing countries and give small 
and medium-sized countries more opportunities to 
participate in decision-making. Reform proposals 
should be based on the widest possible consensus. 
China is ready to work with all other parties to turn 
reform into a process of strengthening consultation and 
dialogue and promoting solidarity and cooperation 
among all United Nations Member States. 
 China is committed to building a society of 
democracy, the rule of law, equity and justice, integrity 
and amity, vitality, stability and order, where people 
live in harmony with nature. To achieve that goal, 
China is fully implementing the outcomes of scientific 
thinking on development. We are working to boost 
social productivity and ensure people’s rights in the 
political, economic, cultural, social and other fields. By 
striving to build a harmonious society and by 
improving the material and cultural life of one fifth of 
the world’s population, China is making a true 
contribution to the building of a harmonious world. 
 China has always pursued its own development as 
a part of the global effort to promote the common 
progress of mankind. In international affairs, we are 
committed to the following goals: promoting 
participation in international affairs by all countries on 
an equal footing and democracy in international 
relations; enabling all countries to share the benefits of 
economic globalization and progress in science and 
technology for a win-win outcome; promoting 
exchanges and understanding among civilizations and 
diversity in the world; enhancing dialogue and trust 
among countries; and jointly tackling global issues. 
China unswervingly pursues a path of peaceful 
development and will continue to make further 
contributions to humankind’s cause of peace and 
development. 
 Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory. 
We will not permit any challenge to the one-China 
principle and General Assembly resolution 2758 
(XXVI). For 15 years running, since 1993, the General 
Assembly has rejected the inclusion of Taiwan-related 
issues in the agenda of the General Assembly session. 
This fully demonstrates that any move that runs 
counter to the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations Charter or attempts to distort and deny General 
Assembly resolution 2758 (XXVI) will not receive any 
support from the United Nations Member States and is 
doomed to failure. We hope that the countries 
concerned will not allow themselves to be manipulated 
by the Taiwan authorities and will stop making wrong 
moves of this kind. 
The Taiwan authorities are now obstinately 
clinging to the separatist course of “Taiwan 
independence” and are trying by all means to secure a 
referendum on applying for membership of the United 
Nations under the name Taiwan. This is another 
dangerous step towards “de jure Taiwan independence” 
taken by the Chen Shui-bian authorities. If unchecked, 
this move will gravely endanger peace and stability 
across the Taiwan Strait and in the Asia-Pacific region. 
The Chinese Government has always made every effort 
to promote with all sincerity peaceful development of 
cross-Strait relations and to seek peaceful 
reunification. However, we will never allow anyone to 
separate Taiwan from China in name or in any other 
way. We hope that the international community will 
continue to support China’s cause of peaceful 
reunification, support the Chinese people in opposing 
and repulsing separatist activities for “Taiwan 
independence” and work with us to maintain peace and 
stability across the Taiwan Straits and in the Asia-
Pacific region. 
 The Olympic Games, which represent humanity’s 
aspiration for peace, development, cooperation and 
friendship, will for the first time be held in China, a 
country both ancient and youthful, starting on 8 August 
2008. One World, One Dream   this is the theme of 
the Beijing Olympic Games. The 1.3 billion people in 
China, together with the rest of the world, are eagerly 
looking forward to the opening of the Games. The 
2008 Olympic Games are a great event for both the 
Chinese people and the other peoples of the world. We 
are confident that with the efforts made by the Chinese 
people and with strong support from the international 
community, the 2008 Olympic Games will stand out as 
a highly successful event. 
Please accept  my congratulations, Mr. President, on your election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-second 
session. I wish you every success. 
 We are currently experiencing a period of 
dramatic changes. Great opportunities are accompanied 
by considerable risks. Global structures are changing. 
States, economies and societies are becoming 
networked as never before. That is what we call 
globalization. 
 The good thing about that development is that 
prosperity is increasing, and more and more people are 
escaping from poverty. The challenge that that 
development poses is that not everyone has their fair 
share of this prosperity. There are considerable 
imbalances. We thus need a global awareness, beyond 
national boundaries, of our joint responsibility in order 
to master the major challenges facing our world. 
 Climate change is undoubtedly one of the central 
challenges facing humanity today. I therefore very 
much welcome your decision, Mr. President, to make 
climate change the focus of this year’s session of the 
General Assembly. Never before have the facts been so 
clear, the consensus among scientists so great or the 
need for action so indisputable. Each and every country 
is affected by the impact of climate change. No one 
country can tackle it alone. Not to take action would 
incur immense costs and cause new global conflicts. 
 What does that mean for the way ahead? In quite 
concrete terms, it means that any contribution from 
individual States or groups of States is welcome. 
However, I would like to add most emphatically that 
such contributions can only complement a post-Kyoto 
agreement under the auspices of the United Nations. 
They can never replace it. 
 This session of the General Assembly therefore 
has to set the course for the next vital step: the climate 
conference in Bali. Environment ministers will have to 
agree in Bali on a clear road map so that negotiations 
can be successfully concluded by 2009. There are three 
key elements: a common understanding on the scale of 
emissions reduction, a common understanding on fair 
national contributions and a common understanding on 
the instruments we should use both to protect the 
climate and to foster economic growth. 
 The scope of the need for action is becoming 
increasingly clear. We must at least halve global 
emissions by the middle of the century. For this we 
have a clear guiding principle: the principle of 
common but differentiated responsibility. 
Industrialized countries must embrace ambitious 
absolute reduction targets. During the German 
presidency the European Union adopted bold targets 
for 2020. All industrialized countries will have to 
drastically reduce their per capita emissions. 
 Emerging economies will first of all have to 
decouple their economic growth from emissions. In the 
long term, per capita emissions in both industrialized 
countries and emerging economies will have to 
converge at a level compatible with our global climate 
protection target. 
 Such a process of long-term convergence offers 
all countries scope to develop. It does not demand too 
much of anyone. There is no doubt in my mind that 
only a United Nations agreement can provide the 
dependability this will require.  
 Climate protection will therefore be a litmus test 
of the international community’s ability to act 
effectively in the twenty-first century. For, on our own 
continent, we Europeans know from our daily 
experience that   although any individual country is 
too small to make a real difference   together we can 
achieve much. 
 In the light of our experience, I believe three 
principles are of crucial importance to our common 
future. First, economic strength and social 
responsibility belong together. This principle applies 
both to how States treat their citizens and to how States 
treat each other. It emphasizes the right and freedom of 
each individual to achieve their full potential. At the 
same time, it upholds cohesion and solidarity, while 
categorically rejecting isolationism and protectionism. 
 That is why we are seeking a balanced and 
comprehensive agreement on multilateral trade. In 
concrete terms, this means that we have to bring the 
Doha Round to an early and successful conclusion. Too 
much time has been wasted. We have to seize the last 
chance for negotiations this autumn. Our aim must be 
transparent financial markets and effective protection 
of intellectual property, as well as minimum legal and 
social standards. For I am convinced that there can be 
no fair competition without common ground rules. 
 We can only achieve cohesion and solidarity in a 
global development partnership. With the Millennium 
Development Goals, the international community has 
laid down binding quantifiable targets and deadlines 
for the first time. Together with its EU partners, 
Germany has undertaken to reach the United Nations 
0.7 per cent target no later than 2015. We stand by 
these pledges. 
 There can be no doubt that genuine partnership 
places all sides under an obligation   an obligation to 
step up the fight against corruption, to aim for better 
governance and to better protect human rights. We 
want to support Africa in particular. There have been 
encouraging developments on the continent but 
unfortunately, also, serious setbacks, for example in 
Zimbabwe. 
 “Growth and responsibility in the world 
economy” is, therefore, also the motto guiding this 
year’s German presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8). 
 The second principle is that we have to 
strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations. In 
my view, there is absolutely no doubt   the United 
Nations is the place where binding joint responses can 
be found to global challenges. But the United Nations 
is in need of reform. This is true, above all, of the 
Security Council. In many crisis situations it needs to 
be able to come up quickly with universally binding 
proposals. To do this, it must have international 
legitimacy. However, the present composition of the 
Security Council no longer reflects the world today. 
There is, therefore, no alternative to adapting it to 
political realities. 
 My country has over the past years been actively 
involved in this debate. Germany is prepared to assume 
more responsibility, and to take on a permanent seat on 
the Security Council. What we need now are tangible 
results. We are by no means only at the start of our 
endeavours. The United Nations reform process has 
already produced some results, such as the report of the 
High-level Panel on United Nations system-wide 
coherence and the establishment of the Peacebuilding 
Commission. 
 But time is short. There are numerous crises we 
have to deal with right now. And notwithstanding the 
many differing factors that have led to these crises, 
they all have one thing in common: they can only be 
solved multilaterally. The key to ending them is unity 
of purpose. This is particularly true with respect to 
Iran. Iran has continuously worked on its nuclear 
programme in clear contradiction of the demands of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United 
Nations. Nobody should be in the slightest doubt as to 
the dangerous nature of this programme. Iran is 
ignoring Security Council resolutions. Iran is blatantly 
threatening Israel. 
 Let us not fool ourselves. If Iran were to acquire 
the nuclear bomb, the consequences would be 
disastrous, first and foremost for the existence of 
Israel; secondly, for the entire region; and ultimately 
for all of us in Europe and the world who attach any 
importance to the values of liberty, democracy and 
human dignity. That is why we have to prevent Iran 
from acquiring nuclear arms. 
 The international community must not allow 
itself to be divided or have its decisive response to 
Iran’s provocations undermined in any way. The world 
does not have to prove to Iran that Iran is building a 
nuclear bomb. Iran has to convince the world that it is 
not striving towards such a bomb. 
 Each and every German Chancellor before me 
has shouldered Germany’s special responsibility for the 
existence of Israel. I, too, pledge to live up to this 
responsibility that our history has bequeathed us. It is 
one of the fundamental principles that guides my 
country. In other words, Israel’s security is 
non-negotiable for me as German Chancellor. And that 
being the case, we have to do more than pay lip-service 
to it. Together with its partners, Germany will continue 
to seek a diplomatic solution. With this aim in mind, 
Germany will   if Iran does not come around   
firmly advocate additional and harsher sanctions. 
 Unity of purpose is also the key in the fight 
against international terrorism, and especially in our 
efforts aimed at security and stability in Afghanistan. 
Unity of purpose is also vital for ensuring a peaceful 
future in Kosovo, where NATO and the European 
Union play a particularly active role. We want a 
solution under United Nations auspices. All parties are 
now called upon to show a willingness to compromise. 
 We also strongly support the efforts of the Middle 
East Quartet for peace in that region. Germany is a 
staunch advocate of the vision of two States, within 
secure borders and in peace, for the Jewish people in 
Israel and for the Palestinians in Palestine. We 
welcome the fact that both parties are continuing their 
talks with great vigour, above all with a view to the 
Middle East conference scheduled for November. 
 The third principle is that we have to strengthen 
our shared immutable values. In my opinion, one of the 
great dangers of the twenty-first century is that crises 
and conflicts could give rise to a clash of civilizations. 
This must not happen. For this reason, I plead for 
tolerance   tolerance as properly understood, not 
“anything goes” masquerading as tolerance. Everybody 
must be able to follow his or her own path, but it must 
be a path within the international community, not 
outside it. 
 This path is clearly departed from wherever 
massive human rights violations are committed, as in 
Darfur. A human tragedy is being played out there. Too 
much time has already been squandered. Now is the 
time to act. The crimes perpetrated there must not go 
unpunished. This path has been departed from in 
Myanmar, where human rights have likewise been 
disregarded for years. I urge the Government not to use 
force against the peaceful demonstrators and finally to 
make way for a democratic future for the country. This 
path is also departed from when political assassinations 
are carried out, as in the case of Rafik Hariri or the 
recent cowardly attack just a few days ago in Lebanon. 
The Hariri tribunal must commence its work with all 
possible speed. I call on Syria to grant Lebanon 
diplomatic recognition at long last. 
 It is my fundamental conviction that we must, 
time and again, muster the strength to assert our shared 
values of freedom and democracy. In order to do that, 
we need an unshakeable foundation.  
 We have such a foundation: the Charter of the 
United Nations. It was written when Europe and wide 
swathes of the rest of the world lay in ruins. At the 
most basic level, it is a statement that, notwithstanding 
all the dark chapters and tortuous turns of our history, 
universal human rights do exist. In other words, what it 
all comes down to is respecting and protecting the 
dignity of each individual person. That is the 
underlying reason why we assemble here each year and 
work together for the future of our peoples. 
 Germany will do its utmost to advance that work. 
We look forward to fruitful cooperation with all 
partners in the United Nations. 
 To all the  peoples represented here, I convey the brotherly 
greetings of France. Mr. Secretary-General, you have 
an enormous responsibility, and you have the trust of 
France. 
 This is the first time that I address this Assembly 
on behalf of France. It is a solemn and moving moment 
for me. I cannot help thinking of all of those men and 
women who, at one of the most tragic moments in the 
history of humanity, as the world stood on the brink of 
barbarity, finding that prospect intolerable, succeeded 
in countering force and violence and barbarity with 
justice and peace. Thus was the United Nations born. 
 The United Nations is not a mere political 
construct. It is not a mere legal construct. It is an 
awakening of the human conscience against everything 
that threatens to destroy humanity. 
 I have never believed that the United Nations 
could one day root out the violence that lies within 
human beings. But what I do know deep down inside 
me, what we all know deep down, is that in spite of all 
its failures, without the United Nations it would have 
been impossible to put an end to conflicts that seemed 
to be insoluble. Remember the genocide of the 
Cambodian people, remember the suffering inflicted 
upon them; remember the independence of Namibia; 
remember the independence of Timor. Look at the 
Great Lakes region, or West Africa. Without the United 
Nations, the world might have experienced a third 
world war, doubtless even more terrible than the two 
previous ones. 
 France is convinced that the United Nations is the 
only remedy we have for the blindness and folly that 
sometimes take hold of human beings. 
 The message I wish to bring to you in the name 
of France is a simple one: in this world where the fate 
of each of us depends on the fate of others, the United 
Nations should not be weakened; the United Nations 
must be strengthened. Reforming the United Nations so 
as to adapt it to the realities of our world is an absolute 
priority for France. We cannot afford to wait any 
longer. The world’s problems must be addressed and 
resolved globally. No one on this Earth can alone 
protect themselves from the consequences of climate 
warming, the clash of civilizations, major epidemics. 
Against selfishness, against fanaticism, against hatred, 
it is our duty to renew that appeal to the universal 
conscience by virtue of which, for the first time in the 
history of all the peoples of the world, all nations 
agreed to meet within a common forum in order to set 
aside what divides us and talk to one another. 
This appeal to the universal conscience is an 
appeal for peace. It is an appeal for open-mindedness. 
It is an appeal for diversity. And it is an appeal for 
justice. France has always sought greatness for the sake 
of men and women, not for its own sake. Like all 
nations, France, in the course of its long history, has 
made mistakes, and has sometimes been at fault. But 
its people, the people of France, have always chosen to 
be on the side of freedom and democracy. France is 
loyal to its friends and to the values it shares with 
them. But this loyalty is not submission. This loyalty is 
not a shackle. And France intends to draw on that 
loyalty in the cause of openness to others, of openness 
to the world. I want the world to know that France is 
willing to talk to everybody in the world, in every 
continent. 
 But I would also like to say that openness is not 
renunciation. Understanding is not weakness. 
Weakness and renunciation are not factors of peace; 
they are factors of war. France and Europe in the past 
experienced the tragic consequences of such an attitude 
for themselves and for the whole world. When you are 
weak and submissive, you get ready to accept war. We 
all have a duty to ensure that that never happens again. 
There will be no peace in the world if the international 
community compromises with the right of peoples to 
self-determination and if it compromises with human 
rights. 
 There will be no peace in the world unless the 
international community is unshakeable in its 
determination to fight terrorism. There will be no peace 
in the world unless the international community stands 
united in its resolve to put an end to the wars in the 
Middle East, to put an end to the horror in Darfur, to 
the tragedy of Lebanon or to the humanitarian disaster 
in Somalia. And I weigh my words carefully. There 
will be no peace in the world if the international 
community falters in the face of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
 Iran is entitled to nuclear power for civilian 
purposes. But if we allow Iran to acquire nuclear 
weapons, there would be an unacceptable risk to 
stability in the region and in the world. I want to say 
here, in the name of France, that we can only resolve 
this crisis by combining firmness with dialogue. It is in 
that spirit that France will act. 
 I want to say here, in the name of France, that it 
is the duty of the international community to confront 
those who seek power and constantly threaten the 
fragile balance of peace and to do so by bringing to 
bear its unwavering unity and its determination to 
uphold the law. I want to say, in the name of France, 
that there will be no peace in the world without respect 
for diversity, without respect for national identities, 
without respect, I venture to say, for religions and 
beliefs, or without respect for cultures. Attachment to 
one’s faith, to one’s identity, to one’s language and 
culture, and to one’s way of life, thought and belief   
all that is legitimate, and profoundly human. To deny 
that is to sow the seeds of humiliation. It would stoke 
the fires of nationalism, fanaticism and terrorism. We 
will not avert the clash of civilizations by forcing 
everyone to think and to believe the same things. 
France intends to pursue, together with all people of 
goodwill, this battle to build a new world order of the 
twenty-first century. 
 We want a Lebanon living independently, and we 
say that France will always stand shoulder to shoulder 
with Lebanon in its desire for independence. Tomorrow 
we hope that Israelis and Palestinians will find within 
themselves the strength to live in peace. Peace is 
possible. It is possible now. And we will devote all of 
our energies to that. 
 We want to see the peaceful coexistence of the 
main religions to vanquish fundamentalism and 
fanaticism. But I want to say, with all due gravity, that 
there is too much injustice in the world for the world to 
hope to live in peace. 
 The founding fathers of the United Nations knew 
that the world’s future could be read in the eyes of a 
tortured child; a hungry child; children who watch their 
parents being humiliated; children who since birth have 
known nothing but war; children torn from their 
homes, their lands, their families. Because in those 
children’s desperate eyes there is not only suffering, 
but also all the wars and revolts that will drench the 
world in blood tomorrow. 
 Let us look at the world as it is. Let us look at 
what we have made of it. Have we wanted enough to 
make it more just? The answer is no. Have we done 
enough to achieve that end? The answer is no.  
 When the Berlin wall fell, we all dreamed that 
history would cease to be tragic. Let us look at our 
world as it is so that we can make it better. Let us 
judge our world by the yardstick of justice. Justice 
means that the Palestinian people can regain a country 
and build a State. Justice means that the Israeli people 
can enjoy the right to live in security. Justice means 
that the Lebanese people can regain their freedom. 
Justice means that the Iraqi people, in all their 
diversity, can find within themselves the path to 
reconciliation and democracy. Justice means that a 
developing country on which we wish to impose 
environmental rules, even though its inhabitants have 
barely enough to eat, can be helped to put such rules in 
place. Justice means that we cannot tap a country’s 
resources without paying a fair price for them. 
 Let us look squarely at our world. Never before 
has there been so much easy money, with so much 
wealth concentrated in the hands of a few large groups. 
Throughout the world, even in the richest countries, 
there are many men and women who no longer have 
even a hope of emerging some day from their material 
and moral distress.  
 In conclusion, I appeal to the conscience of all 
those who have a responsibility for the conduct of 
world affairs. Because if we do nothing, the poor and 
the exploited will one day rise up against the injustice 
done to them. 
 What the world needs is a new mindset: a 
genuine New Deal on a global scale, an ecological and 
economic New Deal. On behalf of France, I call on all 
States to join together to found the new world order of 
the twenty-first century, predicated on the key idea that 
the common goods of humanity must be the 
responsibility of all of humanity.  
 On behalf of France, I solemnly appeal to the 
United Nations to provide itself, in this era marked by 
the return of scarcity, with the means to guarantee that 
all people throughout the world have access to vital 
resources: water, energy, food, medicine and 
knowledge. I solemnly appeal to the United Nations to 
concern itself with the issue of fairer distribution of 
wealth and of the income derived from commodities 
and technology. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to concern itself with the moralization of 
financial capitalism. I solemnly appeal to the United 
Nations to go further in combating corruption, which 
saps countries that are suffering and all too poor. 
 Things must change. Mindsets must change. 
Behaviour must change. This is our responsibility now, 
because tomorrow it will be too late. If we fail to act, 
we will see a resurgence of all the threats that the 
people of the post-war world believed they had 
overcome. Let us not take this risk lightly.  
 Peoples of the world, we can, together, build a 
better future for all people. It is up to us alone; it is up 
to our capacity to remain faithful to the values that 
have brought us together here today. You have 
understood. France believes that we have no more time 
to wait. France calls for action. France urges action. 
France is committed to action in the service of world 
peace. 
It is a great  honour to make my first speech to the General 
Assembly. 
 The United Nations has a duty to lead the world 
in addressing the shared threats and opportunities that 
dominate our age, and it must do so in deed as well as 
in word. That is why I want to use this platform to 
express my admiration and support for United Nations 
missions around the world, from Lebanon to Liberia, 
from Congo and Haiti to East Timor, which, even as we 
meet in New York this week, are saving lives and 
spreading hope. 
 Since 1946, when the first meeting of the General 
Assembly took place in London, the United Kingdom 
has been determined to fulfil its international 
responsibilities through the United Nations. The new 
Government in the United Kingdom, under the 
leadership of Gordon Brown, is proud to continue that 
tradition, and I reaffirm our commitment today. 
 The focus at this session has been on immediate 
and pressing issues. In the Middle East, we need urgent 
action towards a two-State solution that addresses the 
security of Israelis and the rights of Palestinians at the 
same time.  
 In Iraq, recent security gains can only be 
sustained through continued support for the 
development of the Iraqi security forces, through 
national reconciliation and through political support 
from the whole region. 
 Our international community depends on 
responsibilities as well as rights. If Iran wants to be a 
leading and respected country, it must cease its support 
for terrorist groups in Iraq and Afghanistan and end its 
defiance of three Security Council resolutions in 
respect of its nuclear programme. 
 In Zimbabwe, we need United Nations action to 
support African leadership to reverse the vicious cycle 
of economic and social devastation that now afflicts 
the country. 
 We have all seen the extraordinary scenes in 
Burma. I call on the regime to allow peaceful protest, 
encourage national dialogue and promote genuine 
reconciliation. Let us today send a message to the 
monks on the streets of Burma: we support your 
demand for a democratic Burma. And let us take a 
message from the monks on the streets of Burma: the 
human desire for freedom knows no bounds of race or 
religion or region. It is good that the Burmese 
Government has allowed Ambassador Gambari into the 
country, but it is now vital that they use his presence 
there to start the process of reconciliation. 
 But as well as addressing the traumas of our 
fellow citizens around the world, the United Nations 
must be the place where we address the longer-term 
threats. Today, I devote my speech to one of the great 
threats to stability and prosperity in the world: the 
threat of global inequality. I do so because inequalities 
are not just morally offensive; they are also dangerous. 
Inequality fuels extremism. It undermines support for 
an open, global economy. It corrodes trust and respect 
and reciprocity between nations. 
 The United Nations Charter talks of the 
“sovereign equality of States”, and it also talks of the 
“equal rights and dignity of men and women and of 
nations large and small”. The principle of equality is 
nowhere more evident than in the General Assembly 
where all States have an equal voice. But in the world 
outside this Hall, economic, social and political 
inequalities within and between States persist and 
worsen. We cannot stand united against the shared 
threats and opportunities in our world when we are so 
divided by economic and political disparities. So the 
need for Governments and international institutions to 
reduce inequalities and promote our common humanity 
is stark. 
 Traditionally, we have focused on the divide 
between developed and developing nations. However, 
the growth rates in many developing countries are 
faster than in developed economies. That is the good 
news. But there remain around a billion people in the 
world   one sixth of its population   living in 58 
countries, who have been left out of the story of human 
progress. This “bottom billion” have an average life 
expectancy of 50 years. Fourteen per cent of the 
children in the bottom billion die before their fifth 
birthday, and more than a third suffer malnutrition. The 
countries that are home to the bottom billion saw their 
national incomes fall each year during the 1980s and 
1990s. 
 Even where inequalities are narrowing between 
nations, they are widening within them. According to 
the United Nations Development Programme, in 73 
countries   containing 80 per cent of the world’s 
population   economic inequality has risen in recent 
years. 
 Every nation represented here has responsibilities 
to its own people. The drive to tackle poverty needs 
open markets. It needs the empowerment of citizens 
through democratic and transparent institutions, free 
from corruption. It needs strong and effective 
education and health services open to all. 
 But national action is not enough. Because the 
causes of inequality cross national boundaries, we need 
cooperation between nations, bilateral and multilateral, 
led by the United Nations. 
 First, three quarters of the countries where the 
bottom billion citizens reside have recent or current 
experience of civil war. Conflict is the trapdoor to 
extreme poverty. Look at Darfur: more than 200,000 
people are dead, 2 million are displaced and 4 million 
are on food aid. As the international community, we 
decided on a course of action in Security Council 
resolution 1769 (2007). Now we need to get on with it: 
an agreement on force composition, swift deployment, 
effective protection of civilians on the ground and a 
political process in which the legitimate grievance of 
the Darfur people is addressed through negotiation. In 
Afghanistan, one of the five poorest countries in the 
world, we need to back up military efforts to secure 
safe space with economic, social and political 
reconstruction. 
 Beyond those crises, we also need to improve our 
capacity to prevent the emergence of conflict. That is 
our vision of the responsibility to protect. A critical 
dimension is controlling the spread of weapons whose 
easy availability makes it so simple to set up militias 
and provoke violence and mayhem. Last year, the 
Assembly voted overwhelmingly to take forward 
United Nations work towards an arms trade treaty (see 
resolution 61/89). The Government of the United 
Kingdom will continue to press for the achievement of 
that goal. 
 Secondly, freedom from conflict is the platform 
for progress, but the battle against disease and 
illiteracy is the second stage. Despite progress in some 
countries, the world is off track to meet the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That is why, in July here 
at the United Nations, the Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom launched a call for action: to honour our own 
commitments and go further, to build a truly global 
partnership   with the private sector, trade unions, 
faith groups, civil society and cities   that can meet 
the 2015 MDG targets. That requires the developed 
world to meets its commitment to spend 0.7 per cent of 
its national incomes on development. The United 
Kingdom will meet that commitment by 2013. But that 
requires shared responsibility. Poor governance and 
corruption are the enemies of development. 
 Thirdly, progress on aid needs to be combined 
with a new global trade deal that opens up economies 
on a fair basis. Western producers continue to benefit 
from subsidies and tariffs, particularly for agriculture. 
Higher tariffs for processed goods prevent poor 
countries from diversifying their economies. That is a 
bad deal for Western consumers, and it squeezes out 
the livelihoods of producers in poor countries. Neither 
is it in rich countries’ financial self-interest, nor is it 
fair. The Government of the United Kingdom believes 
that concluding the Doha trade round this year is not 
just necessary, but also possible, and we will work to 
achieve that goal. 
 Finally, we must address the greatest long-term 
threat to our aspirations to tackle inequality: climate 
change. Climate change affects all countries, but the 
poorest countries   and the poorest people within 
those countries   will suffer the most disruption and 
devastation. I congratulate the President of the General 
Assembly on choosing climate change as a central 
theme of this general debate. And I congratulate the 
Secretary-General on his leadership on this issue. But 
we need more than debate. 
 The United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change is the only body that can conclude a 
global agreement on climate change. Therefore, in the 
next two months we need an urgent agreement on the 
steps towards progress to be taken at the December 
meeting in Bali. Beyond that, we need a road map to 
the 15th conference of parties to the Convention, to be 
held at Copenhagen in two years’ time, and agreement 
on a global deal that succeeds the end of the first 
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol. 
 At the heart of such an agreement must be the 
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities: 
all countries taking on responsibilities, but making sure 
that they are equitably distributed, with the greatest 
action taken by the richest countries. The United 
Kingdom stands ready to play its part. This year, our 
climate change bill will be enacted into law in the next 
session of Parliament to place on a statutory footing 
our commitment to cut carbon emissions by at least 60 
per cent from 1990 levels by the year 2050. But we 
need similar binding commitments from all rich 
countries. 
 The challenges are therefore immense. Crisis 
resolution and conflict prevention, the Millennium 
Development Goals, a new trade deal, climate 
change   they call for all our resources. Military 
intervention is never the whole solution, but sometimes 
a solution cannot be found without armed force. 
Development budgets are necessary, but the developing 
world needs a growth plan, not just an aid plan. 
Diplomacy needs to bridge differences between 
nations, but also to reach out to civil society and 
business. 
 The United Kingdom is proud not just of its 
bilateral relations with the countries represented in the 
Assembly, but also of its commitment to multilateral 
institutions, which can be a force for good in the world. 
But international institutions need to reflect the world 
as it is, not the world as it was. The United Kingdom 
therefore welcomes the prospect of intergovernmental 
negotiations at this session to achieve agreement on 
reform of the Security Council. We support permanent 
membership for Germany, Japan, India and Brazil and 
permanent representation for Africa. We are not 
wedded to a single model of reform. Achieving 
effective change is what matters. 
 In a world where more than a billion people are 
online, where companies have bigger turnovers than 
countries and where global non-governmental 
organizations have memberships that are bigger than 
national populations, our international institutions must 
look inwards to internal reform, but also outwards to 
broader popular movements for change. 
 In the last phase of globalization, in the 
nineteenth century, the emergence of new Powers and 
the breakdown of the international order resulted in 
conflict that scarred the whole of the twentieth century. 
Unless we can build trust and reciprocity between 
nations and embody them in durable and robust 
international institutions that reconcile differences and 
nurture common values, the latest phase of 
globalization could be another false dawn. 
 Globalization is not just something to which we 
must adapt; it is something that we can and must shape 
for the achievement of our own goals. It must be put to 
use spreading power, wealth and opportunity. For my 
Government, this mission is driven by both moral 
purpose and national interest. We must address the 
insecurity and inequality that exist beyond our borders 
if we are to enhance security and prosperity within our 
borders. 
 We live in a more prosperous, more peaceful and 
more democratic world than ever before. Let us 
commit ourselves to living in a more equal world. 
Kindly accept my 
congratulations, Sir, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
My delegation assures you of its full cooperation as we 
address issues identified in the annual report of the 
Secretary-General (A/62/1) and as we responsibly and 
creatively move forward with pending reforms of the 
Organization. 
 At the outset I would like to express India’s deep 
gratitude to all Member States for the recent 
unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of 
resolution 61/271, deciding to annually observe the 
International Day of Non-Violence, on 2 October, the 
anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi. I also 
look forward to participation by Member States in the 
informal plenary meeting of the General Assembly and 
other functions being organized tomorrow at the United 
Nations to mark the first International Day of 
Non-Violence. 
A central topic for this year’s debate   
responding to climate change   is both timely and 
relevant. India’s views on it were recently set forth at 
the high-level event on climate change, which took 
place here on 24 September. Combined with the 
exchange of views in the general debate, it will no 
doubt provide a useful backdrop to the meeting of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change to be held later this year in Bali, Indonesia.  
 The impact of climate change and environmental 
degradation falls disproportionately upon developing 
countries. Developing countries are the most 
vulnerable to it, and also lack the means to tackle it. 
Measures to address climate change must be based on 
mitigation and adaptation strategies with fair burden-
sharing and measures to realize sustainable patterns of 
consumption and production. The process of burden-
sharing must also take into account where the primary 
responsibility for the present state of greenhouse gas 
concentration in the atmosphere rests and not foreclose 
rapid and sustained economic development for the 
developing world, which, in any case, is an imperative 
for adaptation. 
 Technology is the other key area that needs to be 
addressed. It is important that critical clean 
technologies be made available and affordable to 
developing countries. The intellectual property rights 
regime must balance rewards for innovators with the 
common good of humankind. Concerted international 
action to address climate change, in accordance with 
the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities, as well as 
national circumstances and social and economic 
conditions, is the need of the hour. India, for which 
energy security is a national imperative, has a very 
small individual carbon footprint, with per capita 
carbon dioxide emissions at just about a quarter of the 
world’s average. Even so, we are determined that, as 
we pursue economic growth, our per capita greenhouse 
gas emissions will not increase beyond those of the 
industrial countries. 
 Poverty and underdevelopment are amongst the 
central challenges of our times. The overarching 
requirement is for sustained economic growth to 
eradicate poverty in developing countries. However, 
economic growth must also be measured against the 
template of social inclusion. Growth alone is not 
enough if it does not produce benefits that are 
sufficiently dispersed, not only in terms of increased 
income and employment, but also for improved health, 
nutrition and education for all. 
 I affirm India’s resolve to achieve the 
internationally agreed development goals, including 
the Millennium Development Goals. The Government 
of India accords the highest priority to inclusive 
growth, including the political, legal, educational and 
economic empowerment of women, effective and 
affordable public health, and enhanced access to 
educational opportunities, especially for all those who 
are disadvantaged. 
 It is apparent that progress in the achievement of 
the internationally agreed development goals has been 
tardy. The international community, through the United 
Nations system, must more effectively support the 
efforts of developing countries to achieve the 
development goals. A comprehensive reform of the 
international financial architecture is a key ingredient 
in that process. The United Nations must play an 
important role in overseeing the reform of the 
international financial architecture. That should include 
measures to ensure a greater voice for and participation 
by developing countries in the Bretton Woods 
institutions. The process of reform must be carried to 
its logical conclusion if the credibility of those 
institutions is to be enhanced. 
 We must also address as a priority the regrettable 
inversion of global resource flows. Today, instead of 
the urgently needed inflow of resources to developing 
countries to buttress their national economic 
development plans, we are confronted with a net 
outflow from them. Official development assistance 
(ODA) showed a marked fall during 2006 and remains 
well below the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national 
product. It is primarily being used to finance debt 
relief. That this is happening after so many years of 
liberalization and globalization highlights our 
collective failure. Perhaps we should be considering 
mechanisms, such as an international debt commission, 
to redress the problem of developing country debt.  
 The least developed countries, which are 
particularly hard hit by rising energy costs, find 
themselves in an even more difficult situation. 
Enhanced and predictable resource flow to developing 
countries remains a key objective of the global 
partnership for development. India will continue to do 
what it can to help with capacity-building in other 
developing countries and to assist them through ODA 
within the limits of its capacity. By the end of the year, 
imports from least developed countries into India will 
face a zero-tariff regime. 
 Early and substantive progress at the Doha Round 
of trade negotiations, based on the primacy of the 
development dimension, is another imperative. We 
must return to the negotiating table with a redoubled 
sense of urgency, while recognizing that adherence to 
the existing mandate remains critical. Nor can the 
interests of subsistence farmers be ignored or equated 
with those of other sectors. An illogical linkage 
between agriculture and non-agricultural market access 
will only complicate the development impact of the 
Round. The overarching principle of special and 
differential treatment for developing countries remains 
a categorical imperative. 
 As part of India's commitment to the 
achievement of human rights for all, and as a member 
of the Human Rights Council, we remain actively 
involved in developing the institutional framework of 
that body, including the universal periodic review 
mechanism, based on effective international 
cooperation as a central principle in the Council’s 
methods of work. India will work towards developing 
an international normative framework for the 
promotion and protection of human rights. India is 
honoured to be one of the first signatories of the 
International Convention for the Protection of All 
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Earlier today, I 
also had the honour of depositing India’s instrument of 
ratification of the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  
 As the largest democracy in the world, India has 
developed a system of local self-government with 
democratically elected institutions of representative 
Government at all levels   the village, the district, the 
State and the nation. The effort to make participatory 
democracy more meaningful to every Indian citizen 
underpins what is perhaps one of the greatest social 
experiments in the world today, namely, the transfer of 
decision-making power to nearly one million elected 
women local Government representatives. As a result, 
women are not merely the beneficiaries of change in 
India, but are its instruments. 
 As the world’s largest democracy, it was also 
natural for India to support the establishment of the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. We made an initial 
contribution of $10 million to the Fund and remain 
actively and constructively involved in realizing the 
objectives for which it was set up. As a small token of 
our commitment to that laudable initiative, I have the 
privilege of announcing a further pledge of $10 million 
to the United Nations Democracy Fund. 
 The international system cannot be reordered 
meaningfully without a comprehensive reform of the 
United Nations. If the Organization is to remain the 
cornerstone of the international architecture in this 
century, it cannot remain mired in the realities of the 
1940s. Despite substantive implementation of the 
United Nations reform agenda that emerged from the 
2005 World Summit Outcome, such reform will 
inevitably remain incomplete without comprehensive 
reform and expansion of the Security Council and 
revitalization of the General Assembly. Elements and 
ideas on the reform of the Security Council have been 
discussed for well over a decade in numerous reports 
and interminable consultations. It is now time for 
intergovernmental negotiations to commence in order 
to make the Security Council more democratic, 
representative and responsive.  
 We, together with partners from Africa, Latin 
America and Asia, tabled a resolution on 11 September 
2007, spelling out the principles on which reform 
ought to be based if it is to be meaningful. These 
principles are expansion in both permanent and 
non-permanent categories of membership; greater 
representation for developing countries and 
representation for developed countries that is reflective 
of contemporary world realities; and comprehensive 
improvement in the working methods of the Security 
Council, including ensuring greater access for island 
and small States. We welcome recent statements from 
this podium by President Bush of the United States of 
America and other world leaders on the need for 
Security Council reform in both the permanent and 
non-permanent categories. It is high time that we 
collectively bring these ideas to implementation. 
 Reform of the United Nations would also be 
incomplete without revitalization of the General 
Assembly. The central goal of such revitalization must 
be the restoration and enhancement of the role and 
authority of the General Assembly as originally 
envisaged in the Charter. 
 Given the significance of developmental 
activities for the developing world, India sees a 
corresponding need for the reform of United Nations 
operational activities in favour of development. Since 
these activities are aimed at supporting the work of 
Member States, it follows that Members must 
determine their direction and shape through an 
intergovernmental process. The litmus test for any 
reform proposal is whether it improves the support 
extended by the United Nations to the efforts of 
programme countries. India would therefore judge 
reform proposals by their impact on the ground, by the 
resultant improvement in the effectiveness of the 
system and by the impact on transaction costs for the 
United Nations development system. 
 Steps to achieve the complete elimination of 
nuclear weapons have also only made limited headway. 
Despite some progress, the world remains far from 
achieving the objective of total elimination of nuclear 
weapons. India’s long-standing commitment to 
universal, non-discriminatory and comprehensive 
nuclear disarmament is embodied in the vision of late 
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-free and 
non-violent world. This vision was put forward nearly 
two decades ago. It remains undiminished today.  
 Indeed, it is all the more relevant today, given the 
fact that peaceful uses of nuclear energy can address 
the inexorably growing demand for new and  
non-polluting sources of energy to fuel economic 
development. We will be bringing proposals to 
Member States and this Organization to see how we 
can refocus on general and complete disarmament, 
particularly nuclear disarmament. Disarmament is our 
agreed goal, and it subsumes arms control and 
non-proliferation. 
 It is well known that India has an impeccable 
record in preventing the proliferation of sensitive 
technologies. That is in keeping with our commitment 
to being a responsible nuclear Power. India is ready to 
work with the international community to develop a 
new international consensus on non-proliferation. The 
international community needs to intensify the effort to 
address the very real threat posed by the link between 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
(WMDs) and related materials and technologies and 
the ability of non-State actors to acquire them. The risk 
posed by the intersection between proliferation and 
terrorism is real and serious. The central objective must 
be to ensure that our solidarity in words is translated 
into action. 
 The adoption of the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy last September was a 
noteworthy development, signalling the will of the 
international community to combat this menace in a 
holistic and coordinated manner. Welcome as the 
Strategy is, there is much more that needs to be done to 
combat the menace that international terrorism has 
become. India is convinced that without the early 
adoption of a comprehensive convention against 
international terrorism, the global struggle against 
terrorism remains incomplete and likely to succeed 
only partially. We must ensure that there is zero 
tolerance for all forms of terrorism. 
 In conclusion, I would express the hope that our 
deliberations in the year ahead will lead us to 
enlightened action. With maturity and resolve we will 
successfully overcome the many challenges before us. 
Three thousand years ago, the 
people of Israel journeyed from slavery in Egypt to 
independence in the land of Israel. The Bible tells us 
that on their voyage to liberty they made a crucial stop 
and received the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai. 
 As the General Assembly gathers this year, the 
Jewish people recall that historic journey by marking 
the festival of Sukkot. And every year, at this time, our 
people remember that the long march to freedom 
requires the acceptance of humanity’s basic values. 
 For 60 years, since the rebirth of our State in our 
ancient homeland, with Jerusalem at its heart, we have 
not lost sight of this principle. The core values of 
tolerance, coexistence and peace that lie at the heart of 
every democracy must be protected within societies 
and promoted between them. This is the calling of our 
generation. 
 The conflict in our region is driven by those who 
reject these core values   those who seek power 
without responsibility, those whose aim is not to 
realize their own rights but to deny those rights for 
others. At its heart, this is a conflict not about territory, 
but about values. 
 There is, of course, a territorial dimension to our 
dispute. We know this and, as we have proven in the 
past, we are prepared for the territorial compromise 
that lasting peace entails. But we also know, especially 
after withdrawing from Lebanon and Gaza, that 
territorial withdrawal by itself will not bring peace 
unless we address the core clash of values that lies 
beneath the conflict. 
 Israel may be on the front lines of this battle, but 
it is not our fight alone. This is a global battle. The 
notion that this battle is a local one, limited to isolated 
regions, collapsed in this city with the twin towers on a 
September morning six years ago. Today, it is clear that 
the extremists are engaged in a bloody war against 
civilians and communities, against hearts and minds, in 
every corner of the world. 
 And it is clear, too, that the Middle East conflict 
is not the cause of this global extremist agenda, but a 
consequence of it. Yes, it is up to the parties in the 
Middle East to settle their political conflict, and Israel, 
for its part, desires to do so. But for success to be 
genuine and lasting, you, the nations of the world, need 
to be partners in a shared global struggle against the 
extremism and terror that feed conflict, for your sake, 
not just for ours. 
 It is in this spirit that I would like to speak today 
about resolving our particular conflict, but also about  
the wider battle being waged today   the battle that 
affects us all. This battle is global, not just because it 
targets civilians everywhere, but also because the 
extremists have taken aim at the fundamental pillars of 
every modern society   namely, democracy, tolerance 
and education. These are the new battlefields of the 
twenty-first century, and it is in these arenas, more than 
any other, that the future of our world will be decided. 
 I believe in democracy. I believe in its 
extraordinary power to produce free and peaceful 
societies founded on respect for human rights. 
Democracy is a profound ideal, but it is also a 
vulnerable one. 
 Today, in different parts of the world, extremists, 
who are opposed to the very ideals of democracy, are 
entering the democratic process, not to abandon their 
violent agenda but to advance it. As a spokesman for 
Al-Qaida recently declared, “We will use your 
democracy to destroy your democracy”. This should be 
a wake-up call for all of us. 
 It is time to reclaim democracy, and this begins 
by rejecting those who abuse it. Genuine democracy is 
about values before it is about voting. No true 
democracy on Earth allows armed militia or groups 
with racist or violent agendas to participate in 
elections. But some demonstrate a troubling double 
standard. There are some who insist on high standards 
in their own country but forget them when they look 
abroad. Violent extremists who could never run for 
office at home are treated as legitimate politicians 
when elected elsewhere. As a result, we empower those 
who use democratic means to advance anti-democratic 
ends. And we strengthen the forces of those who not 
only undermine their societies but also threaten our 
own. 
 Today, from this podium, I call on the 
international community to adopt at the global level 
what democracies apply at the national one: a universal 
set of standards for participation in genuine democratic 
elections. We need a universal democratic code that 
requires that all those seeking the legitimacy of the 
democratic process earn it by respecting such 
principles as State monopoly over the lawful use of 
force, the rejection of racism and violence and the 
protection of the rights of others. 
 The goal of such a universal code is not to dictate 
our values or to stifle legitimate voices with which we 
may disagree. Its goal is to protect core democratic 
values from those determined to use the democratic 
system against itself; and to make clear that 
participation in the democratic process is not just a 
right   it is also a responsibility. 
 I know that the temptation to engage with 
extremists can be strong. It may seem to promise 
stability and quiet. We may hope that by feeding the 
beast we can gradually tame it. As free societies, we 
pride ourselves, rightly, on our respect for difference 
and diversity. But we do a disservice to diversity when, 
in its name, we tolerate the intolerant. 
 Bitter experience has shown that buying off 
extremists is a short-term fix for which we will pay 
dearly in the long run. Instead, groups such as Hamas 
and Hizbullah must be presented with a clear choice 
between the path of violence and the path of 
legitimacy. They cannot have both. And it is this same 
stark choice that must be presented to the radical 
regime in Iran. 
 No responsible State disagrees that Iran is the 
most prominent sponsor of terrorism. It is a major 
source of instability and conflict in Iraq, Lebanon, 
Palestine and across the entire Middle East; and it is 
the enemy of Arab-Israeli coexistence. No one 
disagrees that Iran denies the Holocaust and speaks 
openly of its desire to wipe a Member State   mine   
off the map. And no one disagrees that, in violation of 
Security Council resolutions, it is actively pursuing the 
means to achieve this end. 
 But there are still those who, in the name of 
consensus and engagement, continue to obstruct the 
urgent steps that are needed to bring Iran’s sinister 
ambitions to a halt. Too many see the danger, but they 
walk idly by, hoping that someone else will take care 
of it. What is the value, we have to ask, of an 
organization which is unable to take effective action in 
the face of a direct assault on the very principles it was 
founded to protect? 
 It is time for the United Nations, and the States of 
the world, to live up to their promise of never again, to 
say enough is enough, to act now and to defend their 
basic values. It is also time to see this same kind of 
moral conviction in the Human Rights Council, so that 
it can become a shield for the victims of human rights, 
not a weapon for its abusers. 
 Israel has never tried to avoid genuine discussion 
of its human rights record. But so long as the Council 
maintains its wildly disproportionate focus on Israel, it 
weakens the moral voice of the United Nations, and the 
price of this blindness is paid by the victims of human 
rights atrocities in Darfur and Myanmar and 
throughout the world. 
 There is no more accurate forecast for the future 
of a society than the lessons we teach our children. 
Unfortunately, in our region, we see children’s 
television programmes in which Mickey Mouse 
puppets teach the glory of being a suicide bomber and 
a seven-year old girl sings of her dreams of blood and 
battle. Religion, rather than being a source of hope and 
spiritual healing, is abused as a call to arms, as God is 
dragged once again onto the field of battle. 
 It is time to reclaim religion from those who have 
made it a weapon rather than a shelter. It is time to 
reclaim education from those who use it as a tool of 
hate rather than an opportunity. As always, the most 
powerful form of education, and the hardest, is to teach 
by example. We cannot expect our younger generation 
to value what we are not prepared ourselves to protect 
and pay a price for. And there is a price to pay. From 
the leader who has to withstand public pressures. From 
the businessman who has to forgo economic 
opportunity. From the teacher and spiritual guide who 
must find the inner strength to teach truth and tolerance 
in a climate of extremism and hostility. At all levels of 
society, there is a price to be paid. But if we do not pay 
it today, we, and those who follow us, will face a far 
greater bill tomorrow. 
 These thoughts are in my mind as we seek, today, 
to advance the cause of Israeli-Palestinian 
reconciliation. Reconciliation is not about deciding 
who was right or who was wrong in the past; it is about 
sharing a common vision and a common responsibility 
for the future. In the last months, Prime Minister 
Olmert and President Abbas have been engaged in a 
sincere and genuine effort to reach the widest possible 
common ground on political understandings. There is 
no substitute for the bilateral process. Failure is not an 
option, but it is for the parties themselves to define 
success. The foundation for true peace lies in the vision 
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side 
in peace and security. The world shares this vision, but 
it is also important that it clearly embrace the two core 
principles that emerge from it. 
 The first of these principles is: two States, two 
homelands. Just as Israel is homeland to the Jewish 
people, so Palestine will be established as the 
homeland and the national answer for the Palestinian 
people, including the refugees. 
 The second is: living side by side in peace and 
security. Just as a viable and prosperous Palestine in 
the West Bank and Gaza is an Israeli interest, so must a 
secure Israel be a Palestinian interest. The world 
cannot afford another terror State. 
 Guided by these principles, the parties can define 
a common border and turn the two-State vision from a 
dream into reality. To succeed, we must set our sights 
on a brighter future, while responding to the challenges 
of the present and learning the lessons of the past. As 
we make progress on concrete political understandings, 
it is just as important to change the reality on the 
ground   to show Palestinians and Israelis that the 
promise of peace exists in practice, not just on paper. 
 In recent months, Israel has taken tangible 
measures to create a better environment, and we are 
ready to do more. We know that Palestinian life is full 
of day-to-day hardship. We know also, and only too 
well, the burden of terror that Israelis bear and of our 
primary obligation to their security. Together, we can 
change this reality; we do not need to submit to it. 
 We are not naive. We can see the difficulties 
ahead and the enemies of peace that stand in our way. 
But practical progress is possible in those areas where 
there is an effective Palestinian Government that 
accepts the Quartet’s principles and implements, 
alongside Israel, the existing Road Map obligations. 
 As the parties take the risks for peace, we look to 
the international community and the Arab and Muslim 
world to offer support, not to stipulate conditions. This 
support comes in many forms. It comes through 
economic and political assistance to the new 
Palestinian Government committed to coexistence and 
seeking to build the foundations of a peaceful and 
prosperous State. It comes through the clear 
endorsement of any political understandings reached 
between the parties. It comes through enhancing and 
deepening regional ties and cooperation between the 
Arab world and Israel, while in parallel we advance 
towards Israeli-Palestinian peace. And, finally, it 
comes by confronting those determined to prevent us 
from succeeding. 
 We must stand up to those who have no respect 
for human life or human liberty, those who hold 
captive soldiers - Gilad Shalit, Udi Goldwasser and 
Eldad Regev - whose families are with us today and 
whose pain remains always in our hearts. 
 We must stand up to those who, after we 
withdrew from Gaza to give peace a chance, chose not 
to build but to destroy and who choose, on a daily 
basis, to target Israeli homes and kindergartens with 
their missiles. 
 And we must stand up to those who see 
democracy as a tool to advance hate, who see tolerance 
as a one-way street and who see education as a means 
of poisoning the minds of the next generation. 
 I believe that, despite all the obstacles, there is a 
new moment of opportunity and an alliance of interest 
that favours peace. Time is of the essence. We owe it to 
ourselves and to our children to find both the courage 
and the wisdom to make the right choices in the right 
way. 
 On this festival of Sukkot, Jews commemorate 
the journey from slavery to freedom by leaving their 
homes to live in fragile huts, like the shelters in which 
our ancestors lived on their way to the Promised Land. 
For 3,000 years, these temporary huts, open to the 
elements, have been a reminder that stability and 
security are ensured not only by the structures that we 
build but also by the values that we share. Perhaps it is 
for this reason that the Sukkah, this fragile shelter, has 
become the Jewish symbol of peace. 
 We turn to Jerusalem and say in our prayers every 
day: Spread over us the canopy of your peace. May it 
be in our days, and for all nations. 
As we meet for the 
sixty-second session of the General Assembly, we look 
again to the United Nations as the global forum to 
address the challenges which affect us all. 
 Climate change is serious and urgent, as many 
have said in this Hall. We welcome that it has been the 
theme of our general debate this year. The science is 
clear. Climate change is real and will impact on all 
parts of the world. To meet the global challenge of 
climate change, there must be widespread and effective 
international action. It will be important to get all 
economies onto low carbon pathways over time. 
Market mechanisms will have a significant role to play. 
Individual countries will face different challenges. 
Different national circumstances must be taken into 
account. 
 The United Nations climate change conference in 
Bali in December will be a fresh opportunity to 
re-energize our efforts in addressing climate change. 
New Zealand wants to see a Bali road map emerge in 
December to set us on the course for an effective future 
response. New Zealand welcomes the momentum that 
is being generated by other high-level meetings in the 
lead-up to Bali, including the recent Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation Leaders’ Declaration. 
 Last week’s high-level event deserves special 
mention. We congratulate the Secretary-General for his 
efforts in cultivating the political goodwill that will be 
vital if we are to reach agreement in Bali.  
 Taking action as an international community also 
means taking action domestically. In recent weeks, 
New Zealand has announced a number of domestic 
measures to address climate change. An emissions 
trading scheme will be established from 1 January 
2008 and will form the cornerstone of our efforts to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It will, over time, 
cover all sectors and all gases. 
 We have also identified a number of longer-term 
domestic goals, which will move New Zealand down 
the path to carbon neutrality. They will provide 
benefits, including healthier homes, cleaner air and 
improved public transport. While climate change is 
certainly a challenge for us all, it is also an opportunity 
to move towards a more sustainable world. 
 With regard to the Millennium Development 
Goals, we recognize that having passed the halfway 
point to 2015, the international community needs to 
step up its efforts to achieve them. At the same time, 
there is scope for the United Nations development 
system to be strengthened. We welcome the newly 
established initiatives in the Economic and Social 
Council   the Annual Ministerial Review and the 
Development Cooperation Forum   as practical ways 
to share information about what is working and where 
we can improve our efforts at country level. 
 New Zealand is also committed to improving 
system-wide coherence at the United Nations in the 
fields of development, humanitarian issues and the 
environment. We attach particular importance to 
working for a strengthened, coherent, gender 
architecture and towards effective gender 
mainstreaming across all United Nations entities. 
 New Zealand welcomes the completion of the 
United Nations Pacific-based development agencies’ 
strategic framework for the Pacific. We are keen to 
work closely with United Nations agencies in the 
Pacific to achieve positive outcomes for our partners in 
the areas of human rights, sexual and reproductive 
heath, HIV/AIDS, child immunization and women’s 
leadership. 
 A strong, prosperous and stable Pacific is a key 
foreign policy priority for New Zealand. We place a 
high priority on fostering solidarity and cooperation in 
the Pacific to tackle the challenges the region faces in 
democracy, security and economic development. 
Around half of New Zealand’s development assistance 
goes towards the Pacific.  
 New Zealand provides assistance in the region in 
Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and 
Bougainville in Papua New Guinea, with each situation 
calling for a different response. 
 The Timorese people, their leaders and the 
international community have all made a huge effort 
over the past year to return Timor-Leste to a more 
secure and stable path. New Zealand has participated in 
those efforts through our contributions to the 
International Security Forces and to the United Nations 
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). Timor-
Leste will require a sustained commitment from 
UNMIT.  
 The situation in Fiji continues to be of concern to 
New Zealand. As a neighbour of Fiji with a long-
standing and very close relationship, New Zealand 
worked hard to avert last December’s coup, including 
by convening a meeting to mediate between the then 
Prime Minister and the military commander. We very 
much regret that this failed to dissuade the coup 
makers from their illegal and unconstitutional path. 
 New Zealand strongly and actively supports the 
steps that have been taken by the Pacific Islands Forum 
to encourage an early return to constitutional 
government in Fiji. We would welcome a firm 
commitment from the interim administration to work 
towards elections within the timeframe endorsed by the 
Forum. Given that commitment, New Zealand would 
begin to restore a more normal bilateral relationship 
through which we could cooperate in addressing Fiji’s 
undoubtedly complex problems. 
 I also want to take this opportunity to address one 
issue in particular raised in the Solomon Islands 
statement on Monday (see ). It was 
suggested, inter alia, that the presence of the Regional 
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI), 
was an “occupation”, and that RAMSI’s operation 
transgressed Article 52 of the United Nations Charter. 
New Zealand has always been committed to upholding 
the purposes and principles of the Charter in every 
respect. In our view, RAMSI is entirely consistent with 
those purposes and principles. It is a specific example 
of Chapter VIII of the Charter in operation. To suggest 
it is contrary to the Charter is in our view wrong. 
RAMSI was established in response to a formal request 
from the Solomon Islands. Its presence in the Solomon 
Islands is sanctioned by treaty and by the domestic law 
of the Solomon Islands. That was recently reaffirmed 
by the Solomon Islands Parliament. Moreover, RAMSI 
stems from the endorsement by Pacific Islands Forum 
Foreign Ministers of a programme of action under the 
Forum Leaders’ Biketawa Declaration. That provides a 
framework for regional responses in times of crisis or 
when members request assistance   exactly the 
situation in this case. 
 Amid all these challenges, I would like to report 
on activity being undertaken by Tokelau, the tiny 
territory 500 kilometres north of Samoa that New 
Zealand administers. The people of Tokelau, all 1,500 
of them on three atolls, have decided that they wish to 
undertake an act of self-determination to decide 
whether they wish to change their present status. A 
vote in February 2006 narrowly missed the threshold 
set by Tokelau for a change of status. They will again 
vote on that issue from 20 to 24 October. 
 As members of the Special Committee on 
Decolonization know, New Zealand supports Tokelau’s 
right to choose, but has stood back from any wish to 
determine the direction of any change. That decision is 
entirely for the people of Tokelau. New Zealand will 
support their decision. 
 Advancement of the rule of law at the national 
and international levels is essential for the realization 
of sustained economic growth, development and 
human rights. New Zealand encourages members to 
provide their full support to the International Criminal 
Court (ICC) by acceding to the Rome Statute of the 
ICC. We also call on all United Nations Member 
States, especially State parties to the Rome Stature, to 
fully cooperate with the Court in carrying out its 
current work. Universality and full support are crucial 
if we are to end the impunity of the perpetrators of the 
most serious crimes of international concern, such as 
those carried out in Darfur, where International 
Criminal Court arrest warrants are outstanding. 
 Efforts to protect and maintain the international 
rule of law can only be effective when built on a 
foundation of international peace and security. 
 Interfaith and intercultural dialogue can help to 
counter religious extremism by encouraging 
understanding and respect among different faith 
communities and cultures. 
 In May, New Zealand hosted two significant 
gatherings aimed at advancing global response to 
interfaith and intercultural issues in a practical way. We 
regard the United Nations’ Alliance of Civilizations as 
the key multilateral process among the growing 
number of international and regional initiatives in this 
area. 
 With respect to nuclear proliferation, New 
Zealand welcomes the strong signals that have been 
sent to North Korea and Iran by the Security Council. 
 On a different topic, New Zealand is convinced 
that the humanitarian harm posed by cluster munitions 
must be addressed urgently. We believe that negotiation 
of a treaty to deal with the problems caused by cluster 
mines is well overdue. We will host a meeting on this 
initiative in February of next year. 
 We are pleased, too, to promote a new initiative 
at the General Assembly this year calling for action to 
lower the operational status of nuclear weapons. 
Maintaining nuclear weapons at a high level of 
readiness increases the likelihood of these weapons 
being used, with catastrophic consequences. 
 The humanitarian disaster and conflict in Darfur 
threaten security in the entire East African region. New 
Zealand applauds the efforts by Members to establish 
the new African Union-United Nations Hybrid 
Operation in Darfur. 
 New Zealand is deeply concerned at the current 
political, economic and humanitarian situation in 
Zimbabwe. We welcome the efforts being made to find 
acceptable solutions to the problems Zimbabwe faces. 
We sincerely hope that these efforts continue and that 
solutions can be found that will benefit all 
Zimbabweans and will enable free and fair elections to 
be held. 
 New Zealand remains profoundly concerned at 
the situation in Myanmar. Protestors have been killed, 
shot at, beaten and arrested. This violent treatment is 
reprehensible. Engaging in peaceful protests is a 
fundamental human right. New Zealand, therefore, 
joins others in calling for the immediate release of 
those detained in recent weeks, along with the many 
political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, who 
have been held without trial for much longer periods. 
 The Myanmar regime should be held responsible 
for the personal safety and treatment of all the people it 
has detained. We call on the authorities there to stop 
the violence and to encourage a process of genuine 
dialogue with pro-democracy leaders and ethnic 
minorities. 
 New Zealand fully supports United Nations 
efforts to resolve the immediate and longer term 
situation in Myanmar. We welcomed the visit to 
Myanmar of Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari. We fully 
support continued discussion of the situation of 
Myanmar in the Security Council with a view to 
considering what further steps might be taken by the 
international community. 
 Turning now to human rights, New Zealand will 
stand for election to the Human Rights Council for 
2009 to 2012. We want to do our part to help this 
fledging United Nations organization achieve its full 
potential as the pre-eminent global human rights body. 
 A human rights issue of particular importance to 
New Zealand is the death penalty. Adoption of a 
resolution on a global moratorium on this inhumane 
form of punishment would represent a historic step 
towards global efforts to abolish the death penalty. 
 In closing, New Zealand has been a committed 
and active participant in the United Nations since its 
formation. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called 
on Member States to deliver to the best of our abilities 
at the United Nations, recognizing the need for faster, 
more effective action, as well as for a more results-
driven Organization that strives to have the highest 
standards of transparency and professional ethics. New 
Zealand whole-heartedly agrees.  
 We look forward to working closely with the 
Secretary-General, with you, Mr. President and with 
other Member States in all of our efforts to build a 
stronger United Nations for a better world. 
Traditionally, the General Assembly sums up 
the results of the ending political year. This requires 
serious and joint consideration. It is essential to 
identify agreed solutions for today’s global problems 
based on the collective analysis of current international 
affairs. It appears that no one is challenging that 
security and prosperity are inseparable in an 
increasingly globalized world. Our approach should be 
similarly comprehensive, taking into account the 
inseparable link between the issues of peace and 
development, which has been amply proven by our 
recent experience.  
 The expanding range of conflicts in international 
politics through the exacerbation of regional crises, the 
increasing threat of terrorism, the risk of the spread of 
weapons of mass destruction and stagnation on 
disarmament jeopardize international stability, divert 
resources from constructive uses and undermines the 
potential for sustainable worldwide economic growth. 
And it is such growth that is our common fundamental 
goal. Poverty and economic backwardness expand the 
breeding ground for extremism.  
 On the other hand, developments over the past 
year provide convincing proof that an essentially new 
geopolitical situation has been developing in the world, 
one that is defined primarily by emerging multipolarity. 
We need to agree on what inferences we can draw from 
this. In his Munich speech in February, President 
Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation called for an 
open and sincere dialogue that would enable us to work 
out a common understanding of the current historical 
epoch and of the modus operandi it obliges our nations 
to adopt.  
 The international landscape is changing, due to 
newly emerging centres of global growth. Today, 
nobody can cope with global challenges single-
handedly. Neither diktat nor bipolar dominance can 
fulfil the task of world governance. What is needed is 
collective leadership by major States; this should be 
representative both geographically and in terms of 
civilizations. The basis for such an informal 
mechanism can be provided only by the United Nations 
with its unique legitimacy.  
 Multilateral diplomacy based on international law 
has come to the fore. Like any society of free people, a 
world of free nations needs universal regulatory 
principles to ensure predictability and confidence in 
international affairs. The way to achieve this goal lies 
through strengthening the United Nations system by 
further adapting it to modern global realities. Decisions 
here should be based on the broadest possible 
consensus among Member States and on the universal 
intergovernmental nature of the United Nations. It is 
from that perspective that we view the reform 
initiatives proposed by Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon.  
 It will be in our common interest to make more 
active use of United Nations peacekeeping capabilities. 
These could be improved by more effective use of a 
body such as the Military Staff Committee. The 
initiative put forward by the President of Russia in 
2000 to enhance the work of the Military Staff 
Committee remains relevant. Naturally, a renewed 
Committee should operate with the participation of all 
members of the Security Council, as provided for in 
the United Nations Charter.  
 Much remains to be done also in improving the 
interaction of the United Nations with regional 
organizations that have proven their ability to 
effectively participate in resolving security and 
development issues. A positive interrelationship 
between the principles of multilateralism and 
regionalism is obviously very important. At present, 
more than 50 per cent of international trade is carried 
out under regional trade agreements. Global trade 
regulation mechanisms cannot be effective without 
regional integration, which is key to the economic 
well-being of all the regions of the world.  
 Russia is actively signing and using regional 
trade agreements to achieve mutual liberalization of 
trade. Russia intends to use its current chairmanship of 
the Eurasian Economic Community to give a more 
practical focus to the organization, which since 2003 
has had observer status in the General Assembly. 
Russia, along with other sponsors, will submit to the 
General Assembly a draft resolution on cooperation 
between the United Nations and the Eurasian 
Economic Community, aimed at providing a more 
systemic basis and facilitating the timely realization of 
the Millennium Development Goals. We also hope that 
United Nations Member States would honour the 
Eurasian Development Bank the status of observer in 
the General Assembly. We shall actively promote the 
attainment of these objectives, including in the 
framework of the process to reinvigorate the 
Commonwealth of Independent States and build up 
strategic offensive capabilities.  
 The international community’s efforts should 
remain focused on reaching the Millennium 
Development Goals. We are concerned that today, 
seven years since the Millennium Summit, many 
developing countries, especially the least developed 
countries, are still significantly behind schedule in 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Particular attention should be paid to the specific needs 
of the African continent.  
 Russia fully shares the principles of global 
partnership in the interest of development, as approved 
at the Monterrey International Conference on 
Financing for Development and intends to increase its 
input to our common efforts in that area. We shall 
consistently strengthen our position as a donor country 
in accordance with the approach to Russian 
participation in international development assistance 
approved by President Putin in June 2007.  
 We are confident that concrete steps to ensure 
sustainable socio-economic development in all regions 
are a sure remedy against threats to peace and security.  
 There is a pressing need to use any means 
available to strengthen the leading role of the United 
Nations in fighting terrorism. Here, the Organization’s 
activities should be based on a comprehensive 
framework, including the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted last year as 
resolution 60/288, and on a comprehensive convention 
on international terrorism. The Collective Security 
Treaty Organization is contributing to these efforts and 
has established useful interaction with the United 
Nations.  
Our efforts to resolve regional conflicts and 
urgent social and economic problems should form part 
of our counter-terrorism efforts.  
 Iraq has become a source of destabilization for 
the whole region. Ensuring security, not to mention 
economic development, in that country requires a new 
strategy focused on reaching genuine national 
reconciliation with the participation of all of Iraq’s 
neighbours and with the support of the international 
community. We call upon the Secretary-General to take 
an active role in this issue, given the additional power 
the United Nations can wield towards an Iraqi 
settlement. The participants in recent multilateral 
meetings on Iraq have upheld that approach, and we 
support the decision endorsed at those meetings.  
 The indivisibility of security is to be seen clearly 
in the Middle East. Early solution of the Palestine 
problem based on the two-State concept and the 
achievement of a comprehensive Middle East 
settlement underpinned by the international legal 
platform developed by the United Nations are next on 
the agenda. We are convinced that this goal could be 
advanced by holding a representative international 
conference preceded by thorough preparation. We 
consider the United States initiative to convene in 
November a multiparty meeting on a Middle East 
settlement as a step in that direction. We appreciate the 
preliminary considerations voiced by the United States 
side regarding the agenda and composition of that 
event. We reaffirm the importance of involving the 
Quartet of international mediators and the Arab League 
in the preparations.  
 Settlement of the Kosovo problem is only 
possible within the framework of international and law 
based on negotiations. Unilateral steps will not lead to 
a lasting peace and will create the risk of 
destabilization in the Balkans and other regions.  
 Complex problems require an integrated 
approach. This is particularly true for the situation 
around Iran. The goal of nuclear non-proliferation is an 
absolute priority. At the same time, we should not 
ignore the task of engaging Iran in constructive efforts 
to resolve regional and international issues.  
 Urgent steps are needed to strengthen the 
non-proliferation regime while providing all States 
with legitimate access to the benefits of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The joint initiative of the 
Presidents of Russia and the United States, put forward 
at their Kennebunkport meeting, is aimed at starting 
joint practical work in this field.  
 We are confident that today peace should be 
based on willingness to cooperate, especially on 
matters directly affecting strategic stability. In this 
context, we cannot neglect the unilateral plans in the 
area of missile defence. President Putin has proposed a 
constructive alternative: collaborative work with the 
participation of Russia, the United States and Europe, 
and subsequently with that of other countries. Such 
work could lead to a genuinely global strategic alliance 
encompassing the entire Euro-Atlantic region, which 
would allow us to move forward in establishing an 
open system of collective security. Our proposals are 
under discussion, and we hope that the collective 
approach will prevail. 
 The principle of the indivisibility of security 
should form the basis for resolving the situation around 
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. 
Russia stands ready to engage in that process, and 
proposals are well known. We expect that these 
proposals will be seriously discussed during the 
upcoming consultations. 
 The possibility of deploying weapons in outer 
space poses a serious threat. The magnitude of that 
threat is determined by the global coverage of the 
deployment, which can endanger all States without 
exception. We consistently oppose the deployment in 
space of weapons of any type, and we call upon the 
international community to conclude an agreement to 
that effect. 
 Another outstanding global issue is the effective 
prevention of climate change, which requires agreed 
and scientifically based solutions that are realistic and 
balanced and that do not undercut countries’ right to 
development. Russia has always stood for a 
constructive dialogue with a view to giving a genuinely 
universal character to the international climate 
protection regime. We hope that the important meetings 
that took place this week in New York and Washington 
will facilitate thorough preparations for a successful 
launch in December in Bali of negotiations on joint 
post-2012 efforts. 
 The spiritual and moral foundations of human 
solidarity are of increasingly vital importance. The 
spiritual values of all world religions demand that we 
achieve intercivilizational accord and fight 
manifestations of xenophobia and racism, as well as 
the resurgence of neo-Nazi trends. Those are the tasks 
to be tackled within the framework of the Alliance of 
Civilizations, which we support.  The World Summit of 
Religious Leaders held in Moscow last year added a 
new dimension to this endeavour. We propose to build 
upon the results of the Summit and to think about 
establishing, under United Nations auspices, a special 
forum   a kind of consultative council of religions   
for exchanges of views among representatives of major 
world faiths. 
 Russia will spare no effort to strengthen 
multilateral cooperation within the framework of the 
United Nations. I am convinced that with a continued 
commitment to the principles of the United Nations 
Charter, we can make progress in the creation of an 
effective system of collective security, as was the will 
of the founding fathers of the world Organization.
Thank you for the opportunity 
to address the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
 Sixty years ago, representatives from 16 nations 
gathered to begin deliberations on a new international 
bill of rights. The document they produced is called the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and it stands 
as a landmark achievement in the history of human 
liberty. The Declaration opens by recognizing the 
inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of 
all members of the human family as the foundation of 
freedom and justice and peace in the world. As we 
gather for the sixty-second session of the General 
Assembly, the standards of the Declaration must guide 
our work in this world.  
 Achieving the promise of the Declaration requires 
confronting long-term threats. It also requires 
answering the immediate needs of today. 
 We nations in this Hall have our differences. Yet, 
there are some areas where we can all agree. When 
innocent people are trapped in a life of murder and 
fear, the Declaration is not being upheld. When 
millions of children starve to death or perish from a 
mosquito bite, we are not doing our duty in the world. 
When whole societies are cut off from the prosperity of 
the global economy, we are all worse off. Changing 
these underlying conditions is what the Declaration 
calls the work of larger freedom, and it must be the 
work of every nation in this Assembly. 
 This great institution must work for great 
purposes, to free people from tyranny and violence, 
hunger and disease, illiteracy and ignorance and 
poverty and despair. Every member of the United 
Nations must join in this mission of liberation. The 
first mission of the United Nations requires liberating 
people from tyranny and violence. The first article of 
the Universal Declaration begins by stating that all 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. This truth is denied by terrorists and extremists 
who kill the innocent with the aim of imposing their 
hateful vision on humanity. The followers of this 
violent ideology are a threat to civilized people 
everywhere. All civilized nations must work together 
to stop them by sharing intelligence about their 
networks and choking off their finances and bringing to 
justice their operatives. In the long run, the best way to 
defeat extremists is to defeat their dark ideology with a 
more hopeful vision   the vision of liberty that 
founded this body. 
 The United States salutes the nations that have 
recently taken strides towards liberty, including 
Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mauritania, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone and Morocco. The Palestinian territories 
have moderate leaders   mainstream leaders   who 
are working to build free institutions that fight terror, 
enforce the law and respond to the needs of their 
people. The international community must support 
these leaders so that we can advance the vision of two 
democratic States   Israel and Palestine   living side 
by side in peace and security. 
 Brave citizens in Lebanon and Afghanistan and 
Iraq have made the choice for democracy. Yet, the 
extremists have responded by targeting them for 
murder. This is not a show of strength; it is evidence of 
fear; and the extremists are doing everything within 
their power to bring down these young democracies. 
The people of Lebanon and Afghanistan and Iraq have 
asked for our help, and every civilized nation has a 
responsibility to stand with them. Every civilized 
nation also has a responsibility to stand up for the 
people suffering under dictatorship. In Belarus, North 
Korea, Syria and Iran, brutal regimes deny their people 
the fundamental rights enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration. 
 Americans are outraged by the situation in 
Burma, where a military junta has imposed a 19-year 
reign of fear. Basic freedoms of speech, assembly and 
worship are severely restricted. Ethnic minorities are 
persecuted. Forced child labour, human trafficking and 
rape are common. The regime is holding more than 
1,000 political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, 
whose party was elected overwhelmingly by the 
Burmese people in 1990. 
 The ruling junta remains unyielding, yet the 
people’s desire for freedom is unmistakable. This 
morning, I am announcing a series of steps to help 
bring peaceful change to Burma. The United States will 
tighten economic sanctions on the leaders of the 
regime and their financial backers. We will impose an 
expanded visa ban on those responsible for the most 
egregious violations of human rights   as well as their 
family members. We will continue to support the 
efforts of humanitarian groups working to alleviate 
suffering in Burma. And I urge the United Nations and 
all nations to use their diplomatic and economic 
leverage to help the Burmese people reclaim their 
freedom. 
 In Cuba, the long rule of a cruel dictator is 
nearing its end. The Cuban people are ready for their 
freedom. And as that nation enters a period of 
transition, the United Nations must insist on free 
speech, free assembly and, ultimately, free and 
competitive elections. 
 In Zimbabwe, ordinary citizens suffer under a 
tyrannical regime. The Government has cracked down 
on peaceful calls for reform and has forced millions to 
flee their homeland. The behaviour of the Mugabe 
regime is an assault on its people and an affront to the 
principles of the Universal Declaration. The United 
Nations must insist on change in Harare and must insist 
on freedom for the people of Zimbabwe. 
 In Sudan, innocent civilians are suffering 
repression; and in the Darfur region, many are losing 
their lives to genocide. America has responded with 
tough sanctions against those responsible for the 
violence. We have provided more than $2 billion in 
humanitarian and peacekeeping aid. I look forward to 
attending a Security Council meeting that will focus on 
Darfur, chaired by the French President. I appreciate 
France’s leadership in helping to stabilize Sudan’s 
neighbours. The United Nations must answer this 
challenge to conscience and live up to its promise to 
promptly deploy peacekeeping forces to Darfur. 
 Secondly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from hunger and disease. 
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and of his 
family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical 
care. Around the world, the United Nations is carrying 
out noble efforts to live up to these words. 
 Feeding the hungry has long been a special 
calling for my nation. Today, more than half the 
world’s food assistance comes from America. We send 
emergency food stocks to starving people, from camps 
in Sudan to slums around the world. I have proposed 
an innovative initiative to alleviate hunger under which 
America would purchase the crops of local farmers in 
Africa and elsewhere, rather than shipping in food 
from the developed world. This would help build up 
local agriculture and break the cycle of famine in the 
developing world, and I urge our United States 
Congress to support this initiative. 
 Many in this Hall are bringing the spirit of 
generosity to fighting HIV/AIDS and malaria. Five 
years ago, in sub-Saharan Africa, an AIDS diagnosis 
was widely considered a death sentence, and fewer 
than 50,000 people infected with the virus were 
receiving treatment. The world responded by creating 
the Global Fund, which is working with Governments 
and the private sector to fight the disease around the 
world. The United States decided to take these efforts a 
step further by launching the $15 billion Emergency 
Plan for AIDS Relief. Since 2003, this effort has 
helped bring cutting-edge medicines to more than a 
million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It is a good start. 
So earlier this year, I proposed to double our initial 
commitment   to $30 billion. By coming together, the 
world can turn the tide against HIV/AIDS, once and for 
all. 
 Malaria is another common killer. In some 
countries, malaria takes as many lives as HIV/AIDS, 
the vast majority of them children under the age of 
five. Every one of these deaths is unnecessary, because 
the disease is preventable and treatable. The world 
knows what it takes to stop malaria   bed nets, indoor 
spraying and medicine to treat the disease. Two years 
ago, America launched a $1.2 billion malaria initiative. 
Other nations and the private sector are making vital 
contributions as well. I call on every Member State to 
maintain its focus, to find new ways to join this cause 
and to bring us closer to the day when deaths caused by 
malaria are no more. 
 Thirdly, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from the chains of illiteracy 
and ignorance. Article 26 of the Universal Declaration 
states that everyone has the right to education. When 
nations make the investments needed to educate their 
people, the whole world benefits. Better education 
unleashes the talent and potential of citizens and adds 
to the prosperity of all of us. Better education promotes 
better health and greater independence. Better 
education increases the strength of democracy and 
weakens the appeal of violent ideologies. So the United 
States is joining with nations around the world to help 
them provide a better education for their people. 
 A good education starts with good teachers. In 
partnership with other nations, America has helped 
train more than 600,000 teachers and administrators. A 
good education requires good textbooks. So, in 
partnership with other nations, America has distributed 
tens of millions of textbooks. A good education 
requires access to good schools. So, in partnership with 
other nations, America is helping nations raise 
standards in their schools at home and providing 
scholarships to help students come to schools in the 
United States. And in all our education efforts, our 
nation is working to expand access for women and 
girls so that the opportunity to get a decent education is 
open to all. 
 Finally, the mission of the United Nations 
requires liberating people from poverty and despair. 
Article 23 of the Universal Declaration states that 
everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment and to just and favourable conditions of 
work. In the twenty-first century, this requires ensuring 
that people in poor countries have the same 
opportunity to benefit from the global economy that 
citizens of wealthy countries have. 
 The United Nations provides vital economic 
assistance designed to help developing nations grow 
their economies and reach their potential. The United 
States agrees with that position. We have dramatically 
increased our own development assistance, and we are 
delivering that aid in innovative ways. We started the 
Millennium Challenge Account to reward nations that 
govern justly, fight corruption, invest in their people 
and promote economic freedom. With this aid, we are 
reaching out to developing nations in partnership, not 
paternalism. And we are ensuring that our aid dollars 
reach those who need them and achieve results. 
 In the long run, the best way to lift people out of 
poverty is through trade and investment. A nation that 
is open and trading with the world will create 
economic rewards that far exceed anything it could get 
through foreign aid. During the 1990s, developing 
nations that significantly lowered tariffs saw their per 
capita income grow about three times faster than other 
developing countries. Open markets ignite growth, 
encourage investment, increase transparency, 
strengthen the rule of law and help countries help 
themselves. 
 The international community now has a historic 
chance to open markets around the world by 
concluding a successful Doha Round of trade talks. A 
successful Doha outcome would mean real and 
substantial openings in agriculture, goods and services, 
and real and substantial reductions in trade-distorting 
subsidies. The world’s largest trading nations, 
including major developing countries, have a special 
responsibility to make the tough political decisions to 
reduce trade barriers. America has the wi11 and 
flexibility to make those necessary decisions. Our 
negotiators are demonstrating that spirit in Geneva. I 
urge other leaders to direct their negotiators to do the 
same. And I am optimistic that we can reach a good 
Doha agreement and seize this once-in-a-generation 
opportunity. 
 In the meantime, America wi11 continue to 
pursue agreements that open trade and investment 
wherever we can. We recently signed free-trade 
agreements with Peru, Colombia, Panama and South 
Korea. These agreements embody the values of open 
markets, transparent and fair regulation, respect for 
private property and resolving disputes under rules of 
international law. These are good agreements. They are 
now ready for a congressional vote, and I urge our 
Congress to approve them as soon as possible. 
 As America works with the United Nations to 
alleviate immediate needs, we are also coming together 
to address longer-term challenges. Together, we are 
preparing for pandemics that could cause death and 
suffering on a global scale. Together, we are working 
to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction. Together, we are confronting the 
challenges of energy security, environmental quality 
and climate change. I appreciate the discussions on 
climate change led by the Secretary-General last night. 
I look forward to further discussions at the meeting of 
major economies in Washington later this week. 
 The goals I have outlined today cannot be 
achieved overnight, and they cannot be achieved 
without reform of this vital institution. The United 
States is committed to a strong and vibrant United 
Nations. Yet the American people are disappointed by 
the failures of the Human Rights Council. That body 
has been silent on repression by regimes from Havana 
and Caracas to Pyongyang and Tehran, while focusing 
its criticism excessively on Israel. To be credible on 
human rights in the world, the United Nations must 
first reform its own Human Rights Council. 
 Some have also called for reform of the structure 
of the Security Council, including an expansion of its 
membership. The United States is open to this 
prospect. We believe that Japan is well qualified for 
permanent membership on the Security Council and 
that other nations should be considered as well. The 
United States will listen to all good ideas, and we will 
support changes to the Security Council as part of 
broader United Nations reform. And in all we do, I call 
on Member States to work for an institution that 
adheres to strict ethical standards and lives up to the 
high principles of the Universal Declaration. 
 With the commitment and courage of those in this 
Hall, we can build a world where people are free to 
speak, assemble and worship as they wish   a world 
where children in every nation grow up healthy, get a 
decent education and look to the future with hope   a 
world where opportunity crosses every border. America 
will lead towards that vision, in which all are created 
equal and free to pursue their dreams. That is the 
founding conviction of my country. It is the promise 
that established this body. And, with our determination, 
it can be the future of our world.  
Let me begin by adding my 
voice to the many salutations directed to Mr. Ban 
Ki-moon on being elected as the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. I wish him a fruitful tenure of 
office, trusting that through his work the poor of the 
world will have good reason to increase their 
confidence in this Organization of the nations of the 
world. 
 Again, I reiterate the many thanks to Her 
Excellency Ms. Haya Rashed Al Khalifa, for the good 
work she did as the President of the General Assembly 
at its sixty-first session. Equally, my congratulations go 
to Mr. Srgjan Kerim on his election as the President of 
the General Assembly at its sixty-second session. 
 We meet here today, under the theme of 
responding to climate change, at this session, which 
marks the half-way point in the freely agreed period 
during which the nations of the world committed 
themselves to work, individually and collectively, to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Billions of the people of the world know as a 
matter of fact that the consequences of climate 
change   be it droughts, floods or unpredictable and 
extreme weather patterns   undermine our common 
efforts to achieve the MDGs. Today, we all understand 
that the costs of doing nothing about climate change far 
outweigh those of taking concrete measures to address 
this challenge. It is clear that delaying action on this 
matter of climate change will hit poor countries and 
communities hardest. Yet the pace of climate change 
negotiations is out of step with the urgency indicated 
by science. 
 I would therefore urge that we collectively aim 
for a significant advance in the multilateral 
negotiations when our negotiators meet in Bali in 
December this year. Together, we must ensure that we 
build a fair, effective, flexible and inclusive climate 
regime under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, 
and we must agree to this as a matter of urgency. 
Though we have different responsibilities, and 
developed countries clearly have an obligation to take 
the lead, we all have a common duty to do more and 
act within our respective capabilities and in accordance 
with our national circumstances. 
 The World Summit on Sustainable Development 
correctly reaffirmed sustainable development as a 
central element of the global action against poverty and 
the protection of the environment and identified 
important linkages between poverty, the environment 
and the use of natural resources. These linkages are 
real to billions of the poor; the combination of their 
empty stomachs, their degraded environment and their 
exploited natural resources, for which they benefit 
nothing, defines hopelessness and a heart-wrenching 
existence. 
 Many of these wretched of the Earth know from 
their bitter experience how their resource-rich areas 
were transformed into arid, uninhabitable and desolate 
areas forcing migration to better-endowed regions, thus 
exacerbating conflicts and the struggle for scarce 
resources. 
 Gathered here as representatives of the peoples of 
the world, we know very well that climate change, 
poverty and underdevelopment are not acts of God but 
human-made. 
 Clearly, the starting point for a future climate 
regime must be equity. A core balance between 
sustainable development and climate imperatives will 
have to be the basis of any agreement on a 
strengthened climate regime. Any deal on fair use of 
the ecological space will have to be balanced by a deal 
giving all countries a fair chance in the development 
space. 
 Under the aegis of the United Nations, but also 
within our regional bodies, we have adopted many 
programmes and declarations, with clear 
implementation targets aimed at addressing the 
challenges of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment. As this conclave knows very well, 
the many lofty agreements include, among others, 
those adopted at the Rio Earth Summit, the 
Copenhagen Social Summit, the Millennium Summit, 
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the 
Monterrey International Conference on Financing for 
Development. At all these summits and others, we have 
adopted declarations using moving and solemn words 
that express our profound understanding of the gravity 
of the challenges facing the modern world and have 
unequivocally committed ourselves to defeating any 
and all of the miserable and dehumanizing conditions 
facing large parts of humanity. 
 Indeed, this collective asserted, in paragraph 11 
of the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2):  
  “We will spare no effort to free our fellow 
men, women and children from the abject and 
dehumanizing conditions of extreme poverty. ... 
We are committed to making the right to 
development a reality for everyone and to freeing 
the entire human race from want.” 
Yet the poor, whose hopes have been raised many times 
as we have made declaration after declaration against 
poverty and underdevelopment   and as we are doing 
now on climate change   can be forgiven for thinking 
that this important global leadership often sounds like 
an empty vessel.  
 That this collective is able to express, always 
eloquently, the dire circumstances characterizing 
poverty is without doubt. However, this Organization, 
which should pride itself on visible actions and results 
in the fight against climate change and poverty, finds it 
difficult to demonstrate decisive progress in that 
regard. The reasons for that are not hard to find. 
Although the concepts of freedom, justice and equality 
are universal and fully embraced by the United 
Nations, this global Organization has not itself 
transformed and designed necessary institutions of 
governance that are consistent with the noble ideals 
that drive modern democratic societies. 
 Because the nations of the world are defined by 
the dominant and the dominated, the dominant have 
always become the decision-makers in the important 
global forums, including at this seat of global 
governance. Accordingly, the skewed distribution of 
world power   political, economic, military, 
technological and social   replicates itself in 
multilateral institutions, much to the disadvantage of 
the majority of the poor people of the world. 
 Indeed, even as we agree on the important 
programmes that should bring a better life to the 
billions of poor, the rich and the powerful have 
consistently sought to ensure that, whatever happens, 
the existing power relations are not altered and 
therefore that the status quo remains. The results of 
that situation are that the United Nations can and does 
correctly identify problems and appropriate solutions 
necessary for making the world a better place for all of 
humanity. Naturally, the dominant and the powerful 
very often respond positively to agreed programmes if 
these would advance their own narrow interests. 
 At the same time, the poor will continue to strive 
for improvement of their wretched conditions. They 
therefore see the United Nations as a natural 
instrument for helping to accelerate the process of 
change for the better. Hence, they correctly see 
implementation of all United Nations programmes as 
being central to the efforts relating to climate change 
and the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. 
 Yet the cold reality is that it will be difficult for 
the United Nations, in its present form, to fully 
implement its own decisions and therefore to help the 
poor to swiftly achieve the Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs). Indeed, until the ideals of freedom, 
justice and equality characterize this premier world 
body itself, the dominant will forever dictate to the 
dominated, and the interests of the dominated   which 
are those of the majority of humanity   will be 
deferred in perpetuity. Thus, noble statements will 
continue to be uttered on all matters facing the 
majority of the people of the world, such as the need to 
successfully conclude the Doha Development Round, 
while little is done to implement the many critical 
agreements necessary to pull the poor out of the morass 
of poverty and underdevelopment. 
 We in my own country are of the firm belief that 
we will achieve the MDGs. Having emerged from more 
than three centuries of colonialism and apartheid, we 
inherited two interlinked economies, which we 
characterize as the first and second economies. The 
two economies   one developed and globally 
connected and the other localized and informal   
display many features of a global system of apartheid. 
As South Africans, we have sought to strengthen the 
first economy and to use it as a base for the transfer of 
resources to strengthen and modernize the second 
economy, and thus embark on the process of changing 
the lives of those who subsist in the second economy. 
 Indeed, without the requisite resource transfers, it 
will not be possible to achieve the MDGs, because our 
second economy cannot on its own generate the 
resources needed to bring a better life to millions of 
poor South Africans. I mention this because, as we all 
accept, central to the global attainment of the MDGs is 
the critical matter of resource transfers from the rich 
countries of the North to the poor countries of the 
South. 
 Many developing countries   especially those of 
my own continent, Africa   do not have the material 
base from which to address and attain the MDGs on 
their own. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for 
massive resource transfers through development 
assistance, investment, trade, technology transfers and 
human resource development to these poor countries if 
we are to achieve the MDGs and successfully adapt to 
the devastating impacts of climate change. 
 If we do not succeed in building a climate change 
regime that balances adaptation and mitigation, 
underpinned by the transfer of technology and financial 
resources, we will place an unmanageable burden on 
future generations. In that regard, given Africa’s 
specific and dire challenges, we believe it is important 
to enter into a partnership with Africa using the African 
Union’s programme the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD), which the Assembly has 
adopted, so that the measures that the continent has 
undertaken, with limited resources, for the regeneration 
of all the African countries can be strengthened by 
support from the international community, guided by 
the programmes of the United Nations. 
 As history teaches us, it was because of the 
massive resource transfers in the aftermath of the 
Second World War that Western Europe recovered and 
was set on its development path. A similar intervention 
helped to put a number of Asian countries on their own 
development trajectory. The question we should ask is, 
why is there an absence of the same resolve to assist 
poor nations today? The global village to which we 
constantly refer should encourage us to expand human 
solidarity. Thus, we would build a durable bridge over 
the river dividing our common global village and 
regrettably ensuring that one human being lives a 
fulfilling life while another experiences a miserable 
existence. 
 Representing the citizens of the world, we have 
set for ourselves programmes requiring that all of us 
work together to create better living conditions for 
humanity and ensure that we achieve that which is 
necessary for our mutual prosperity. 
 Together, rich and poor, developed and 
developing, North and South, we can and must truly 
hold hands and address the challenges of climate 
change and sustainable development, work together to 
defeat poverty and underdevelopment and ensure that 
every human being is saved from the indecencies and 
humiliations that are inseparable from poverty. But to 
do that, we need first and foremost to implement the 
decisions that we have adopted freely in this eminent 
house of the representatives of the global community. 
And so, let our actions speak louder than our words.  
