For 
China, this has been a special year. We experienced 
 
 
35 08-51749 
 
two major events. One was the devastating earthquake 
in Wenchuan, which caused grave loss of life and 
property. In the face of the disaster, the Chinese people 
showed great strength, courage, solidarity and 
resilience. By now, the people affected by the 
earthquake have been properly relocated and recovery 
and reconstruction work is well under way. The other 
event was the successful hosting of the Beijing 
Olympic Games. That grand sporting event provided a 
good opportunity for athletes from around the world to 
show true sportsmanship. It also enabled the world to 
learn more about China and for China to learn more 
about the world.  
 In our fight against the earthquake disaster and 
our efforts to host the Games, we received 
understanding, support and assistance from the 
international community. I wish to take this 
opportunity to express sincere gratitude on behalf of 
the Chinese Government and people.  
 Now the whole world wants to know in what 
direction China is heading, both politically and 
economically, after the Beijing Olympic Games. Let 
me tell you in unequivocal terms that China will 
remain committed to the path of peaceful development, 
unswervingly pursue reform and opening-up, and 
continue to adhere to an independent foreign policy of 
peace. This is in the fundamental interests of the 
Chinese people and the people of all other countries. It 
is also in keeping with the trend of the world. 
 The Olympic Games that just concluded were 
held in China, the largest developing country in the 
world. The international community has highly 
commended the efforts made by the Chinese 
Government and people for the Games, and their 
success has greatly inspired the Chinese people and 
given them even more confidence and strength to 
achieve modernization of the country.  
 At the same time, however, we are soberly aware 
that China is a country with 1.3 billion people. 
Although its total GDP is one of the highest in the 
world, it trails behind more than 100 countries in terms 
of per capita income. Development between urban and 
rural areas and among different regions in China is 
unbalanced. The rural areas, particularly in western 
China, are underdeveloped. Tens of millions of Chinese 
lack adequate food and clothing.  
 China is still a developing country, where 
productivity remains low and further development is 
constrained by the shortage of resources and energy 
and by environmental consequences. Our socialist 
market economic system, democracy and the rule of 
law need to be further improved, and certain 
outstanding social issues are yet to be resolved. To 
achieve China’s modernization is a daunting task, and 
we still have a long way to go. Both the opportunities 
and challenges that we face are unprecedented. We will 
seize the opportunities, rise up to challenges, dedicate 
ourselves to nation-building and focus on development. 
That is what the Chinese Government and people have 
been thinking and doing. 
 People may ask how China is achieving its 
development. The answer is through reform and 
opening up. This year marks the thirtieth anniversary 
of China’s reform and opening-up policy, a policy that 
fundamentally changed the closed, backward and 
ossified situation that had existed in China for years. It 
is a policy that freed people’s minds and aroused their 
initiative, liberated the productive forces, generated 
great economic and social progress and instilled vigour 
and vitality into the country. Without that policy, there 
would not have been such change in China in the last 
30 years.  
 To achieve the goal of modernization and build a 
strong, prosperous, democratic, culturally advanced 
and harmonious country, we will pursue the reform and 
opening-up policy. It is of vital importance to the 
development of China today. It is also a strategy that 
will shape China’s future. We are firm in carrying this 
policy forward. 
 The Chinese nation has all along cherished the 
fine tradition and benefited from the wisdom of being 
open to new ideas and drawing on the strengths of 
others. The Chinese people have learned from 30 years 
of reform and opening up that only continued 
economic and political restructuring and reform in 
other fields can lead to sustained economic growth and 
social progress. And only continued opening up in an 
all-round way can lead the country to greater national 
strength and prosperity. This is the conclusion we have 
drawn both from our practice and exploration and from 
historical experiences. 
 The world needs peace, for only with peace can 
there be development. China earnestly hopes to have a 
peaceful international environment in order to achieve 
its development goals. The Chinese Government is 
committed to an independent foreign policy of peace 
  
 
08-51749 36 
 
and stands ready to work with other countries to 
advance the noble cause of the peace and progress of 
mankind. 
 Respect for sovereignty and non-interference in 
the internal affairs of other countries is the prerequisite 
for sound State-to-State relations. The Chinese people 
have learned from their modern history of humiliation 
that when a country loses its sovereignty, its people 
lose dignity and status. China is firm in upholding its 
hard-won sovereignty and territorial integrity and will 
never tolerate any external interference. Following the 
principle of treating each other as equals, China also 
respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
other countries, as well as the independent choices of 
their people for their own social systems and 
development paths. 
 China is ready to develop friendly relations with 
all countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit 
rather than on ideology or on a political system. In 
handling international affairs, we make our own 
judgement on the merit of each case and take our 
position in light of our national interests and the well-
being of the world’s people. We will neither blindly 
follow the position of others nor give way to the 
pressure of any forces. In international relations, China 
does not seek to build alliances or become a leader and 
will never do so in the future. 
 Peaceful settlement of international disputes is a 
founding purpose of the United Nations and a basic 
principle of international law. China is committed to 
addressing historical issues and current differences 
with other countries through dialogue and negotiation. 
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China 
will continue to play an active and constructive role in 
promoting the peaceful settlement of international 
hotspot issues and regional conflicts. 
 China’s development is peaceful in nature. It will 
not harm anyone or pose a threat to anyone. China does 
not seek hegemony now, nor will it do so in the future. 
China keeps and develops an appropriate level of 
military capability solely for the purpose of 
safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 
 The confidence and pride of the Chinese nation 
today are based on China’s economic development, 
social justice, the civility of its people and moral 
strength. China will, through its own development, 
contribute to the peace and development of the world. 
 In the long history of humankind, the destinies of 
countries have never been so closely linked as they are 
today. Given the global nature of issues threatening the 
survival and development of mankind, such as global 
warming, environmental degradation, resource 
constraints, frequent outbreaks of diseases and natural 
disasters and the spread of terrorism, and in the face of 
the intertwining challenges related to finance, energy 
and food, no country can expect to avoid difficulties or 
to handle the problems alone.  
 Ongoing financial volatility, in particular, has 
affected many countries, and its impact is likely to 
become more serious. To tackle the challenge, we must 
all make concerted efforts. So long as people of all 
countries, including their leaders, can do away with 
hostility, exclusion and prejudice, treat each other with 
sincerity and an open mind and forge ahead hand in 
hand, humankind will overcome all difficulties and 
embrace a brighter and better future. 
 China, as a responsible major developing country, 
is ready to work with other members of the 
international community to strengthen cooperation, 
share opportunities, meet challenges and contribute to 
the harmonious and sustainable development of the 
world. I offer my 
congratulations to Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann on 
his election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I wish him every success. 
 The United Nations mandate to establish and 
maintain peace and security has lost none of its 
urgency in 2008. The task remains. However, fulfilling 
it is more demanding than ever. 
 When the Berlin Wall fell, no one had greater 
hopes than we Germans not only that Germany would 
be reunited but that a new age of global cooperation — 
beyond the traditional front lines — would begin. The 
Iron Curtain had divided the world into two blocs and 
when it came to dealing with crises and conflicts, often 
enough, loyalty within the blocs had priority; what was 
needed to improve the lot of ordinary people was of 
secondary importance. 
 
 
47 08-52265 
 
 The end of the East-West confrontation in the 
early nineties seemed to mark the dawn of a new age of 
effective multilateralism, while the United Nations 
seemed to be on the threshold of a great renaissance. 
Disillusionment has now set in, more quickly and more 
profoundly than we had feared. The hoped-for peace 
dividend did not materialize. On the contrary, the 
cynical certainties of the cold war had disappeared, and 
they were not replaced by new ones.  
 The world is clearly searching for a new order, 
and multilateralism does not always seem to be the first 
choice in this quest. What we have experienced since 
then is the confluence of the traditional power politics 
of the 19th century, the legacies of the cold war and the 
new challenges of the 21st century. 
 At the same time, new players and Powers that 
have still to find their place in the international order 
are seeking to enter the global stage. It is now 
generally accepted that we can master the new 
challenges of the twenty-first century, such as climate 
change, scarcity of raw materials, access to food and 
water and the fight against epidemics, pandemics and 
terrorism, only if we act together. Although we know 
that and although it is absolutely vital that we focus on 
finding common solutions to the key issues of the 
future, time and again we are called upon to resolve 
conflicts that have their roots in a past that we have 
only seemingly put behind us. 
 One conflict that smouldered for some time and 
then escalated suddenly and violently is the crisis in 
Georgia, where an entire region found itself on the 
edge of the abyss of war and destruction and where 
common sense failed to prevail on all sides. The United 
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union agree that 
the weapons must be silenced for good. We must help 
the suffering population without delay. That does not 
mean accepting the status quo; nor does it mean the 
calling into question of Georgia’s territorial integrity. 
 Nevertheless, we have to work together to ensure 
reconstruction, the return home of the refugees and 
long-term security in Georgia and the entire region. 
The European Union is making an important 
contribution by sending an observer mission, which my 
country is leading. Together with the United Nations 
and the OSCE, the mission will put forward a 
comprehensive strategy in Geneva this October. We are 
aiming to pave the way towards the durable resolution 
of the conflict through stabilization and confidence-
building in this particular region of the world, the 
Southern Caucasus. 
 The same task is even more demanding in 
Afghanistan, a country where the situation is still 
precarious. It is clear to us that, without security, 
Afghanistan will not, and indeed cannot, develop. 
Equally, however, we need economic development in 
order to improve the security situation and to 
encourage people to reject fundamentalism and terror. 
 We have achieved much together in recent 
months and years. Millions of children — many of 
them girls — are going to school again, while streets, 
bridges and hospitals are being built. The training and 
build-up of the Afghan police force and army are 
progressing. Compared to the deteriorating security 
situation, however, they are not progressing fast 
enough, especially in the present situation. Germany 
intends to do even more in the future. 
 However, we cannot afford to look at Afghanistan 
by itself. We need to step up our efforts to help 
Pakistan master the economic and social challenges it 
faces. Pakistan’s internal stability is crucial to stability 
in the entire region. This will require concrete support 
from everyone in the international community, and my 
country — rest assured — will play its part. 
 International engagement is also still necessary in 
the Middle East. In the current phase of domestic 
uncertainty, we call upon all parties to the conflict not 
to ease up in their efforts to resolve the conflict. As 
experience has shown, to stand still in the Middle East 
often means to take a step backward. A new wave of 
terror and violent clashes would result, and neither 
Israel nor Palestine, nor the international community, 
can afford to let that happen. 
 Germany believes it has a particular 
responsibility to provide concrete assistance to 
improve the framework conditions. Just recently, at the 
Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil 
Security and the Rule of Law — which many of those 
here attended — we agreed on concrete measures to 
strengthen the Palestinian security sector. Those 
measures are already having an impact. 
 An Iran armed with nuclear weapons would pose 
a threat to security throughout the Middle East and 
would trigger a nuclear arms race. Therefore, Iran must 
put its cards on the table. We have made our offer, 
  
 
08-52265 48 
 
which is a tangible solution. The delaying tactics of the 
Iranian side must not exhaust the patience of the 
international community. We expect a clear signal from 
Iran indicating its willingness to comply with the 
international community’s demands and to build 
confidence. And let me make the following very clear: 
the Iranian President’s remarks concerning Israel are 
irresponsible and unacceptable. In my view, the blatant 
anti-Semitism that he expressed in his statement once 
again this year (see ) is outrageous and 
should be condemned by all of us. We must stand 
together on that issue. 
 The problems in Georgia, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and the Middle East highlight one fact: it is more 
urgent than ever that we develop the foundations for a 
stable world order. My country stands for dialogue and 
the reconciliation of interests. That does not mean 
dialogue for the sake of discussion, without any 
results; nor does reconciliation of interests imply that 
we are prepared to abandon our own principles. We 
believe that it is essential to renounce violence, ensure 
fairness and recognize international law.  
 For us, that is the alternative vision to a world of 
fabricated opposing interests, the bloc mentality and 
oversimplified categories such as good and evil. East 
against West, North against South — that is yesterday’s 
thinking, and it no longer has a place in today’s world. 
In order to resolve the problems of today and 
tomorrow, we all need more partners, not more 
opponents. The twenty-first century is the first in 
which we can resolve problems only if we work 
together. 
 The same applies to disarmament policy. Only a 
partnership of shared global responsibility can achieve 
lasting results. The dangerous trend in which an ever-
increasing number of countries strive to gain access to 
nuclear technology, or even to build nuclear weapons, 
must be stopped. My proposal to multilateralize the 
fuel cycle showed how those risks can at the very least 
be minimized. Furthermore, I call upon all States to 
sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, 
because its entry into force would mean a huge gain in 
security. 
 For all that, however, we must remember that 
more people die every day as a result of hunger than as 
a result of war. The pledges that we made at the turn of 
the millennium must not remain a mere piece of paper. 
The fight against hunger and poverty is also part of a 
global responsibility partnership. Germany will 
therefore step up its efforts to promote poverty 
reduction and global fairness. As part of those efforts, 
we will increase our official development assistance 
contributions in accordance with the plan of the 
European Union. In the next budget alone, we will 
increase development assistance by $1.2 billion.  
 In that connection, I would like to say something 
about Africa. For too long, we have perceived that part 
of the world only as a continent of wars and conflicts. 
However, I also know an Africa that has set off on the 
road to the future with courage and resolve. It deserves 
our partnership and support along that road. 
 At present, the headlines are dominated by the 
international financial crisis. Recklessness, greed and a 
lack of common sense among those involved has set us 
back years. The long-term consequences cannot be 
assessed yet. However, I am certain that the painful 
tremors on the world financial markets will accelerate 
the multipolarization of the international financial 
system. There can be no future without rules, and no 
single player will be able to lay down those rules. It 
will no longer be possible for any one country to act as 
if it were immune to undesirable developments. 
Europe, with its tried-and-tested policy of mediation 
and reconciliation of interests, could play a key role in 
this. 
 Together, we must now finally ensure long-
overdue transparency, stability and provisions to guard 
against risks on the world financial markets, along with 
oversight. My country developed concrete proposals in 
that regard a few years ago. I hope that, in the face of 
this deep crisis, the international community will now 
act quickly and with resolve. We need universal rules 
for the international financial markets. 
 That does not apply only to the international 
financial sphere, however; clear rules, solid structures 
and joint action are the vital prerequisites for meeting 
global challenges. That is why we need a strong and 
effective United Nations that enjoys the confidence of 
the international community, has the requisite 
legitimacy and can be the umbrella for a global 
responsibility partnership. 
 We therefore support the process of reforming the 
United Nations and its organs. Security Council reform 
is overdue, as we are all aware. The Council’s 
composition must reflect the realities of world politics 
today. Germany is prepared to shoulder greater 
 
 
49 08-52265 
 
responsibility in that area. Less than two weeks ago, 
the General Assembly unanimously decided to begin 
the negotiations on reform soon (see decision 62/557). 
That important step must now be followed by others. 
Germany is firmly convinced that, in the twenty-first 
century, we need the United Nations more urgently 
than ever before. I bring 
you fraternal greetings from Europe — Europe that is 
conscious of its responsibilities and wishes to act; 
Europe that is true to its values — democracy and 
freedom; Europe that is loyal to its friends, but also 
Europe that wishes to speak to the whole world in 
service of dialogue and of peace. 
 At a time when the world is deeply troubled, I 
have come to tell you, on behalf of Europe, that in the 
midst of so many difficulties the international 
community has a political and moral responsibility that 
we must shoulder. Let us not forget that if we are 
gathered here today, it is because following one of the 
most terrible tragedies that humankind has ever known, 
there were men and women of good will who were 
determined that in the future no one could ever say, 
when faced with misfortune: “There is nothing we can 
 
 
13 08-51570 
 
do.” That is why we are here, because those who went 
before us did not renounce their responsibility. Europe 
believes that today, our duty is to act and to refuse to 
submit.  
 We can wait no longer. We are beginning to 
gauge the tragic consequences of having already 
waited too long. We cannot wait to achieve peace, to 
end the tragedy in Darfur. We cannot wait to fight 
terrorism, to avert the food crisis that condemns so 
many human beings to die of hunger. We cannot wait 
to prepare for the post-petroleum world, to fight global 
warming, to save the oceans, to put an end to monetary, 
social and ecological dumping. We cannot wait to bring 
ethics to financial capitalism.  
 For too long we have all been resigned to being 
powerless. For too long we have retreated before the 
need to give to the globalized world institutions that 
will enable it to be regulated. 
 The world of the twenty-first century cannot be 
governed with the institutions of the twentieth century. 
We are a century behind. Let today’s major Powers and 
the Powers of tomorrow unite to shoulder together the 
responsibilities their influence gives them in world 
affairs.  
 To all those who are hesitant, I wish to say that 
enlarging the Security Council and the G-8 is not just a 
matter of fairness, it is also a question of effectiveness. 
We can no longer wait to turn the G-8 into the G14 and 
to bring in China, India, South Africa, Mexico and 
Brazil. Italy is proposing a major step in that direction 
at the next summit, which it will host, and Italy is 
right. 
 Let us act to make our international institutions 
more representative, because if they are more 
representative they will be stronger, more effective and 
more respected. A new world is emerging not only 
through all our successes, but also through all the 
crises besetting the planet. However, we cannot receive 
that new world passively, we must build it. 
 Let us learn to manage together the most acute 
crises that no one, not even the most powerful among 
us, can resolve alone. I am convinced that it is the duty 
of the heads of State and Government of the countries 
most directly concerned to meet before the end of the 
year to examine together the lessons of the most 
serious financial crisis the world has experienced since 
that of the 1930s. Who would understand it if the 
world’s major economies should fail to take the time to 
meet to discuss what we must do together and the 
lessons we must draw from what has happened? 
 Let us rebuild together a regulated capitalism, in 
which entire swathes of financial activity are not left to 
the sole judgement of market operators; in which banks 
do their job; which is to finance economic development 
rather than to fuel speculation; in which rules of 
prudence apply to all and serve to avert and soften 
shocks instead of exacerbating them; in which the 
credit agencies are controlled and punished when 
necessary; in which transparency of transactions 
replaces such opacity that today it is difficult to 
understand what is happening; and in which modes of 
remuneration do not drive people to take unreasonable 
risks. It is my duty to say that those who jeopardize 
people’s savings should be punished and at last face up 
to their responsibilities. We will succeed in that on the 
condition that we work together. 
 In our globalized world, the fate of each is linked 
to that of all others. The negotiations on climate 
change, begun in Bali, will conclude in Copenhagen 
next year. Whatever our particular interests, we do not 
have the right to fail. 
 Europe will adopt an unprecedented raft of 
measures on energy and climate in December. Europe 
does not wish to teach lessons; it wishes to set an 
example. Europe also wishes to set the example by 
acting to bring about peace. It did so in Georgia. It did 
so with the Union for the Mediterranean. Because for 
over half a century Europe has undertaken to stop the 
endless cycle of war, vengeance and hate that has 
periodically taken it to the edge of the precipice, it 
does not want war. It does not want a war of 
civilizations. It does not want a war of religion. It does 
not want a cold war.  
 Europe wants peace, and because it wants peace 
it says to Russia that it wants links of solidarity with 
that country, that it wants to build a shared future, and 
that it wants to be Russia’s partner. Why not build a 
continent-wide common economic space that would 
unite Russia and Europe? However, Europe also says 
to Russia with the same sincerity that it cannot 
compromise on the principle of the sovereignty and 
independence of States, their territorial integrity or 
respect for international law. Europe’s message to all 
States is that it cannot accept the use of force to settle a 
dispute. 
  
 
08-51570 14 
 
 Europe says to Iran that it respects that country, 
that Iran has the right to civil nuclear energy and that it 
will explore all avenues of dialogue. However, it says 
to Iran with the same sincerity that it cannot accept a 
nuclear-armed Iran that would endanger the peace and 
stability of the whole region. Nor can Europe 
tolerate — and I say this solemnly — Iran calling for 
the destruction of the State of Israel. 
 Europe says to Israel that it is its friend and that it 
will let no one threaten its existence. Europe says to 
Israel that it will always be at its side in the fight 
against terrorism, but with the same sincerity says to 
telling Israel that there will be no peace until there is a 
viable Palestinian State with recognized borders. 
 Europe says to Afghanistan that it will continue 
to stand by it and that it will not permit barbarians 
allied with Al-Qaida again to take an entire people 
hostage and to turn an entire country into a terrorist 
base.  
 Europe says to Somalia that it will help it, with 
the support of the United Nations, to combat the 
scourge of piracy off its coasts. Until all States join 
together to establish a maritime police force, we cannot 
allow some hundreds of pirates to threaten the free 
passage of ships throughout the world. 
 Europe says to Africa that it is committed to 
co-development, that it wishes to be Africa’s privileged 
partner, and that it has a common destiny with Africa 
and a profound sense of solidarity. Europe says to 
Africa that it has its place among the permanent 
members of the Security Council and in the enlarged 
G-8. How can one ever hope to settle the great issues 
of the world while ignoring Africa, South America or a 
large part of Asia? Europe believes in the African 
renaissance, which is under way and, first and 
foremost, is in the hands of the Africans, particularly 
those of African youth, which is the youth of the world. 
 Essentially, what brings us here together in this 
forum, where everyone must listen to the others and 
thereby show them a form of respect, is something 
more basic even than democracy. What brings us 
together is respect for the dignity of all just as they are, 
and for diversity of their opinions, cultures and beliefs. 
Human dignity is a universal value. What we must 
promote everywhere is respect for that diversity, which 
is the surest guarantor of peace and human fraternity 
and the surest antidote to intolerance, hatred, violence, 
obscurantism and fanaticism. 
 That is what Europe wants: peoples united in 
respect, understanding and solidarity; peoples united 
throughout the world working together for the great 
common cause of safeguarding of humanity. Time is at 
a premium; the world cannot wait. It is humbling to 
stand before this great Assembly today. Events of 
recent weeks have proved beyond doubt that we are 
now in a new global age. Living through the first 
financial crisis and the first resources crisis of 
globalization, we are a world not simply in transition, 
but facing transformation, with change more far-
reaching than anything we have seen in our lifetimes. 
The challenges, the opportunities for us and the risks 
that we now face come together at the global 
crossroads of the United Nations, providing the focus 
for debate and decision here in this General Assembly 
Hall.  
 A predecessor of mine said that if one built the 
present only in the image of the past, one would miss 
out entirely on the challenges of the future. It is to 
those challenges of the future that I want to address my 
remarks today. 
 In the next two decades, our world economy will 
double in size. That means double the opportunities 
and potential for more businesses, more jobs and more 
prosperity. Extraordinary promise and opportunity 
await, but there are also wholly new insecurities and 
pressures — global problems that will require global 
solutions. 
 The twin shocks of a global credit crunch and 
soaring commodity prices lead straight to the front 
doors of every family in every country, with higher oil, 
gas and food prices, and higher costs for credit. But 
because it is a global financial crisis and a global 
shortage of food and resources, it will not be resolved 
simply by individual nations acting in isolation, 
although there is much that they can do themselves. It 
will be solved in the end by us acting together. 
 I want to talk about how we can work together to 
tackle financial instability and the intense pressure now 
on our finite world resources. The immediate priority is 
to help people everywhere cope with these difficult 
times and to do so fairly. That is why, in Britain, we 
have acted to help those hit hardest, assisting people 
with the costs of gas and electricity, supporting 
homeowners and the housing market and helping 
people acquire the skills to do the new jobs of the 
twenty-first century. 
 But if we have learned anything in the past few 
years about the world in which we are now living, it is 
that the world we share is more interconnected than 
ever before and that the solutions have to be similarly 
coordinated. 
 First, we must do all that it takes to stabilize the 
still turbulent financial markets and, in the months 
ahead, we must work together to rebuild the world 
financial system around clear principles. In the short 
term, each country is taking action to deal with the 
fallout of the credit crunch, and the United States of 
America deserves support from the rest of the world as 
it seeks to agree on in detail what all parties agree on 
in principle. 
 In Britain, we have taken decisive action to 
promote stability in our banking system, protecting 
depositors and introducing a temporary ban on short-
selling. We have already injected billions into the 
market, making in excess of £100 billion available, and 
announced only last week that our special liquidity 
scheme will be extended until the end of January next 
year. 
 Confidence in the future is also needed to build 
confidence today, and that confidence will be built by 
showing that what are global problems can be 
addressed by globally coordinated solutions. I believe 
there are five key principles behind that all nations 
should unite around as we examine the future of our 
financial system. 
 The first principle is that of transparency. People 
must know what they are buying and selling, and they 
must know what they are dealing with and not fear 
what might be hidden on each other’s books. We must 
look at the rapid introduction of improved 
internationally acceptable accounting standards and 
disclosure. 
 Secondly, there must be sound banking practice 
and more effective regulation that looks not just at 
solvency but at liquidity, at managing and pricing risks 
for bad times and for good times, together. 
 Thirdly, there must be responsibility. No member 
of senior management should be able to say he or she 
did not understand the risks they were running and 
walk away from his or her obligations. 
 Fourthly, there must be integrity. Most people 
agree that companies should align reward with stability 
and long-term gain because what matters is hard work, 
 
 
19 08-52272 
 
effort and enterprise. We should align the advice of 
credit-rating agencies with the interests of the 
investors. 
 Fifthly, just as banks are global and the flows of 
capital are global, so oversight can no longer just be 
national but must also include global supervision. That 
is why we want to work to support immediately the 
establishment of international colleges for each of the 
largest global financial institutions — 30 of them by 
the end of the year.  
 The international institutions built in the wake of 
the Second World War have not kept pace with the 
changing global economy. We need national regulators 
to be cooperative, rules and principles to be consistent, 
and international movements of capital to be 
transparent. 
 The current era has been one of global prosperity. 
It has also been an era of global turbulence, and while 
there has been irresponsibility, we must now say 
clearly that the age of irresponsibility must be ended. 
We must now build that new global financial order, 
founding it on transparency, not opacity; rewarding 
success, not excess; and responsibility, not impunity. 
That order must be global, not national. 
 Global action cannot be limited to financial 
stability. We must also address another problem of 
globalization — the global scramble for resources. We 
need global action to deal with high commodity prices 
and a rising global population demanding more energy. 
Only by taking tough decisions on energy security and 
climate change and by bringing together a new global 
partnership of oil producers and oil consumers can we 
bring stability to global energy markets and secure 
sustainable energy supplies for the long term. 
 We are committed to tackling the global 
challenge of climate change. Oil will of course 
continue to meet a large part of our global energy 
needs for some decades to come, but over the past year 
we have seen the price of oil rise to as high as $146 per 
barrel before falling again to $90 in the past month — 
a fall of nearly 40 per cent. Such high and volatile 
prices have a harmful impact on the global economy, 
and all countries surely have a shared interest in 
avoiding such dramatic swings in the price of scarce 
resources. 
 We must now therefore consider whether the 
current international architecture can bring the more 
transparent and stable energy markets this global 
economy clearly needs. We must bring producers and 
consumers together, build common understanding and 
address the issues through meaningful and sustained 
dialogue. At the end of this year, I will be hosting a 
global energy summit in London, building on the 
momentum generated in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, to agree 
on key areas for further action. It is only by acting 
together that we can make the most of the world’s 
scarce resources and harness the power of our greater 
interdependence for our common good. 
 Some say that in a time of difficulty we should 
look inwards and cut aid; that we have an excuse for 
walking by on the other side; and that, by our inaction, 
we tolerate famine — but in today’s world, there is no 
other side. 
 Africa is not part of the problem, but an 
indisputable part of the solution. It is only by helping 
Africa to become a net exporter of food rather than a 
net importer that we can hope to achieve a long-term 
end to soaring food prices. Only by restarting and 
seeing the trade talks through can we help our 
economies benefit from the annual boost of 
$150 billion that would be achieved by removing the 
protectionist trade barriers and trade-distorting 
subsidies that currently cost developing countries the 
most — $15 billion a year in their agricultural incomes 
alone. 
 As Governments and as nations, we must respond 
with courage and vision to the new insecurities that 
face people, because while the global changes 
happening all around us are complex, the instincts they 
summon up in people are not. We must resist those 
instincts that are protectionist. Now is not the time to 
pull up the drawbridge, to seek solace in isolation or to 
revert to an outdated and futile protectionism. It is only 
by maintaining our open, flexible and dynamic 
economies that we can best secure people’s jobs, 
homes and standards of living in a global age.  
 Our global institutions have always had a 
sweeping ambition, set up not against a single enemy 
but against poverty, conflict, injustice and intolerance, 
and set up in the belief that, for peace to last, 
prosperity must be shared. Now we must build on the 
idealism of the era that created those institutions and 
change and evolve those institutions to meet the 
challenges of the global age. This United Nations is 
where the world turns to confront some of its greatest 
  
 
08-52272 20 
 
challenges. It is where international law is made, where 
the most acute political problems are addressed, and 
where the hopes of the world for a better future 
ultimately rest. 
 For the past 40 years, it has been this United 
Nations that has been the key forum where the 
international community has sought peace in the 
Middle East, and it is the United Nations that must help 
the next Government of Israel build on the foundations 
laid by Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas to 
agree to a two-State solution that guarantees the 
security of Israel and gives the Palestinians a viable 
State. 
 In Cyprus, where the United Nations has been 
present for 30 years and more, we have a real chance of 
a settlement, thanks to new leadership, which has our 
support. 
 In Afghanistan, the International Security 
Assistance Force is training Afghans to take back their 
country after two generations of almost constant 
conflict. When the Afghan Government can deny its 
land to Al-Qaida and its associates, the international 
community will have done its job, but the task is hard 
and long. Progress is encouraging, but must be 
continued and stepped up. 
 In the Sudan, United Nations peacekeepers help 
keep the fragile North-South peace agreement in place, 
but Darfur remains for all of us a disaster. It is the 
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan to create 
the conditions in Darfur that will allow the conflict to 
end and a new deal for the people of Darfur to be put in 
place. Justice has to be part of any sustainable peace. 
 Difficulty has never daunted the United Nations. 
Where we are rebuffed, we are resolute, so we must 
also send a powerful signal of our support for 
democracy and human rights in Zimbabwe. We must 
stand firm against oppression in Burma. We must, as 
we did yesterday, reaffirm the practical measures that 
underpin our determination to defeat poverty. Now 
would be the worst time to turn our back on the 
Millennium Development Goals. 
 We have reached a unique point in the world’s 
history. For the first time in human history, we have the 
opportunity to come together around a global covenant, 
to reframe the international architecture to make it fit 
for the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century, 
and to build the first truly global society and global 
citizenship. Our history is not our destiny, it is what we 
choose to make it. 
 Let us resolve today to end any irresponsibility, 
to protect the global public interest by cleaning up the 
world’s financial system and to reaffirm our 
commitment to meeting our global responsibilities on 
trade, poverty, energy and climate change, and let us 
act upon that as people, as Governments, as nations 
united. Let history record that ours was a truly global 
response to the first truly global crisis.May I first congratulate you, 
Sir, on your election as President of the Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I am sure that your wisdom and 
vast experience will guide us as we deliberate the many 
challenges that the world faces today. 
 The United Nations is the embodiment of our 
faith in the benefits of collective action and of 
multilateral approaches in resolving global issues. At 
the 2005 World Summit we pledged ourselves to an 
agenda for early and meaningful reform of the United 
Nations. However, we must acknowledge frankly that 
there has been little progress on the core elements of 
the reform agenda. 
 We need to make more determined efforts to 
revitalize the General Assembly to enable it to fulfil its 
rightful role as the principal deliberative organ of the 
United Nations system. The composition of the 
Security Council needs to change to reflect 
contemporary realities of the twenty-first century. Only 
a truly representative and revitalized United Nations 
can become the effective focal point for the 
cooperative efforts of the world community. We need 
to expeditiously hold negotiations towards this end. 
 Globalization has contributed to ever-widening 
circles of prosperity, and we in India have also 
benefited from it. But its benefits have not been 
equitably distributed. Ensuring inclusive growth within 
nations, and inclusive globalization across nations, is a 
central challenge facing us all. 
 The development gains that many countries have 
made are today threatened by a possible food crisis, a 
global energy crisis and, most recently, unprecedented 
upheavals in international financial markets. 
 The net impact of these problems is that both the 
industrialized economies and the developing 
economies face inflation and a slowdown in growth 
after several years of robust expansion. Industrialized 
countries can afford periods of slow growth. 
Developing countries cannot. There is therefore an 
urgent need for coordinated action by the global 
community on several fronts. 
 The explosion of financial innovation 
unaccompanied by credible systemic regulation has 
made the financial system vulnerable. The resulting 
crisis of confidence threatens global prosperity in the 
increasingly interdependent world in which we all live. 
There is, therefore, a need for a new international 
initiative to bring structural reform in the world’s 
financial system, with more effective regulation and 
 
 
9 08-52265 
 
stronger systems of multilateral consultations and 
surveillance. This must be designed in as inclusive a 
manner as possible. 
 The world food crisis is the cumulative 
consequence of the neglect of agriculture in the 
developing world, exacerbated by distortionary 
agricultural subsidies in the developed world. 
Diversion of cultivable land for producing biofuels is 
compounding the problem. 
 The world needs a second green revolution to 
address the problem of food security. We need new 
technologies, new institutional responses and above all 
a global compact to ensure food and livelihood 
security. This will require transfer of technology and 
innovation from developed to developing countries. 
India is very keen to expand cooperation with Africa in 
Africa’s quest for food and livelihood security for its 
people. 
 Trade liberalization in agriculture can help, 
provided it adequately takes into account the livelihood 
concerns of poor and vulnerable farmers in the 
developing and least developed countries. 
 It is feared that many of the conflicts of the 
twenty-first century will be over water. We must 
therefore reflect on how to use this scarce resource 
most efficiently. We need to invest in new technologies 
and new production regimes for rain-fed and dryland 
agriculture and explore cost-effective desalination 
technologies. 
 Poverty, ignorance and disease still afflict 
millions and millions of people. The commitment to 
achieve the ambitious targets set as part of the 
Millennium Development Goals was an 
acknowledgement by the international community that 
global prosperity and welfare are indivisible and that 
affluence cannot coexist with pervasive poverty. 
 Unfortunately, solemn commitments made for the 
transfer of financial resources from the developed to 
the developing world have remained largely 
unfulfilled. The commitment of developed countries to 
move to the target set long ago of 0.7 per cent of gross 
national income as official development assistance 
needs to be honoured as a matter of priority. In this 
context, special efforts have to be made to address the 
concerns of Africa for adequate resource flows to 
support its development. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
closely linked to energy security. We need a much 
greater measure of predictability and stability in the oil 
and gas markets. We need to think of ways and means, 
such as early warning mechanisms, to help countries 
cope with oil shocks. 
 We must put in place a global cooperative 
network of institutions of developed and developing 
countries engaged in research and development in 
energy efficiency, clean energy technologies, and 
renewable sources of energy. 
 India is registering rapid economic growth, and 
has combined it with declining energy intensity of its 
economy. However, our total demand will keep 
increasing, and we are actively looking for all possible 
sources of clean energy. 
 The opening of international civil nuclear 
cooperation with India will have a positive impact on 
global energy security and on the efforts to combat 
climate change. This is a vindication of India’s 
impeccable record on non-proliferation and testifies to 
our long-standing commitment to nuclear disarmament 
that is global, universal and non-discriminatory in 
nature. The blueprint for this was spelled out by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in this very Assembly 20 years 
ago. 
 I reiterate India’s proposal for a nuclear weapons 
convention prohibiting the development, production, 
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and providing 
for their complete elimination within a specified time 
frame. 
 Climate change can be overcome successfully 
only through a collaborative and cooperative global 
effort. 
 We support the multilateral negotiations now 
taking place under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. The outcome must be 
fair and equitable and recognize the principle that each 
citizen of the world has equal entitlement to the global 
atmospheric space. 
 I believe that the pursuit of ecologically 
sustainable development need not be in contradiction 
to achieving our growth objectives. As Mahatma 
Gandhi once said, “The earth has enough resources to 
meet people’s needs, but will never have enough to 
satisfy people’s greed.”  
  
 
08-52265 10 
 
 India has unveiled an ambitious national action 
plan on climate change. Even as we pursue economic 
growth, we are committed to our per capita emissions 
of greenhouse gases not exceeding those of the 
developed countries. 
 The growing assertion of separate identities and 
ethnic, cultural and religious intolerance threaten our 
developmental efforts and our peace and stability. It is 
vital that we strengthen international cooperation to 
combat terrorism and to bring the perpetrators, 
organizers, financers and sponsors of terrorism to 
justice. We should conclude expeditiously the draft 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 In this context, the situation in Afghanistan is a 
matter of deep concern. The international community 
must pool all its resources to ensure the success of 
Afghanistan’s reconstruction efforts and its emergence 
as a moderate, pluralistic and democratic society. 
 We welcome the return of democracy in Pakistan. 
We are committed to resolving all outstanding issues 
between India and Pakistan, including the issue of 
Jammu and Kashmir, through peaceful dialogue. 
 We also welcome the coming to power of 
democratically elected Governments in Nepal and 
Bhutan. We seek to expand areas of cooperation with 
all these countries to deal with the challenges of 
sustainable development and poverty eradication. 
 The United Nations is a living symbol of 
pluralism. It has weathered many storms. It is the 
vehicle through which our combined will and efforts to 
address global challenges must be articulated and 
implemented. Unless we rise to the task, we will 
bequeath to succeeding generations a world of 
diminishing prospects. Over 60 years have passed 
since the General Assembly voted on the historic 
resolution that would have put an end to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Resolution 181 (II) called for the 
establishment of a Jewish State and an Arab State. Its 
title was: “Plan of Partition with Economic Union”. It 
envisioned two States for two peoples, fulfilling a 
distinct national aspiration. The Jewish people adopted 
the resolution and established the State of Israel. The 
Arabs rejected it, and this led to war. 
 What happened in the ensuing years is much 
different from the resolution’s original intent. While 
much has changed since then, the ironies of history 
summon similar circumstances today. Today, again, we 
are in the middle of the lake. There is no sense going 
back. Continuing forward will show how near we are 
to achieving the initial goal. 
 A year prior to Israel’s declaration of statehood, 
its first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, called me, 
a young man from a kibbutz, to serve in our national 
defence. Since then, I have participated in Israel’s 
dynamic realities: the building of security; the striving 
for peace. So, I need no books to learn the history, 
since I witnessed its miraculous unfolding. We went 
through seven wars. All have paid heavily. Tears still 
flow down the faces of bereaved mothers. 
Remembrance days fill the air with silent prayers of 
widowed families who lost young boys and girls in 
battle. They are, today, the same age, but lifeless.  
 Israel turned military victories into peace 
processes, knowing that the cost of life renders 
imperfect peace superior to perfect victories. 
 We have also achieved two peace agreements: the 
first, with the largest Arab country, Egypt; the second, 
with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. All the land, 
all the water, all the natural resources that fell into our 
hands through war were completely repatriated after 
peace was signed.  
 But for peace, the call in our region is to repair 
the damaged environment and the wounded land which 
leads to poverty. If we do not overcome the desert, the 
thirst, the pollution, they will overcome us. Joint 
 
 
33 08-51749 
 
ventures can meet this call. Nature does not carry a 
national passport. 
 With the Palestinians, we negotiate full peace. 
Both parties agreed to building a Palestinian State side 
by side with Israel, living in peace, security and 
respect. We tried to conclude those negotiations this 
year. Apparently, this will take a longer time. I believe 
it can be accomplished, in spite of this, within the next 
year. 
 I know that our Prime Minister is more than 
ready to conclude an agreement. And knowing 
President Abbas as well, I am sure he will not miss this 
opportunity. We agreed to progress in spite of possible 
changes that may take place in the leadership. Gaps 
have been narrowed through negotiations, particularly, 
and hopefully, the territorial ones. 
 But peace is not just a matter of territorial 
compromise. Rogue politics rejects peace even when 
and where territorial disputes have been resolved. In 
Lebanon, we implemented the resolutions of the United 
Nations, but Hizbullah paralysed the country and cut 
the road to peace. 
 From Gaza, we withdrew completely and 
dismantled all of our settlements. I know there are a 
great many complaints about the settlements: in Gaza, 
we dismantled 30 settlements by order of the 
Government; Hamas responded with a bloody takeover 
and turned the Strip into a base for rocket fire. 
 These militants offer no positive alternative but 
the agonies of Job. They added kidnapping to 
bombings, bringing strife to innocent families. From 
this rostrum, I call for the immediate release of Gilad 
Shalit, the son of Aviva and Noam, a most peace-loving 
family. This Assembly should place the release of that 
person at the top of its priorities. Holding a hostage in 
Gaza, causes Gaza’s isolation and could cause further 
deterioration. 
 At the centre of this violence and fanaticism 
stands Iran. It presents a danger to the entire world. Its 
quest for religious hegemony and regional dominance 
divides the Middle East and holds back chances for 
peace, including among Arabs, while undermining 
human rights. 
 Iranian support for Hizbullah divides Lebanon. 
Its support for Hamas splits the Palestinians; it 
postpones the establishment of the Palestinian State. 
Yesterday, from this very rostrum, the Iranian leader 
renewed the darkest anti-Semitic libel — the 
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion” — bringing to life 
one of the ugliest plots against the Jewish people. Their 
despicable denial of the Holocaust is a mockery of 
indisputable evidence and a cynical offence against the 
survivors of the Holocaust, contrary to the resolutions 
adopted by this very Assembly. 
 Iran continues to develop enriched uranium and 
long-range missiles. It has introduced a religion of fear, 
opposing the call of the Lord to respect human life: all 
humans; all life. The Iranian people are not our 
enemies. Their fanatical leadership is their problem 
and the world’s woe. Their leader is a danger to his 
own people, to the region and to the world. He is a 
disgrace to the ancient Iranian people and tradition. He 
is a disgrace to the values of Islam and all religions. He 
is a disgrace to this House, the United Nations, and its 
basic principles and values. His appearance here is a 
shame.  
 The Jewish people have known throughout 
history that they must stand firm and face evil. 
Enlightened humanity should make it possible for 
freedom and respect to prevail for all of us.  
 Tehran combines long-range missiles with short-
range minds. It is pregnant with tragedies. The General 
Assembly and the Security Council bear the 
responsibility to prevent agonies before they take 
place.  
 Israel has shown that democracies can defend 
themselves. We are able to defend ourselves. We do not 
intend to change that capacity to defend ourselves.  
 Terrorism has not solved a single problem. It 
never has; it never will. It will make the world 
ungovernable. If groups of killers are allowed to 
threaten innocent masses, the world — if it continues 
to survive — will be without order and security, a 
hopeless battleground. The free world must unite to 
stop this, to combat it. 
 Israel, for its part, shall continue to seek peace 
sincerely and fully. We suggest immediate peace with 
Lebanon. Israeli Prime Ministers have indicated to 
Syria that, for peace, we are ready to explore a 
comprehensive compromise. To gain trust and save 
time, we have suggested a face-to-face meeting with 
President Assad. I say to the President: “Follow the 
successful example set by President Sadat and King 
Hussein”. We await an answer. 
  
 
08-51749 34 
 
 I know there is a growing concern that peace is 
far away. My lifelong experience provides me with a 
different judgement. True, I have seen stagnation, 
regression and failure in our journey, but today I can 
identify a road leading in the right direction. In 
addition to the peace agreements, a series of summits 
have taken place: Madrid, Oslo, Wye, Camp David, 
Sharm el-Sheik, Annapolis. In fact, Israelis and Arabs 
are marching towards peace. After a long internal 
debate, Israel has chosen to support the two-State 
solution. 
 Furthermore, I must say that in Beirut, the Arab 
League replaced the three “nays” of Khartoum — 
which were no peace, no negotiation, no recognition — 
with an initiative inaugurated by King Abdullah Bin 
Abdulaziz Al Saud. I call upon the King to further his 
initiative. It may become an invitation for 
comprehensive peace — one to transform a 
battleground into a common ground. 
 I respectfully invite all leaders to come to discuss 
peace in Jerusalem — which is holy to all of us — 
where all of us are praying to the same Lord as 
offspring of the same Father. Israel shall gladly accept 
an Arab invitation to designate a venue where a 
meaningful dialogue may take place at their choice. 
 We are facing a serious economic crisis in the 
world. Perhaps it has happened because we are rich and 
light with funds and poor and heavy with ideas, while 
we live in an era in which science, not land, is the basis 
for a successful economy. Science does not stop at 
borders; it is not disturbed by distances. Wisdom 
cannot be conquered by armies. Knowledge diminishes 
discrimination because it operates through goodwill 
and transcends race, nationality, colour and gender. 
 The global dangers unite and divide us at the 
same time. The dangers are clear: degradation of the 
environment, shortage of water, lack of renewable 
energy, the spread of terrorism and, alas, increased 
poverty among millions and millions of people. The 
divisions of the free world may increase them. Unity 
may offer alternatives. It would direct global 
investments to new areas and to demanding challenges 
such as health, security, education and the 
environment. 
 The future is not in the hands of oil or gold. 
Intellectual assets, new inventions and superior 
education hold the key to the future of each of us. In 
our region, border areas could become open economic 
zones, permitting the free movement of people, 
commodities and ideas. They could encourage tourism 
and build high-tech incubators. They could cultivate 
and advance modern agriculture. Economic zones 
would provide a million jobs and produce billions of 
cubic metres of desalinated water for the Arabs, for the 
Palestinians, for the Jordanians, for Israel — for all of 
us. We have already started to do this; the initial steps 
are promising. 
 The Jewish people are celebrating a New Year. I 
would like to end with a quote by Rabbi Nachman of 
Breslav: 
 “May it be thy will to remove war and bloodshed 
from the world and perpetuate the wonders and 
greatness of peace. All the inhabitants of the 
world shall recognize and know the truth: that we 
have not been placed on this earth to wage war 
and not for hatred or bloodshed.” 
I will repeat it in Hebrew. 
 (The speaker repeated the quote in Hebrew)Sixty-three years 
after its formation, the United Nations remains the 
world’s central international body. Only here do all 
countries come together to devise solutions and to 
forge collective action on global challenges. And these 
are particularly challenging times. As the Secretary-
General and many others have noted, we are facing a 
global financial crisis, a global energy crisis and a 
global food crisis. More than ever before, we are an 
interconnected and interdependent world community. 
The Charter goals of peace and prosperity require the 
full support of all United Nations Members. New 
Zealand was a founding member in 1945, and our 
commitment to this body is as strong now as it was 
then. 
 At such a difficult time in the world we need 
leadership, courage and a recommitment of our 
resources to tackle the issues before us. When the food 
crisis was first in the headlines, the Secretary-
General’s High-Level Task Force provided a 
mechanism for us all to respond. Having contributed 
nearly $NZ 10 million to date, New Zealand is among 
those assisting with urgent food security needs and 
medium-term policy responses. A successful 
conclusion of the Doha Development Round would 
alleviate much of the pressure on the demand-supply 
imbalance. 
 On the development theme of this sixty-third 
session, New Zealand fully associates with the 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Global Call to 
Action Campaign. Support is urgently needed to 
revitalize collective efforts, including developing and 
strengthening partnerships between traditional and new 
donors, the private sector and civil society, and through 
South-South cooperation. We are set to play our part. 
 New Zealand is significantly stepping up official 
development assistance (ODA) from 0.27 per cent of 
gross national income in 2007 to 0.35 per cent by 
2010-2011. That 62 per cent increase will take New 
Zealand aid to over $NZ 600 million. 
 We are acutely aware that the Pacific is the 
second region after sub-Saharan Africa that is least 
likely to meet the MDG targets. We are therefore 
looking to direct our increased ODA there, through a 
Pacific strategy, which focuses poverty reduction 
efforts around four key pillars: strengthening 
governance, achieving broader-based growth and 
sustainable livelihoods, improving health and 
education, and reducing vulnerabilities, including to 
climate change. 
 In these challenging times, we look to the United 
Nations to deliver effectively for development, for 
peace and security and on human rights. Our 
Organization must continue to evolve along with the 
changing demands on it. Momentum needs to be 
maintained in the modernization of the United Nations. 
We share the Secretary-General’s vision for that and 
support his proposals to fix the human resources 
management system, which he has characterized as 
dysfunctional. 
 I would now like to turn to the challenges of 
peace and security around the world, from which our 
own region is not immune. At the Pacific Islands 
Forum held in Niue last month, New Zealand and other 
members of the Pacific Forum community expressed 
profound disappointment at Fiji’s lack of progress 
towards restoring democratic government. The Forum 
communiqué urged the interim regime in Fiji to fulfil 
  
 
08-53141 26 
 
its promise to hold elections in accordance with Fiji’s 
existing constitution by March next year. Leaders also 
acknowledged that there were long-term issues to be 
resolved in Fiji and supported a Commonwealth-led 
independent and inclusive political dialogue process to 
address them. That will not only create a more 
conducive environment for elections, but also enable a 
newly elected Government to engage with key 
stakeholders to promote national reconciliation. New 
Zealand urges all United Nations Members to support 
the steps taken by the Pacific Islands Forum to 
encourage Fiji to return to democratic and 
constitutional government as soon as possible. 
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Our region is also home to Timor-Leste, a partner 
and friend of New Zealand. We are pleased to see 
encouraging progress since last year’s elections, 
especially the building of institutions and improving 
governance. That was achieved despite assassination 
attempts on Timor-Leste’s leadership. The United 
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) 
and the International Stabilization Force continue to 
play a valuable role in helping to maintain security. 
New Zealand strongly supports the UNMIT mandate 
and its extension beyond February 2009. Planning for 
security in the longer term, to ensure appropriately 
sized and resourced institutions with clearly delineated 
roles and responsibilities, is also a key issue, and we 
stand ready to help. 
 Also within our region, the political, economic 
and human rights situation in Myanmar remains 
troubling. We urge the Myanmar authorities to achieve 
national reconciliation through open and constructive 
dialogue and to respect universal human rights in the 
country, consistent with international obligations. We 
support the efforts of the United Nations to sustain a 
dialogue with the Myanmar Government in order to 
build foundations for the future. 
 On the African continent, the humanitarian 
disaster caused by the conflict in Darfur is 
unacceptable. The targeting of civilians by State and 
non-State parties, is a flagrant breach of international 
human rights law. The widespread absence of justice 
and accountability for such human rights violations and 
the impunity that this promotes represent major 
obstacles to improving the human rights situation in 
Darfur. 
 In the case of Zimbabwe, the recent 
announcement of a power-sharing agreement offers 
hope that the long period of violent repression and 
human rights abuses by the previous Government can 
be brought to a close. The international community 
will be watching closely to see that all parties fulfil the 
commitments that they have made to bring about 
peace, respect for political freedom and human rights 
and a Government which reflects the will of the 
people. 
 Let me turn now to the Middle East. New 
Zealand continues to be strongly supportive of all 
attempts to find a lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. We share the international community’s vision 
for a viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian 
State, existing side by side in peace and security with 
the State of Israel. 
 In Afghanistan, despite political progress, the 
overall situation is fragile. The international 
community needs to devote more resources to ending 
the conflict and to assisting the people of Afghanistan 
in their efforts to stabilize and rebuild their country. 
New Zealand has expressed a strong commitment to 
restoring peace and security in Afghanistan with our 
assistance, both military and developmental, totalling 
more than 160 million New Zealand dollars to date. 
 Closer to home, New Zealand welcomes the 
recent improvement in cross-Strait relations. Cross-
Strait stability is vital to the security of the greater 
Asia-Pacific region. We encourage China and Taiwan 
to maintain the dialogue which has been established. 
 New Zealand remains a strong supporter of 
efforts to protect and maintain the international rule of 
law. To that end, one of the most significant advances 
in recent times has been the establishment of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). When the ICC was 
first established, it was widely considered to herald the 
beginning of a new era in international criminal justice. 
The Court has now reached a crucial stage in its 
development, and it has become clear that the 
establishment of a global justice system brings with it 
many challenges. It is of the utmost importance that 
States rise to those challenges. To fail to do so would 
be a betrayal of the victims of egregious crimes. New 
Zealand urges States to make every effort to ensure the 
independence and success of the Court. The Court 
needs our full support and cooperation to ensure that 
individuals responsible for the most serious violations 
 
 
27 08-53141 
 
of international law are brought to justice without 
delay. 
 In this sixtieth anniversary year of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, we acknowledge the 
many international human rights conventions that have 
arisen out of that unique statement of overriding 
principles. New Zealand played an active part in the 
design of the new Human Rights Council, and we are 
seeking election to the Council next year, so as to be 
more closely involved in its work. 
 The newest member of the family of human 
rights treaties is the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, which New Zealand ratified 
this month. We look forward to the first conference of 
States parties, and to the opportunity the Convention 
offers to make a real improvement in the lives and 
human rights of disabled people everywhere. 
 Finally, let me reiterate the importance that New 
Zealand attaches to the concept of the responsibility to 
protect. The United Nations, through the Security 
Council, should be prepared to protect people against 
ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes and crimes 
against humanity when national authorities fail to do 
so. There is a clear need to enhance early warning 
systems to enable the Council to act in a timely 
manner. We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General on the responsibility to protect, and we stand 
ready to help to take that important initiative forward. 
 As we look forward to the year ahead, New 
Zealand pledges to work actively with others in our 
collective stewardship of the United Nations. We shall 
play our part in the continuing, patient process of 
renewing our Organization and of making it more 
resilient and responsive. On 11 September 2001, the world changed, 
and it rallied together in the fight against the threat of 
terror, a threat that was common for all and knew no 
boundaries. I am referring to threat of terrorism. The 
world displayed an unprecedented level of solidarity by 
rejecting old phobias and stereotypes. It seemed that 
the global counter-terrorism coalition became a new 
reality that from then on would define the development 
of a system of international relations free from double 
standards and beneficial to all. 
 The cohesion in the face of the deadly threats 
emerging from Al-Qaida and other elements of 
international terrorism made it possible to achieve 
tangible success during the initial stage. But later, 
problems began to appear. A painful blow to the unity 
of the anti-terrorism coalition was delivered by the war 
in Iraq, when — as it turned out later, under the false 
pretext of the fight against terror and nuclear arms 
proliferation — international law was violated. The 
deepest crisis was thus created in a completely 
artificial way and even today it is far from being 
resolved. 
 Ever more questions are being raised about what 
is going on in Afghanistan. First and foremost, what is 
the acceptable price to pay in terms of the loss of 
civilians’ lives in the ongoing counter-terrorism 
operation? Who decides on criteria for determining 
proportionality in the use of force? And why are the 
international contingents that are present unwilling to 
engage in the fight against the proliferating drug threat 
that causes increasing suffering in the countries of 
Central Asia and Europe? These and other factors give 
us reason to believe that the counter-terrorism coalition 
is faced with a crisis.  
 Looking at the core of the problem, it seems that 
this coalition lacks the requisite collective 
arrangements: equality among all its members in 
deciding on strategy and, especially, operational 
tactics. But in order to control the entirely new 
situation that evolved after 9/11, which required 
genuine cooperative effort, including joint analysis and 
coordination of practical steps, mechanisms designed 
for a unipolar world began to be used; decisions were 
taken in a single centre of power, while the rest merely 
had to follow. 
 We ended up with a privatization of the 
international community’s efforts in the fight against 
terrorism. The inertia of the unipolar world also 
revealed itself in other spheres of international life, 
including unilateral steps taken in anti-missile defence 
and the militarization of outer space as well as in 
attempts to bypass parity in arms control regimes, 
expansion of political-military blocs, and politicization 
  
 
08-53129 2 
 
of the issues of access to and transport of energy 
resources. 
 The illusion of the existence of a unipolar world 
confused many. For some people, it generated a desire 
to place all of their eggs in one basket. In exchange for 
absolute loyalty, there was an expectation of carte 
blanche to resolve all problems, using any means. The 
emerging syndrome of complete permissiveness that 
developed led to a rampage on the night of 8 August, 
when aggression was unleashed on South Ossetia. The 
bombing of the sleeping city of Tskhinvali and the 
killing of civilians and peacekeepers trampled under 
foot all existing settlement agreements, thus putting an 
end to the territorial integrity of Georgia. 
 Russia helped South Ossetia to repel that 
aggression, and carried out its duty to protect its 
citizens and fulfil its peacekeeping commitments. 
Russia’s recognition of the independence of South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia was the only possible step to 
ensure not only their security, but also the very survival 
of their peoples, considering the previous record of 
chauvinism of the Georgian leaders — starting with the 
Georgian leader Zviad Gamsakhurdia who, in 1991, 
under the slogan of “Georgia for Georgians”, ordered 
the deportation of Ossetians to Russia, abolished the 
autonomous status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and 
later unleashed a bloody war against them.  
 That war was brought to an end at the cost of 
innumerable human lives, and peacekeeping and 
negotiation mechanisms were established with the 
approval of the United Nations and the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
However, the current Georgian leadership has pursued 
a persistent policy of undermining those mechanisms 
through relentless provocation, and finally nullified the 
peace process by launching a new murderous war on 
the night of 8 August. 
 This problem is now closed. The future of the 
peoples of Abkhazia and South Ossetia has been 
reliably secured by the treaties between Moscow and 
Tskhinvali and Sukhumi. With the implementation of 
the Medvedev-Sarkozy plan, to which we are strongly 
committed, the situation around the two republics will 
finally be stabilized. It is important that this plan 
should be strictly and unswervingly implemented by all 
parties. We are concerned, however, by the attempts to 
rewrite it after the fact. 
 I believe that everyone here has tired of playing 
the role of extras for the Georgian regime, whose 
words contain not a shred of truth and whose foreign 
policy is aimed exclusively at provoking confrontation 
throughout the world in the pursuit of their own 
objectives which invariably run counter to the 
objectives of the Georgian people and to the goal of 
ensuring security in the Caucasus. 
 Today, it is necessary to analyse the crisis in the 
Caucasus from the viewpoint of its impact on the 
region and the international community as a whole. 
The world has changed yet again. It has become 
absolutely clear that the solidarity demonstrated after 
9/11 must be revived through approaches untainted by 
geopolitical expediency and built on the rejection of 
double standards when fighting against any violations 
or breaches of international law — whether on the part 
of terrorists, political extremists or any others. 
 The crisis in the Caucasus has proved again that 
it is impossible to resolve the problems we face when 
blinded by the mirage of a unipolar world. The price 
we will have to pay in terms of human lives and 
destinies is too high. We cannot tolerate any attempts 
to resolve conflict situations by violating international 
agreements or by the unlawful use of force. If we allow 
that to occur once, then we run the risk of unleashing it 
in the future. 
 One cannot invoke the duty to defend in the 
abstract, and then be outraged when that principle is 
used in practice — and in strict conformity with Article 
51 of the United Nations Charter and other norms of 
international law. In South Ossetia, Russia defended 
the highest of our common values, the most essential 
human right: the right to live.  
 The existing security architecture in Europe did 
not pass the test of recent events. Attempts to adjust it 
to the rules of a unipolar world led to a situation where 
that architecture proved incapable of containing an 
aggressor or  preventing the supply of offensive 
weapons to it, contrary to all existing relevant codes of 
conduct. 
 We propose that this issue should be addressed in 
a comprehensive manner. President Dmitry 
A. Medvedev, of Russia, speaking in Berlin on 5 June, 
proposed an initiative on developing a Euro-Atlantic 
security treaty, a type of “Helsinki II”. This work could 
have been started at the Pan-European summit with the 
 
 
3 08-53129 
 
participation of all States as well as all organizations 
working in the region. 
 The treaty which we are proposing is meant to 
create a reliable collective security system that would 
ensure equal security for all States and set out, in 
legally binding form, the bases of relations among all 
participants, with a view to strengthening peace, 
ensuring stability and promoting integrated and 
manageable development efforts across the vast Euro-
Atlantic region. This would be a process in which all 
parties would reaffirm their commitment to 
fundamental principles of international law, such as the 
non-use of force; peaceful settlement of disputes; 
sovereignty; territorial integrity; non-interference in 
internal affairs; and the inadmissibility of 
strengthening one’s own security by infringing upon or 
endangering the security of others. We also need to 
consider together new mechanisms to ensure 
compliance with those fundamental principles. 
Naturally, such a treaty should organically fit into the 
legal framework of the United Nations Charter and its 
principles of collective security. 
 The cold war distorted the nature of international 
relations and turned them into an arena for ideological 
confrontation. Only now, after the cold war has ended, 
can the United Nations, created on the basis of a 
polycentric vision of the world, fully realize its 
potential. Today as never before, it is important that all 
States reaffirm their commitment to the United Nations 
as a global forum, to which there is no alternative and 
which possesses a universal mandate and generally 
recognized legitimacy, and as a centre for open, candid 
and frank debate and coordination of world policies on 
a just and equitable basis free from double standards. 
This is an essential requirement to ensure that the 
world regains its equilibrium. 
 The multitude of challenges that humanity is 
facing require comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations. In order to keep up with the times, the 
United Nations requires further rational reform to be 
able to gradually adapt itself to existing political and 
economic realities. On the whole, we are satisfied by 
the progress of the reform, including the initial results 
of the activities of the recently established 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council.  
 With regard to expansion of the membership of 
the Security Council, we will, of course, welcome 
proposals that do not divide United Nations Member 
States but rather facilitate the search for mutually 
acceptable compromises and lead to a broad-based 
agreement. 
 Of increasing importance in the reform process is 
the promotion of dialogue and partnership among 
civilizations. Russia supports the Alliance of 
Civilizations and other initiatives in that regard. We 
reiterate our proposal that a consultative council of 
religions be established under United Nations auspices, 
taking into account the increasing role of the religious 
aspect in international life. That would assist in 
strengthening moral principles and incorporating them 
into international affairs.  
 Among the priorities of United Nations activities, 
a number of urgent issues have recently appeared on 
the Organization’s agenda, including climate change 
and food and energy security. Those problems are 
global and interrelated, and they can be addressed and 
resolved only through a global partnership at a 
qualitatively new level, with active involvement by 
Governments, the scientific and business communities 
and civil society. 
 In particular, the current financial crisis requires 
urgent attention and synergy of efforts. From this 
rostrum, the President of France has put forward 
important initiatives aimed at a cooperative search for 
ways to revitalize the international financial system 
that involve the world’s leading economies. In that 
context, we support the further development of 
partnerships between the members of the Group of 
Eight and key States in all developing regions. The 
Economic and Social Council could also play a role 
here. Russia will continue to participate responsibly in 
the work of various bodies of the United Nations 
system and in other contexts to help find an equitable 
solution to all those problems. 
 The international development assistance 
mechanisms being established in Russia will help us to 
increase the extent and effectiveness of our 
participation in international efforts to fight hunger and 
disease, to promote broader access to education and to 
overcome energy shortages, which will be our 
additional contribution to the achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals. It is only natural that, 
in so doing, we should pay particular attention to 
assisting nearby countries. All countries have partners 
with which they share traditional friendly relations 
  
 
08-53129 4 
 
based on a common history and geography. It is wrong 
to artificially undermine such relationships for the 
benefit of geopolitical schemes and against the will of 
the people.  
 We will continue to work together with all our 
neighbours. First and foremost, along with the other 
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
we will continue to develop the integration processes 
within the Collective Security Treaty Organization and 
the Eurasian Economic Community in order to 
preserve and promote our common heritage of culture 
and civilization, which, in a globalizing world, is a 
major resource of the Commonwealth and of each of its 
member States. That is why we have a particular 
interest in cooperating with those countries, and it is 
also why they view Russia as an area of special 
interest. We will therefore base our relations on the 
principles of equality, mutual benefit, respect for and 
consideration of one another’s interests and compliance 
with existing agreements, in particular those on the 
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is also the way in 
which we intend to develop our relations in other 
regions of the world: openly, on the basis of 
international law and without any zero-sum games. 
Those principles were set out in the foreign policy 
concept approved by President Medvedev in July this 
year.  
 Russia is consistently implementing its network 
diplomacy and promoting cooperation in various 
formats: the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the 
BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India and China — 
partnership mechanisms with the European Union, the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of 
Arab States and regional organizations in Latin 
America. 
 The developments that occurred in August gave 
us yet another occasion to think about the 
responsibility to report events accurately. Distortions 
of reality hamper international efforts to settle conflicts 
and crises and revive the worst practices of the cold-
war era. If we wish to prevent the truth from becoming 
the first casualty of war, we must draw the appropriate 
conclusions, in particular in the light of a provision of 
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International 
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation 
among States in accordance with the Charter of the 
United Nations, which states that States have the duty 
to refrain from propaganda for wars of aggression. 
That is in line with the Guidelines on protecting 
freedom of expression and information in times of 
crisis, recently adopted by the Committee of Ministers 
of the Council of Europe. I propose that the United 
Nations also issue a statement on that issue, this time 
in a universal context.  
 The obvious global effects of the crisis in the 
Caucasus show that the world has changed for 
everyone. There are now fewer illusions and fewer 
pretexts for refusing to respond to the most urgent 
challenges of modern times. That is precisely why we 
hope that the international community will, on the 
basis of common sense, finally manage to develop a 
programme of collective action for the twenty-first 
century. I am pleased to be here to 
address the General Assembly. Sixty-three years ago, 
representatives from around the world gathered in San 
Francisco to complete the founding of the Charter of 
the United Nations. They met in the shadow of a 
devastating war, with grave new dangers on the 
horizon. They agreed on a historic pledge to reaffirm 
faith in fundamental human rights and unite their 
strength to maintain international peace and security. 
That noble pledge has endured trying hours in United 
Nations history, and it still guides our work today.  
 
 
9 08-51570 
 
 Yet the ideals of the Charter are now facing a 
challenge as serious as any since the United Nations 
founding: a global movement of violent extremists. By 
deliberately murdering the innocent to advance their 
aims, those extremists defy the fundamental principles 
of international order. They show contempt for all who 
respect life and value human dignity. They reject the 
words of the Bible, the Koran, the Torah or any 
standard of conscience of morality. They imperil the 
values of justice and human rights that gave birth to the 
United Nations — values that have fuelled an 
unprecedented expansion of freedom across the world.  
 To uphold the words of the Charter in the face of 
this challenge, every nation in this Hall has 
responsibilities. As sovereign States, we have an 
obligation to govern responsibly and solve problems 
before they spill across borders. We have an obligation 
to prevent our territory from being used as a sanctuary 
for terrorism, proliferation, human trafficking and 
organized crime. We have an obligation to respect the 
rights and respond to the needs of our people.  
 Multilateral organizations have responsibilities. 
For eight years, the nations in this Assembly have 
worked together to confront the extremist threat. We 
have witnessed successes and setbacks, and through it 
all a clear lesson has emerged. The United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations are needed more 
urgently than ever. To be successful, we must be 
focused, resolute and effective.  
 Instead of only adopting resolutions decrying 
terrorist acts after they occur, we must cooperate more 
closely to keep terrorist attacks from happening in the 
first place. Instead of treating all forms of Government 
as equally tolerable, we must actively challenge the 
conditions of tyranny and despair that allow terror and 
extremists to thrive. By acting together to meet the 
fundamental challenge of our time, we can lead 
towards a world that is more secure, more prosperous 
and more hopeful.  
 In the decades ahead, the United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations must continually 
confront terror. That mission requires clarity of vision. 
We must see the terrorists for what they are: ruthless 
extremists who exploit the desperate, subvert the tenets 
of a great religion and seek to impose their will on as 
many people as possible. Some suggest that those men 
would pose less of a threat if we would only leave 
them alone, yet their leaders make clear that no 
concession could ever satisfy their ambitions. Bringing 
the terrorists to justice does not create terrorism. It is 
the best way to protect our people.  
 Multilateral organizations must respond by taking 
an unequivocal moral stand against terrorism. No cause 
can justify the deliberate taking of innocent life, and 
the international community is nearing universal 
agreement on this truth. The vast majority of nations in 
this Assembly now agree that tactics like suicide 
bombing, hostage-taking and hijacking are never 
legitimate. The Security Council has adopted 
resolutions declaring terror unlawful and requiring all 
nations to crack down on terrorist financing. Earlier 
this month, the Secretary-General held a conference to 
highlight victims of terror, where he stated that 
terrorism can never be justified. 
 Other multilateral organizations have spoken 
clearly as well. The Group of 8 has declared that all 
terrorist acts are criminal and must be universally 
condemned. The Secretary-General of the Organization 
of the Islamic Conference recently spoke out against 
suicide bombing, which he said runs counter to the 
teachings of Islam.  
 The message behind those statements is 
resolutely clear. Like slavery and piracy, terrorism has 
no place in the modern world. Around the globe, 
nations are turning those words into action. Members 
of the United Nations are sharing intelligence with one 
another, conducting joint operations and freezing 
terrorists’ finances. While terrorists continue to carry 
out attacks like the terrible bombing in Islamabad last 
week, our joint actions have spared our citizens from 
many devastating blows.  
 The brutal nature of the extremists is increasingly 
clear and the coalition of nations confronting terrorists 
is growing stronger. Over the past seven years, 
Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from 
regimes that actively sponsor terror to democracies that 
fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror 
and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi 
Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. 
A few nations, regimes like Syria and Iran, continue to 
sponsor terror, yet their numbers are growing fewer 
and they are growing more isolated from the world.  
 As the twenty-first century unfolds, some may be 
tempted to assume that the threat has receded. That 
would be comforting. It would be wrong. The terrorists 
believe time is on their side, so they have made waiting 
  
 
08-51570 10 
 
out civilized nations part of their strategy. We must not 
allow them to succeed. The nations of this body must 
stand united in the fight against terror. We must 
continue working to deny the terrorists refuge 
anywhere in the world, including ungoverned spaces. 
We must remain vigilant against proliferation by fully 
implementing the terms of resolution 1540 (2004) and 
enforcing sanctions against North Korea and Iran. We 
must not relent until our people are safe from this 
threat to civilization. 
 To uphold the Charter’s promise of peace and 
security in the twenty-first century, we must also 
confront the ideology of the terrorists. At its core, the 
struggle against extremists is a battle of ideas. 
Terrorists envision a world in which religious freedom 
is denied, women are oppressed and all dissent is 
crushed. The nations represented in this Hall must 
present a more hopeful alternative — a vision where 
people can speak freely, worship as they choose and 
pursue their dreams in liberty.  
 Advancing this vision of freedom serves our 
highest ideals, as expressed in the United Nations 
Charter’s commitment to the dignity and worth of the 
human person. Advancing this vision also serves our 
security interests. History shows that when citizens 
have a voice in choosing their own leaders, they are 
less likely to search for meaning in radical ideologies, 
and when Governments respect the rights of their 
people, they are more likely to respect the rights of 
their neighbours. 
 For all these reasons, the nations of this body 
must challenge tyranny as vigorously as we challenge 
terror. Some question whether people in certain parts of 
the world actually desire freedom. This self-serving 
condescension has been disproved before our eyes. 
From the voting booths of Afghanistan, Iraq and 
Liberia to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Rose 
Revolution in Georgia, the Cedar Revolution in 
Lebanon and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, we 
have seen people consistently make the courageous 
decision to demand their liberty. 
 For all the suggestions to the contrary, the truth is 
that, whenever and wherever people are given the 
choice, they choose freedom. Nations represented in 
this Hall have supported the efforts of dissidents, 
reformers and civil society advocates in newly free 
societies through the new United Nations Democracy 
Fund, and we appreciate those efforts. As young 
democracies around the world continue to make brave 
stands for liberty, multilateral organizations like the 
United Nations must continue to stand with them. 
 In Afghanistan, a determined people are working 
to overcome decades of tyranny and protect their newly 
free society. They have strong support from all 26 
nations of the NATO alliance. I appreciate the United 
Nations decision this week to renew the mandate of the 
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
The United Nations also has an active civilian presence 
in Afghanistan, where experts are doing important 
work helping to improve education, facilitate 
humanitarian aid and protect human rights. We must 
continue to help the Afghan people defend their young 
democracy so that the Taliban does not return to power 
and Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terror. 
 In Iraq, the fight has been difficult, yet daily life 
has improved dramatically over the past 20 months 
thanks to the courage of the Iraqi people, a determined 
coalition of nations and a surge of American troops. 
The United Nations has provided the mandate for 
multinational forces in Iraq through this December, and 
the United Nations is carrying out an ambitious 
strategy to strengthen Iraq’s democracy, including 
helping Iraqis prepare for their next round of free 
elections. Whatever disagreements our nations have 
had on Iraq, we should all welcome this progress 
towards stability and peace and we should stand united 
in helping Iraq’s democracy succeed.  
 We must stand united in our support of other 
young democracies, from the people of Lebanon 
struggling to maintain their hard-won independence to 
the people of the Palestinian territories, who deserve a 
free and peaceful State of their own. We must stand 
united in our support of the people of Georgia. The 
United Nations Charter sets forth the equal rights of 
nations large and small; Russia’s invasion of Georgia 
was a violation of those rights. Young democracies 
around the world are watching to see how we respond 
to this test. The United States has worked with allies in 
such multilateral institutions as the European Union 
and NATO to uphold Georgia’s territorial integrity and 
provide humanitarian relief. Our nations will continue 
to support Georgia’s democracy. 
 In this Hall are representatives of Georgia, 
Ukraine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Liberia, Iraq and other 
brave young democracies. We admire their courage, we 
honour their sacrifices, and we thank them for their 
 
 
11 08-51570 
 
inspiring example. We will continue to stand with all 
who stand for freedom. This noble goal is worthy of 
the United Nations and it should have the support of 
every member of this Assembly.  
 Extending the reach of political freedom is 
essential to prevailing in the great struggle of our time, 
but it is not enough. Many in this Hall have answered 
the call to help their brothers and sisters in need by 
working to alleviate hopelessness. Those efforts to 
improve the human condition honour the highest ideals 
of this institution. They also advance our security 
interests. The extremists find their most fertile 
recruiting grounds in societies trapped in chaos and 
despair — places where people see no prospect of a 
better life. In the shadows of hopelessness, radicalism 
thrives. Eventually, that radicalism can boil over into 
violence, cross borders and take innocent lives across 
the world.  
 Overcoming hopelessness requires addressing its 
causes: poverty, disease and ignorance. Challenging 
these conditions is in the interest of every nation in this 
Hall, and democracies are particularly well positioned 
to carry out that work because we have experience 
responding to the needs of our own people. We are 
natural partners in helping other nations respond to the 
needs of theirs. Together, we must commit our 
resources and efforts to advancing education, health 
and prosperity.  
 Over the years, many nations have made well-
intentioned efforts to promote these goals, but the 
success of these efforts must be measured by more than 
intentions. It must be measured by results. My nation is 
placing insistence on results at the heart of our foreign 
assistance programmes. We launched a new initiative, 
called the Millennium Challenge Account, which 
directs our help to countries that demonstrate their 
ability to produce results by governing justly, fighting 
corruption and pursuing market-based economic 
policies, as well as investing in their people. Every 
country and institution that provides foreign assistance, 
including the United Nations, will be more effective by 
showing faith in the people of the developing world 
and insisting on performance in return for aid.  
 Experience also shows that, to be effective, we 
must adopt a model of partnership, not paternalism. 
This approach is based on our conviction that people in 
the developing world have the capacity to improve 
their own lives and will rise to meet high expectations 
if we set them. America sought to apply this model in 
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Every nation that 
receives American support through this initiative 
develops its own plan for fighting HIV/AIDS and 
measures the results.  
 So far, these results are inspiring. Five years ago, 
50,000 people in sub-Saharan Africa were receiving 
treatment for HIV/AIDS; today, that number is nearly 
1.7 million. We are taking a similar approach to 
fighting malaria, and so far we have supported local 
efforts to protect more than 25 million Africans. 
Multilateral organizations have made bold 
commitments of their own to fight disease. The G-8 
has pledged to match America’s efforts on malaria and 
HIV/AIDS. Through the Global Fund, many countries 
are working to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria and 
tuberculosis. Lives in the developing world depend on 
these programmes, and all who have made pledges to 
fight disease have an obligation to follow through on 
their commitments.  
 One of the most powerful engines of development 
and prosperity are trade and investment, which create 
new opportunities for entrepreneurs, help people rise 
out of poverty and reinforce such fundamental values 
as transparency and the rule of law. For all these 
reasons, many represented in this Hall have conducted 
free-trade agreements at the bilateral and regional 
levels.  
 The most effective step of all would be an 
agreement that tears down trade barriers at the global 
level. The recent impasse in the Doha round is 
disappointing, but that does not have to be the final 
word. I urge every nation to seize this opportunity to 
lift up economies around the world and reach a 
successful Doha agreement as soon as possible. 
Beyond Doha, our nations must renew our commitment 
to open economies and stand firm against economic 
isolationism. These objectives are being tested by 
turbulence in the global financial markets.  
 Our economies are more closely connected than 
ever before, and I know that many of you here are 
watching how the United States Government will 
address the problems in our financial system. In recent 
weeks we have taken bold steps to prevent a severe 
disruption of the American economy, which would 
have a devastating effect on other economies around 
the world. We promote stability in the markets by 
preventing the disorderly failure of major companies. 
  
 
08-51570 12 
 
The Federal Reserve has injected urgently needed 
liquidity into the system. Last week, I announced 
decisive action by the federal Government to address 
the root cause of much of the instability in our 
financial markets by purchasing illiquid assets that are 
weighing down balance sheets and restricting the flow 
of credit. I can assure the Assembly that my 
Administration and our Congress are working together 
to quickly pass legislation approving this strategy. And 
I am confident that we will act in the urgent time frame 
required.  
 The objectives I have laid out for multilateral 
institutions confronting terror, opposing tyranny and 
promoting effective development are difficult, but they 
are necessary tasks. To have maximum impact, 
multilateral institutions must take on challenging 
missions, and like all of us in this Hall they must work 
towards measurable goals, be accountable for their 
actions and hold true to their word.  
 In the twenty-first century, the world needs a 
competent and effective United Nations. This unique 
institution should build on its successes and improve 
its performance. Where there is inefficiency and 
corruption, that must be corrected. Where there are 
bloated bureaucracies, they must be streamlined. 
Where Members fail to uphold their obligations, there 
must be strong action — for example, there should be 
an immediate review of the Human Rights Council, 
which has routinely protected violators of human 
rights. There should be a stronger effort to help the 
people of Burma live free of the repression they have 
suffered for too long. All nations, especially members 
of the Security Council, must act decisively to ensure 
that the Government of the Sudan upholds its 
commitment to address the violence in Darfur. 
 The United Nations is an Organization of 
extraordinary potential. As it rebuilds its Headquarters, 
it must also open the door to a new age of 
transparency, accountability and seriousness of 
purpose. With determination and clear purpose, the 
United Nations can be a powerful force for good as we 
head into the twenty-first century. It can affirm the 
great promise of its founding.  
 In the final days of the San Francisco Conference, 
the delegates negotiating the United Nations Charter 
received a visit from President Harry Truman. He 
acknowledged the enormous challenges they faced and 
said that success was possible only because of what he 
called an unshakable unity of determination. Today, the 
world is engaged in another period of great challenge, 
and by continuing to work together, that unshakable 
unity of determination will be ours. Together we can 
confront and defeat the evil of terrorism. Together we 
can secure the Almighty’s gift of liberty and justice to 
millions who have not known it. Together we can build 
a world that is freer, safer and better for the 
generations who follow. My 
delegation and I join in expressing our congratulations 
to you, Father Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, on your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session, and we hope you have a very 
successful and rewarding term at the helm of this body. 
We express our gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Srgjan 
Kerim for the excellent work done during his tenure as 
President of the Assembly at its sixty-second session.  
 Once again, we have come to this body to 
reaffirm the need for what we have always called for: 
the implementation of all the promises and pledges that 
we have made before. The focus of the sixty-third 
session of the General Assembly is on the global food 
crisis, climate change and reform of the United 
Nations. The confluence of the food, fuel and financial 
crises, as well as the effects of climate change, pose the 
real threat that they will undermine the progress made 
by developing countries in the struggle against poverty 
and underdevelopment. 
 During the Millennium Summit, held in 2000, our 
heads of State and Government adopted a Declaration 
(resolution 55/2) that communicated a message of hope 
and a vision of a better world. Included in the 
Declaration was an important section on the special 
needs of Africa. In paragraph 24 of the Declaration, the 
leaders stated that they would  
“spare no effort to promote democracy and 
strengthen the rule of law, as well as respect for 
all internationally recognized human rights and 
fundamental freedoms, including the right to 
development”.  
 African and many other, developing countries 
have indeed taken responsibility for promoting 
democracy, good governance, peace and stability and 
human rights. They are also hard at work rolling back 
the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment. But, 
despite those strides, it is clear that many in 
sub-Saharan Africa will not achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). Part of the reason is that 
the global partnership for development on which the 
achievement of the MDGs was predicated has not been 
fully implemented. Despite the lofty ideas expressed at 
previous sessions of the Assembly, we continue to fall 
short in meeting our commitments to implement that 
partnership, in particular in the areas of trade, aid and 
debt relief.  
 We express the fervent hope that the high-level 
meetings organized by yourself, Mr. President, and the 
Secretary-General, on Africa’s development needs and 
on the MDGs, have served not only as important 
reminders of the challenges we face, but also as a 
catalyst that will cause the world to feel a greater sense 
of urgency. 
 The necessary resources exist in the world to 
achieve the MDGs. We need to summon the necessary 
political will and compassion. So we join the sister 
countries of our continent in calling for massive 
resource transfers through development assistance, 
investment, trade, technology transfers and human 
resource development. These will ensure that African 
and other developing countries are able to successfully 
adapt to the devastating impact of climate change and 
achieve the MDGs. 
 However, in order to accelerate the achievement 
of all the Millennium Development Goals, much more 
attention needs to be focused on Goal 3, regarding the 
empowerment of women. Women need to be at the 
centre of development as agents of change, socially, 
economically and politically.  
  
 
08-53141 12 
 
 Billions of the people of the world, whom we are 
privileged to represent in the Assembly, have cast their 
eyes on this gathering of leaders. They have done so 
because they have hope that this leadership will take 
the required measures in order to address poverty and 
underdevelopment. We dare not fail them. 
 The food crisis has to be addressed in the short 
and medium terms. The Green Revolution that has 
been launched by the African Union needs partnerships 
in order to succeed. In addition, support for the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development will be a major 
contributor to the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. In that context, allow me, Mr. 
President, to quote from your own statement to the 
General Assembly with regard to that socio-economic 
programme as well as the role of our immediate former 
President, Thabo Mbeki:  
“During his presidency of the rainbow nation, 
spanning nearly a decade, he, along [with] other 
African leaders, championed the vision of 
NEPAD we still pursue today. When the affluent 
listen to Africa and partner with it, that vision is 
within reach. To quote NEPAD’s founding 
document: `In fulfilling its promise, this agenda 
must give hope to the emaciated African child 
that the twenty-first century is indeed Africa’s 
century.’” (, p. 3)  
 The Doha Development Round has stalled despite 
seven years of negotiations. We are convinced that 
trade and increased market access will make a major 
contribution to the achievement of the MDGs. In that 
regard, it is our submission that the Doha Round of 
trade negotiations should not be allowed to die, but 
must remain focused on development, as originally 
envisaged.  
 In recent years, we have all witnessed the 
devastating effects of climate change, especially on 
island States. Hurricanes have become more frequent 
and more vicious, together with droughts, floods and 
unpredictable extreme weather patterns in the rest of 
the world. Of course, climate change requires an urgent 
response. Given the agreement in Bali last year on a 
road map for negotiations, it is our hope that the 
negotiations, to be completed in Copenhagen in 2009, 
will necessarily set the stage for more concerted action 
by all countries to address climate change and all its 
manifestations, with the developed countries taking the 
lead. South Africa commits itself to approaching the 
preparations for Copenhagen constructively and with a 
view to reaching an agreement that is ambitious, 
balanced and inclusive. 
 We join the many leaders of the world who have 
expressed their support for fundamental reform of the 
system of global governance, including the United 
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions. It is 
important to understand that the critical issues facing 
the world today — the current financial, food and 
energy crises — cannot be addressed effectively when 
so many countries and regions of the world are left out 
of the key decision-making processes of important 
institutions of global governance. South Africa stands 
ready to work with other members of the United 
Nations to advance the goal of reform.  
 Equally, the reform of the Security Council need 
not be re-emphasized. We reiterate our view that a 
reformed Security Council would have more legitimacy 
and that its decisions would have more credibility. We 
welcome the recent decision (decision 62/557) to 
launch in the General Assembly inter-governmental 
negotiations on Security Council reform, to discuss 
plans for expanding the Security Council in both the 
non-permanent and permanent categories. It is of 
course a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
constitutes a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Unless 
the ideals of freedom, justice and equality become the 
character of the United Nations, including the Security 
Council, the dominant will continue to dictate to the 
dominated, while the dreams of the dominated will 
forever be deferred. 
 In December this year, my country will complete 
its tenure as a non-permanent member of the Security 
Council. We have indeed been privileged to serve the 
peoples of Africa and the world in that capacity; it has 
been a historic first for us as a young democracy. In 
that capacity, we were indeed honoured to contribute 
meaningfully to global efforts to create peace and 
stability in all regions of the world. Accordingly, we 
express the humble gratitude of the people of our 
country to the general membership of the United 
Nations for the trust placed in us in helping the world 
discharge this mandate. 
 During our tenure, the Security Council also 
focused on the important question of enhancing the 
relationship between the United Nations and regional 
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU). 
 
 
13 08-53141 
 
We were honoured to be able to contribute to that 
work. We congratulate the Secretary-General on 
appointing an African Union-United Nations panel of 
distinguished persons whose mandate is to explore 
financing modalities for AU-led peacekeeping 
missions. 
 Peace continues to evade the Middle East. South 
Africa participated in the Annapolis Conference in 
2007 with great expectations and hopes that progress 
would indeed be made to advance the goal of peace in 
that region. We will continue to support all 
international efforts to help the peoples of Palestine 
and Israel in their endeavour to find a lasting and 
peaceful solution to their challenges, leading to the 
establishment of a viable Palestinian State, coexisting 
side by side with the State of Israel, within secure 
borders. We understand full well the pain, suffering 
and agony that conflict brings to bear on the lives of 
ordinary people, particularly women and children. 
Those ordinary souls continue to cry out to this 
Assembly of the world, as they have done in the past, 
to help bring an end to the conflict. 
 South Africa will continue to work with the sister 
peoples of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Burundi and Côte d’Ivoire in their efforts to 
consolidate peace and democracy in their respective 
countries. With regard to Zimbabwe, the Assembly 
must certainly be aware of the recent developments led 
by our former President Thabo Mbeki in his capacity as 
the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) facilitator, which culminated in the signing of 
an agreement between the main political protagonists 
in the country. We hope that the leadership of 
Zimbabwe win soon finalize aspects of that agreement 
to make possible the formation of a new Government 
that will help lay the groundwork to address the 
political and economic challenges facing their country. 
SADC, the African Union and the facilitator stand as 
guarantors of the agreement. We call on the 
international community to spare neither strength nor 
effort in lending a hand to the people of Zimbabwe as 
they embark on the difficult path of reconciliation and 
reconstruction. 
 Equally, the situations in Somalia and the Sudan, 
and especially in Darfur, remain matters of great 
concern. South Africa will continue to do whatever it 
can, both bilaterally and in the context of the African 
Union and the United Nations, to help the peoples of 
Sudan and Somalia find peace among themselves. 
 We remain concerned about the impasse on the 
question of Western Sahara. South Africa is committed 
to seeking a just, mutually acceptable and lasting 
solution to that problem.  
 This year also marks the sixtieth anniversary of 
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. During the past six decades, the Declaration 
has remained the key standard for human rights, justice 
and dignity. We should therefore use this anniversary 
period to strengthen our resolve to defend human 
rights. South Africa has also had the honour to be 
reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review 
mechanism of the new Human Rights Council. We 
were also honoured with the appointment of our own 
Justice Navi Pillai to lead that very important 
international institution. 
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 We wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of 
the United Nations. In the Millennium Declaration, we 
reaffirmed that the United Nations “is the 
indispensable common house of the entire human 
family, through which we will seek to realize our 
universal aspirations for peace, cooperation and 
development” (resolution 55/2, para. 32). Leading 
South Africa’s delegation to the Millennium Summit 
was our former President, Thabo Mbeki, who reminded 
the Assembly that  
“Billions among the living struggle to survive in 
conditions of poverty, deprivation and 
underdevelopment ... as offensive to everything 
humane as anything we decry about the second 
millennium.” (A/55/PV.5, p. 18) 
 It is that understanding that has correctly 
informed the engagement of successive leaders of our 
democratic State with this body over the years. In that 
regard, we are touched and humbled by the kind 
comments made in the Assembly by the various heads 
of State or Government and heads of delegation, 
directed at our immediate former President, Thabo 
Mbeki. We most certainly shall, through our 
Government, convey those sentiments to that noble son 
of our people and our continent, and citizen of the 
world. 
 Accordingly, from this rostrum may I also 
express our sincere gratitude to the general 
membership of the United Nations for the support that 
  
 
08-53141 14 
 
former President Mbeki and our country received over 
the past nine-and-a-half years of his stewardship of our 
country. As the leadership of our country is passed on, 
we confirm that South Africa, under the guidance of 
President Kgalema Motlanthe, shall indeed continue to 
be a trusted and dependable partner in the common 
endeavour to strengthen our institutions of 
multilateralism, starting from the correct premise that 
multilateralism remains the only hope in addressing the 
challenges facing humanity today, whether they be 
terrorism, threats to human rights, peace and stability 
or, of course, the central struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. For 
China, this has been a special year. We experienced 
 
 
35 08-51749 
 
two major events. One was the devastating earthquake 
in Wenchuan, which caused grave loss of life and 
property. In the face of the disaster, the Chinese people 
showed great strength, courage, solidarity and 
resilience. By now, the people affected by the 
earthquake have been properly relocated and recovery 
and reconstruction work is well under way. The other 
event was the successful hosting of the Beijing 
Olympic Games. That grand sporting event provided a 
good opportunity for athletes from around the world to 
show true sportsmanship. It also enabled the world to 
learn more about China and for China to learn more 
about the world.  
 In our fight against the earthquake disaster and 
our efforts to host the Games, we received 
understanding, support and assistance from the 
international community. I wish to take this 
opportunity to express sincere gratitude on behalf of 
the Chinese Government and people.  
 Now the whole world wants to know in what 
direction China is heading, both politically and 
economically, after the Beijing Olympic Games. Let 
me tell you in unequivocal terms that China will 
remain committed to the path of peaceful development, 
unswervingly pursue reform and opening-up, and 
continue to adhere to an independent foreign policy of 
peace. This is in the fundamental interests of the 
Chinese people and the people of all other countries. It 
is also in keeping with the trend of the world. 
 The Olympic Games that just concluded were 
held in China, the largest developing country in the 
world. The international community has highly 
commended the efforts made by the Chinese 
Government and people for the Games, and their 
success has greatly inspired the Chinese people and 
given them even more confidence and strength to 
achieve modernization of the country.  
 At the same time, however, we are soberly aware 
that China is a country with 1.3 billion people. 
Although its total GDP is one of the highest in the 
world, it trails behind more than 100 countries in terms 
of per capita income. Development between urban and 
rural areas and among different regions in China is 
unbalanced. The rural areas, particularly in western 
China, are underdeveloped. Tens of millions of Chinese 
lack adequate food and clothing.  
 China is still a developing country, where 
productivity remains low and further development is 
constrained by the shortage of resources and energy 
and by environmental consequences. Our socialist 
market economic system, democracy and the rule of 
law need to be further improved, and certain 
outstanding social issues are yet to be resolved. To 
achieve China’s modernization is a daunting task, and 
we still have a long way to go. Both the opportunities 
and challenges that we face are unprecedented. We will 
seize the opportunities, rise up to challenges, dedicate 
ourselves to nation-building and focus on development. 
That is what the Chinese Government and people have 
been thinking and doing. 
 People may ask how China is achieving its 
development. The answer is through reform and 
opening up. This year marks the thirtieth anniversary 
of China’s reform and opening-up policy, a policy that 
fundamentally changed the closed, backward and 
ossified situation that had existed in China for years. It 
is a policy that freed people’s minds and aroused their 
initiative, liberated the productive forces, generated 
great economic and social progress and instilled vigour 
and vitality into the country. Without that policy, there 
would not have been such change in China in the last 
30 years.  
 To achieve the goal of modernization and build a 
strong, prosperous, democratic, culturally advanced 
and harmonious country, we will pursue the reform and 
opening-up policy. It is of vital importance to the 
development of China today. It is also a strategy that 
will shape China’s future. We are firm in carrying this 
policy forward. 
 The Chinese nation has all along cherished the 
fine tradition and benefited from the wisdom of being 
open to new ideas and drawing on the strengths of 
others. The Chinese people have learned from 30 years 
of reform and opening up that only continued 
economic and political restructuring and reform in 
other fields can lead to sustained economic growth and 
social progress. And only continued opening up in an 
all-round way can lead the country to greater national 
strength and prosperity. This is the conclusion we have 
drawn both from our practice and exploration and from 
historical experiences. 
 The world needs peace, for only with peace can 
there be development. China earnestly hopes to have a 
peaceful international environment in order to achieve 
its development goals. The Chinese Government is 
committed to an independent foreign policy of peace 
  
 
08-51749 36 
 
and stands ready to work with other countries to 
advance the noble cause of the peace and progress of 
mankind. 
 Respect for sovereignty and non-interference in 
the internal affairs of other countries is the prerequisite 
for sound State-to-State relations. The Chinese people 
have learned from their modern history of humiliation 
that when a country loses its sovereignty, its people 
lose dignity and status. China is firm in upholding its 
hard-won sovereignty and territorial integrity and will 
never tolerate any external interference. Following the 
principle of treating each other as equals, China also 
respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
other countries, as well as the independent choices of 
their people for their own social systems and 
development paths. 
 China is ready to develop friendly relations with 
all countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit 
rather than on ideology or on a political system. In 
handling international affairs, we make our own 
judgement on the merit of each case and take our 
position in light of our national interests and the well-
being of the world’s people. We will neither blindly 
follow the position of others nor give way to the 
pressure of any forces. In international relations, China 
does not seek to build alliances or become a leader and 
will never do so in the future. 
 Peaceful settlement of international disputes is a 
founding purpose of the United Nations and a basic 
principle of international law. China is committed to 
addressing historical issues and current differences 
with other countries through dialogue and negotiation. 
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China 
will continue to play an active and constructive role in 
promoting the peaceful settlement of international 
hotspot issues and regional conflicts. 
 China’s development is peaceful in nature. It will 
not harm anyone or pose a threat to anyone. China does 
not seek hegemony now, nor will it do so in the future. 
China keeps and develops an appropriate level of 
military capability solely for the purpose of 
safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 
 The confidence and pride of the Chinese nation 
today are based on China’s economic development, 
social justice, the civility of its people and moral 
strength. China will, through its own development, 
contribute to the peace and development of the world. 
 In the long history of humankind, the destinies of 
countries have never been so closely linked as they are 
today. Given the global nature of issues threatening the 
survival and development of mankind, such as global 
warming, environmental degradation, resource 
constraints, frequent outbreaks of diseases and natural 
disasters and the spread of terrorism, and in the face of 
the intertwining challenges related to finance, energy 
and food, no country can expect to avoid difficulties or 
to handle the problems alone.  
 Ongoing financial volatility, in particular, has 
affected many countries, and its impact is likely to 
become more serious. To tackle the challenge, we must 
all make concerted efforts. So long as people of all 
countries, including their leaders, can do away with 
hostility, exclusion and prejudice, treat each other with 
sincerity and an open mind and forge ahead hand in 
hand, humankind will overcome all difficulties and 
embrace a brighter and better future. 
 China, as a responsible major developing country, 
is ready to work with other members of the 
international community to strengthen cooperation, 
share opportunities, meet challenges and contribute to 
the harmonious and sustainable development of the 
world. I offer my 
congratulations to Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann on 
his election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I wish him every success. 
 The United Nations mandate to establish and 
maintain peace and security has lost none of its 
urgency in 2008. The task remains. However, fulfilling 
it is more demanding than ever. 
 When the Berlin Wall fell, no one had greater 
hopes than we Germans not only that Germany would 
be reunited but that a new age of global cooperation — 
beyond the traditional front lines — would begin. The 
Iron Curtain had divided the world into two blocs and 
when it came to dealing with crises and conflicts, often 
enough, loyalty within the blocs had priority; what was 
needed to improve the lot of ordinary people was of 
secondary importance. 
 
 
47 08-52265 
 
 The end of the East-West confrontation in the 
early nineties seemed to mark the dawn of a new age of 
effective multilateralism, while the United Nations 
seemed to be on the threshold of a great renaissance. 
Disillusionment has now set in, more quickly and more 
profoundly than we had feared. The hoped-for peace 
dividend did not materialize. On the contrary, the 
cynical certainties of the cold war had disappeared, and 
they were not replaced by new ones.  
 The world is clearly searching for a new order, 
and multilateralism does not always seem to be the first 
choice in this quest. What we have experienced since 
then is the confluence of the traditional power politics 
of the 19th century, the legacies of the cold war and the 
new challenges of the 21st century. 
 At the same time, new players and Powers that 
have still to find their place in the international order 
are seeking to enter the global stage. It is now 
generally accepted that we can master the new 
challenges of the twenty-first century, such as climate 
change, scarcity of raw materials, access to food and 
water and the fight against epidemics, pandemics and 
terrorism, only if we act together. Although we know 
that and although it is absolutely vital that we focus on 
finding common solutions to the key issues of the 
future, time and again we are called upon to resolve 
conflicts that have their roots in a past that we have 
only seemingly put behind us. 
 One conflict that smouldered for some time and 
then escalated suddenly and violently is the crisis in 
Georgia, where an entire region found itself on the 
edge of the abyss of war and destruction and where 
common sense failed to prevail on all sides. The United 
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union agree that 
the weapons must be silenced for good. We must help 
the suffering population without delay. That does not 
mean accepting the status quo; nor does it mean the 
calling into question of Georgia’s territorial integrity. 
 Nevertheless, we have to work together to ensure 
reconstruction, the return home of the refugees and 
long-term security in Georgia and the entire region. 
The European Union is making an important 
contribution by sending an observer mission, which my 
country is leading. Together with the United Nations 
and the OSCE, the mission will put forward a 
comprehensive strategy in Geneva this October. We are 
aiming to pave the way towards the durable resolution 
of the conflict through stabilization and confidence-
building in this particular region of the world, the 
Southern Caucasus. 
 The same task is even more demanding in 
Afghanistan, a country where the situation is still 
precarious. It is clear to us that, without security, 
Afghanistan will not, and indeed cannot, develop. 
Equally, however, we need economic development in 
order to improve the security situation and to 
encourage people to reject fundamentalism and terror. 
 We have achieved much together in recent 
months and years. Millions of children — many of 
them girls — are going to school again, while streets, 
bridges and hospitals are being built. The training and 
build-up of the Afghan police force and army are 
progressing. Compared to the deteriorating security 
situation, however, they are not progressing fast 
enough, especially in the present situation. Germany 
intends to do even more in the future. 
 However, we cannot afford to look at Afghanistan 
by itself. We need to step up our efforts to help 
Pakistan master the economic and social challenges it 
faces. Pakistan’s internal stability is crucial to stability 
in the entire region. This will require concrete support 
from everyone in the international community, and my 
country — rest assured — will play its part. 
 International engagement is also still necessary in 
the Middle East. In the current phase of domestic 
uncertainty, we call upon all parties to the conflict not 
to ease up in their efforts to resolve the conflict. As 
experience has shown, to stand still in the Middle East 
often means to take a step backward. A new wave of 
terror and violent clashes would result, and neither 
Israel nor Palestine, nor the international community, 
can afford to let that happen. 
 Germany believes it has a particular 
responsibility to provide concrete assistance to 
improve the framework conditions. Just recently, at the 
Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil 
Security and the Rule of Law — which many of those 
here attended — we agreed on concrete measures to 
strengthen the Palestinian security sector. Those 
measures are already having an impact. 
 An Iran armed with nuclear weapons would pose 
a threat to security throughout the Middle East and 
would trigger a nuclear arms race. Therefore, Iran must 
put its cards on the table. We have made our offer, 
  
 
08-52265 48 
 
which is a tangible solution. The delaying tactics of the 
Iranian side must not exhaust the patience of the 
international community. We expect a clear signal from 
Iran indicating its willingness to comply with the 
international community’s demands and to build 
confidence. And let me make the following very clear: 
the Iranian President’s remarks concerning Israel are 
irresponsible and unacceptable. In my view, the blatant 
anti-Semitism that he expressed in his statement once 
again this year (see ) is outrageous and 
should be condemned by all of us. We must stand 
together on that issue. 
 The problems in Georgia, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and the Middle East highlight one fact: it is more 
urgent than ever that we develop the foundations for a 
stable world order. My country stands for dialogue and 
the reconciliation of interests. That does not mean 
dialogue for the sake of discussion, without any 
results; nor does reconciliation of interests imply that 
we are prepared to abandon our own principles. We 
believe that it is essential to renounce violence, ensure 
fairness and recognize international law.  
 For us, that is the alternative vision to a world of 
fabricated opposing interests, the bloc mentality and 
oversimplified categories such as good and evil. East 
against West, North against South — that is yesterday’s 
thinking, and it no longer has a place in today’s world. 
In order to resolve the problems of today and 
tomorrow, we all need more partners, not more 
opponents. The twenty-first century is the first in 
which we can resolve problems only if we work 
together. 
 The same applies to disarmament policy. Only a 
partnership of shared global responsibility can achieve 
lasting results. The dangerous trend in which an ever-
increasing number of countries strive to gain access to 
nuclear technology, or even to build nuclear weapons, 
must be stopped. My proposal to multilateralize the 
fuel cycle showed how those risks can at the very least 
be minimized. Furthermore, I call upon all States to 
sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, 
because its entry into force would mean a huge gain in 
security. 
 For all that, however, we must remember that 
more people die every day as a result of hunger than as 
a result of war. The pledges that we made at the turn of 
the millennium must not remain a mere piece of paper. 
The fight against hunger and poverty is also part of a 
global responsibility partnership. Germany will 
therefore step up its efforts to promote poverty 
reduction and global fairness. As part of those efforts, 
we will increase our official development assistance 
contributions in accordance with the plan of the 
European Union. In the next budget alone, we will 
increase development assistance by $1.2 billion.  
 In that connection, I would like to say something 
about Africa. For too long, we have perceived that part 
of the world only as a continent of wars and conflicts. 
However, I also know an Africa that has set off on the 
road to the future with courage and resolve. It deserves 
our partnership and support along that road. 
 At present, the headlines are dominated by the 
international financial crisis. Recklessness, greed and a 
lack of common sense among those involved has set us 
back years. The long-term consequences cannot be 
assessed yet. However, I am certain that the painful 
tremors on the world financial markets will accelerate 
the multipolarization of the international financial 
system. There can be no future without rules, and no 
single player will be able to lay down those rules. It 
will no longer be possible for any one country to act as 
if it were immune to undesirable developments. 
Europe, with its tried-and-tested policy of mediation 
and reconciliation of interests, could play a key role in 
this. 
 Together, we must now finally ensure long-
overdue transparency, stability and provisions to guard 
against risks on the world financial markets, along with 
oversight. My country developed concrete proposals in 
that regard a few years ago. I hope that, in the face of 
this deep crisis, the international community will now 
act quickly and with resolve. We need universal rules 
for the international financial markets. 
 That does not apply only to the international 
financial sphere, however; clear rules, solid structures 
and joint action are the vital prerequisites for meeting 
global challenges. That is why we need a strong and 
effective United Nations that enjoys the confidence of 
the international community, has the requisite 
legitimacy and can be the umbrella for a global 
responsibility partnership. 
 We therefore support the process of reforming the 
United Nations and its organs. Security Council reform 
is overdue, as we are all aware. The Council’s 
composition must reflect the realities of world politics 
today. Germany is prepared to shoulder greater 
 
 
49 08-52265 
 
responsibility in that area. Less than two weeks ago, 
the General Assembly unanimously decided to begin 
the negotiations on reform soon (see decision 62/557). 
That important step must now be followed by others. 
Germany is firmly convinced that, in the twenty-first 
century, we need the United Nations more urgently 
than ever before. I bring 
you fraternal greetings from Europe — Europe that is 
conscious of its responsibilities and wishes to act; 
Europe that is true to its values — democracy and 
freedom; Europe that is loyal to its friends, but also 
Europe that wishes to speak to the whole world in 
service of dialogue and of peace. 
 At a time when the world is deeply troubled, I 
have come to tell you, on behalf of Europe, that in the 
midst of so many difficulties the international 
community has a political and moral responsibility that 
we must shoulder. Let us not forget that if we are 
gathered here today, it is because following one of the 
most terrible tragedies that humankind has ever known, 
there were men and women of good will who were 
determined that in the future no one could ever say, 
when faced with misfortune: “There is nothing we can 
 
 
13 08-51570 
 
do.” That is why we are here, because those who went 
before us did not renounce their responsibility. Europe 
believes that today, our duty is to act and to refuse to 
submit.  
 We can wait no longer. We are beginning to 
gauge the tragic consequences of having already 
waited too long. We cannot wait to achieve peace, to 
end the tragedy in Darfur. We cannot wait to fight 
terrorism, to avert the food crisis that condemns so 
many human beings to die of hunger. We cannot wait 
to prepare for the post-petroleum world, to fight global 
warming, to save the oceans, to put an end to monetary, 
social and ecological dumping. We cannot wait to bring 
ethics to financial capitalism.  
 For too long we have all been resigned to being 
powerless. For too long we have retreated before the 
need to give to the globalized world institutions that 
will enable it to be regulated. 
 The world of the twenty-first century cannot be 
governed with the institutions of the twentieth century. 
We are a century behind. Let today’s major Powers and 
the Powers of tomorrow unite to shoulder together the 
responsibilities their influence gives them in world 
affairs.  
 To all those who are hesitant, I wish to say that 
enlarging the Security Council and the G-8 is not just a 
matter of fairness, it is also a question of effectiveness. 
We can no longer wait to turn the G-8 into the G14 and 
to bring in China, India, South Africa, Mexico and 
Brazil. Italy is proposing a major step in that direction 
at the next summit, which it will host, and Italy is 
right. 
 Let us act to make our international institutions 
more representative, because if they are more 
representative they will be stronger, more effective and 
more respected. A new world is emerging not only 
through all our successes, but also through all the 
crises besetting the planet. However, we cannot receive 
that new world passively, we must build it. 
 Let us learn to manage together the most acute 
crises that no one, not even the most powerful among 
us, can resolve alone. I am convinced that it is the duty 
of the heads of State and Government of the countries 
most directly concerned to meet before the end of the 
year to examine together the lessons of the most 
serious financial crisis the world has experienced since 
that of the 1930s. Who would understand it if the 
world’s major economies should fail to take the time to 
meet to discuss what we must do together and the 
lessons we must draw from what has happened? 
 Let us rebuild together a regulated capitalism, in 
which entire swathes of financial activity are not left to 
the sole judgement of market operators; in which banks 
do their job; which is to finance economic development 
rather than to fuel speculation; in which rules of 
prudence apply to all and serve to avert and soften 
shocks instead of exacerbating them; in which the 
credit agencies are controlled and punished when 
necessary; in which transparency of transactions 
replaces such opacity that today it is difficult to 
understand what is happening; and in which modes of 
remuneration do not drive people to take unreasonable 
risks. It is my duty to say that those who jeopardize 
people’s savings should be punished and at last face up 
to their responsibilities. We will succeed in that on the 
condition that we work together. 
 In our globalized world, the fate of each is linked 
to that of all others. The negotiations on climate 
change, begun in Bali, will conclude in Copenhagen 
next year. Whatever our particular interests, we do not 
have the right to fail. 
 Europe will adopt an unprecedented raft of 
measures on energy and climate in December. Europe 
does not wish to teach lessons; it wishes to set an 
example. Europe also wishes to set the example by 
acting to bring about peace. It did so in Georgia. It did 
so with the Union for the Mediterranean. Because for 
over half a century Europe has undertaken to stop the 
endless cycle of war, vengeance and hate that has 
periodically taken it to the edge of the precipice, it 
does not want war. It does not want a war of 
civilizations. It does not want a war of religion. It does 
not want a cold war.  
 Europe wants peace, and because it wants peace 
it says to Russia that it wants links of solidarity with 
that country, that it wants to build a shared future, and 
that it wants to be Russia’s partner. Why not build a 
continent-wide common economic space that would 
unite Russia and Europe? However, Europe also says 
to Russia with the same sincerity that it cannot 
compromise on the principle of the sovereignty and 
independence of States, their territorial integrity or 
respect for international law. Europe’s message to all 
States is that it cannot accept the use of force to settle a 
dispute. 
  
 
08-51570 14 
 
 Europe says to Iran that it respects that country, 
that Iran has the right to civil nuclear energy and that it 
will explore all avenues of dialogue. However, it says 
to Iran with the same sincerity that it cannot accept a 
nuclear-armed Iran that would endanger the peace and 
stability of the whole region. Nor can Europe 
tolerate — and I say this solemnly — Iran calling for 
the destruction of the State of Israel. 
 Europe says to Israel that it is its friend and that it 
will let no one threaten its existence. Europe says to 
Israel that it will always be at its side in the fight 
against terrorism, but with the same sincerity says to 
telling Israel that there will be no peace until there is a 
viable Palestinian State with recognized borders. 
 Europe says to Afghanistan that it will continue 
to stand by it and that it will not permit barbarians 
allied with Al-Qaida again to take an entire people 
hostage and to turn an entire country into a terrorist 
base.  
 Europe says to Somalia that it will help it, with 
the support of the United Nations, to combat the 
scourge of piracy off its coasts. Until all States join 
together to establish a maritime police force, we cannot 
allow some hundreds of pirates to threaten the free 
passage of ships throughout the world. 
 Europe says to Africa that it is committed to 
co-development, that it wishes to be Africa’s privileged 
partner, and that it has a common destiny with Africa 
and a profound sense of solidarity. Europe says to 
Africa that it has its place among the permanent 
members of the Security Council and in the enlarged 
G-8. How can one ever hope to settle the great issues 
of the world while ignoring Africa, South America or a 
large part of Asia? Europe believes in the African 
renaissance, which is under way and, first and 
foremost, is in the hands of the Africans, particularly 
those of African youth, which is the youth of the world. 
 Essentially, what brings us here together in this 
forum, where everyone must listen to the others and 
thereby show them a form of respect, is something 
more basic even than democracy. What brings us 
together is respect for the dignity of all just as they are, 
and for diversity of their opinions, cultures and beliefs. 
Human dignity is a universal value. What we must 
promote everywhere is respect for that diversity, which 
is the surest guarantor of peace and human fraternity 
and the surest antidote to intolerance, hatred, violence, 
obscurantism and fanaticism. 
 That is what Europe wants: peoples united in 
respect, understanding and solidarity; peoples united 
throughout the world working together for the great 
common cause of safeguarding of humanity. Time is at 
a premium; the world cannot wait. It is humbling to 
stand before this great Assembly today. Events of 
recent weeks have proved beyond doubt that we are 
now in a new global age. Living through the first 
financial crisis and the first resources crisis of 
globalization, we are a world not simply in transition, 
but facing transformation, with change more far-
reaching than anything we have seen in our lifetimes. 
The challenges, the opportunities for us and the risks 
that we now face come together at the global 
crossroads of the United Nations, providing the focus 
for debate and decision here in this General Assembly 
Hall.  
 A predecessor of mine said that if one built the 
present only in the image of the past, one would miss 
out entirely on the challenges of the future. It is to 
those challenges of the future that I want to address my 
remarks today. 
 In the next two decades, our world economy will 
double in size. That means double the opportunities 
and potential for more businesses, more jobs and more 
prosperity. Extraordinary promise and opportunity 
await, but there are also wholly new insecurities and 
pressures — global problems that will require global 
solutions. 
 The twin shocks of a global credit crunch and 
soaring commodity prices lead straight to the front 
doors of every family in every country, with higher oil, 
gas and food prices, and higher costs for credit. But 
because it is a global financial crisis and a global 
shortage of food and resources, it will not be resolved 
simply by individual nations acting in isolation, 
although there is much that they can do themselves. It 
will be solved in the end by us acting together. 
 I want to talk about how we can work together to 
tackle financial instability and the intense pressure now 
on our finite world resources. The immediate priority is 
to help people everywhere cope with these difficult 
times and to do so fairly. That is why, in Britain, we 
have acted to help those hit hardest, assisting people 
with the costs of gas and electricity, supporting 
homeowners and the housing market and helping 
people acquire the skills to do the new jobs of the 
twenty-first century. 
 But if we have learned anything in the past few 
years about the world in which we are now living, it is 
that the world we share is more interconnected than 
ever before and that the solutions have to be similarly 
coordinated. 
 First, we must do all that it takes to stabilize the 
still turbulent financial markets and, in the months 
ahead, we must work together to rebuild the world 
financial system around clear principles. In the short 
term, each country is taking action to deal with the 
fallout of the credit crunch, and the United States of 
America deserves support from the rest of the world as 
it seeks to agree on in detail what all parties agree on 
in principle. 
 In Britain, we have taken decisive action to 
promote stability in our banking system, protecting 
depositors and introducing a temporary ban on short-
selling. We have already injected billions into the 
market, making in excess of £100 billion available, and 
announced only last week that our special liquidity 
scheme will be extended until the end of January next 
year. 
 Confidence in the future is also needed to build 
confidence today, and that confidence will be built by 
showing that what are global problems can be 
addressed by globally coordinated solutions. I believe 
there are five key principles behind that all nations 
should unite around as we examine the future of our 
financial system. 
 The first principle is that of transparency. People 
must know what they are buying and selling, and they 
must know what they are dealing with and not fear 
what might be hidden on each other’s books. We must 
look at the rapid introduction of improved 
internationally acceptable accounting standards and 
disclosure. 
 Secondly, there must be sound banking practice 
and more effective regulation that looks not just at 
solvency but at liquidity, at managing and pricing risks 
for bad times and for good times, together. 
 Thirdly, there must be responsibility. No member 
of senior management should be able to say he or she 
did not understand the risks they were running and 
walk away from his or her obligations. 
 Fourthly, there must be integrity. Most people 
agree that companies should align reward with stability 
and long-term gain because what matters is hard work, 
 
 
19 08-52272 
 
effort and enterprise. We should align the advice of 
credit-rating agencies with the interests of the 
investors. 
 Fifthly, just as banks are global and the flows of 
capital are global, so oversight can no longer just be 
national but must also include global supervision. That 
is why we want to work to support immediately the 
establishment of international colleges for each of the 
largest global financial institutions — 30 of them by 
the end of the year.  
 The international institutions built in the wake of 
the Second World War have not kept pace with the 
changing global economy. We need national regulators 
to be cooperative, rules and principles to be consistent, 
and international movements of capital to be 
transparent. 
 The current era has been one of global prosperity. 
It has also been an era of global turbulence, and while 
there has been irresponsibility, we must now say 
clearly that the age of irresponsibility must be ended. 
We must now build that new global financial order, 
founding it on transparency, not opacity; rewarding 
success, not excess; and responsibility, not impunity. 
That order must be global, not national. 
 Global action cannot be limited to financial 
stability. We must also address another problem of 
globalization — the global scramble for resources. We 
need global action to deal with high commodity prices 
and a rising global population demanding more energy. 
Only by taking tough decisions on energy security and 
climate change and by bringing together a new global 
partnership of oil producers and oil consumers can we 
bring stability to global energy markets and secure 
sustainable energy supplies for the long term. 
 We are committed to tackling the global 
challenge of climate change. Oil will of course 
continue to meet a large part of our global energy 
needs for some decades to come, but over the past year 
we have seen the price of oil rise to as high as $146 per 
barrel before falling again to $90 in the past month — 
a fall of nearly 40 per cent. Such high and volatile 
prices have a harmful impact on the global economy, 
and all countries surely have a shared interest in 
avoiding such dramatic swings in the price of scarce 
resources. 
 We must now therefore consider whether the 
current international architecture can bring the more 
transparent and stable energy markets this global 
economy clearly needs. We must bring producers and 
consumers together, build common understanding and 
address the issues through meaningful and sustained 
dialogue. At the end of this year, I will be hosting a 
global energy summit in London, building on the 
momentum generated in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, to agree 
on key areas for further action. It is only by acting 
together that we can make the most of the world’s 
scarce resources and harness the power of our greater 
interdependence for our common good. 
 Some say that in a time of difficulty we should 
look inwards and cut aid; that we have an excuse for 
walking by on the other side; and that, by our inaction, 
we tolerate famine — but in today’s world, there is no 
other side. 
 Africa is not part of the problem, but an 
indisputable part of the solution. It is only by helping 
Africa to become a net exporter of food rather than a 
net importer that we can hope to achieve a long-term 
end to soaring food prices. Only by restarting and 
seeing the trade talks through can we help our 
economies benefit from the annual boost of 
$150 billion that would be achieved by removing the 
protectionist trade barriers and trade-distorting 
subsidies that currently cost developing countries the 
most — $15 billion a year in their agricultural incomes 
alone. 
 As Governments and as nations, we must respond 
with courage and vision to the new insecurities that 
face people, because while the global changes 
happening all around us are complex, the instincts they 
summon up in people are not. We must resist those 
instincts that are protectionist. Now is not the time to 
pull up the drawbridge, to seek solace in isolation or to 
revert to an outdated and futile protectionism. It is only 
by maintaining our open, flexible and dynamic 
economies that we can best secure people’s jobs, 
homes and standards of living in a global age.  
 Our global institutions have always had a 
sweeping ambition, set up not against a single enemy 
but against poverty, conflict, injustice and intolerance, 
and set up in the belief that, for peace to last, 
prosperity must be shared. Now we must build on the 
idealism of the era that created those institutions and 
change and evolve those institutions to meet the 
challenges of the global age. This United Nations is 
where the world turns to confront some of its greatest 
  
 
08-52272 20 
 
challenges. It is where international law is made, where 
the most acute political problems are addressed, and 
where the hopes of the world for a better future 
ultimately rest. 
 For the past 40 years, it has been this United 
Nations that has been the key forum where the 
international community has sought peace in the 
Middle East, and it is the United Nations that must help 
the next Government of Israel build on the foundations 
laid by Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas to 
agree to a two-State solution that guarantees the 
security of Israel and gives the Palestinians a viable 
State. 
 In Cyprus, where the United Nations has been 
present for 30 years and more, we have a real chance of 
a settlement, thanks to new leadership, which has our 
support. 
 In Afghanistan, the International Security 
Assistance Force is training Afghans to take back their 
country after two generations of almost constant 
conflict. When the Afghan Government can deny its 
land to Al-Qaida and its associates, the international 
community will have done its job, but the task is hard 
and long. Progress is encouraging, but must be 
continued and stepped up. 
 In the Sudan, United Nations peacekeepers help 
keep the fragile North-South peace agreement in place, 
but Darfur remains for all of us a disaster. It is the 
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan to create 
the conditions in Darfur that will allow the conflict to 
end and a new deal for the people of Darfur to be put in 
place. Justice has to be part of any sustainable peace. 
 Difficulty has never daunted the United Nations. 
Where we are rebuffed, we are resolute, so we must 
also send a powerful signal of our support for 
democracy and human rights in Zimbabwe. We must 
stand firm against oppression in Burma. We must, as 
we did yesterday, reaffirm the practical measures that 
underpin our determination to defeat poverty. Now 
would be the worst time to turn our back on the 
Millennium Development Goals. 
 We have reached a unique point in the world’s 
history. For the first time in human history, we have the 
opportunity to come together around a global covenant, 
to reframe the international architecture to make it fit 
for the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century, 
and to build the first truly global society and global 
citizenship. Our history is not our destiny, it is what we 
choose to make it. 
 Let us resolve today to end any irresponsibility, 
to protect the global public interest by cleaning up the 
world’s financial system and to reaffirm our 
commitment to meeting our global responsibilities on 
trade, poverty, energy and climate change, and let us 
act upon that as people, as Governments, as nations 
united. Let history record that ours was a truly global 
response to the first truly global crisis.May I first congratulate you, 
Sir, on your election as President of the Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I am sure that your wisdom and 
vast experience will guide us as we deliberate the many 
challenges that the world faces today. 
 The United Nations is the embodiment of our 
faith in the benefits of collective action and of 
multilateral approaches in resolving global issues. At 
the 2005 World Summit we pledged ourselves to an 
agenda for early and meaningful reform of the United 
Nations. However, we must acknowledge frankly that 
there has been little progress on the core elements of 
the reform agenda. 
 We need to make more determined efforts to 
revitalize the General Assembly to enable it to fulfil its 
rightful role as the principal deliberative organ of the 
United Nations system. The composition of the 
Security Council needs to change to reflect 
contemporary realities of the twenty-first century. Only 
a truly representative and revitalized United Nations 
can become the effective focal point for the 
cooperative efforts of the world community. We need 
to expeditiously hold negotiations towards this end. 
 Globalization has contributed to ever-widening 
circles of prosperity, and we in India have also 
benefited from it. But its benefits have not been 
equitably distributed. Ensuring inclusive growth within 
nations, and inclusive globalization across nations, is a 
central challenge facing us all. 
 The development gains that many countries have 
made are today threatened by a possible food crisis, a 
global energy crisis and, most recently, unprecedented 
upheavals in international financial markets. 
 The net impact of these problems is that both the 
industrialized economies and the developing 
economies face inflation and a slowdown in growth 
after several years of robust expansion. Industrialized 
countries can afford periods of slow growth. 
Developing countries cannot. There is therefore an 
urgent need for coordinated action by the global 
community on several fronts. 
 The explosion of financial innovation 
unaccompanied by credible systemic regulation has 
made the financial system vulnerable. The resulting 
crisis of confidence threatens global prosperity in the 
increasingly interdependent world in which we all live. 
There is, therefore, a need for a new international 
initiative to bring structural reform in the world’s 
financial system, with more effective regulation and 
 
 
9 08-52265 
 
stronger systems of multilateral consultations and 
surveillance. This must be designed in as inclusive a 
manner as possible. 
 The world food crisis is the cumulative 
consequence of the neglect of agriculture in the 
developing world, exacerbated by distortionary 
agricultural subsidies in the developed world. 
Diversion of cultivable land for producing biofuels is 
compounding the problem. 
 The world needs a second green revolution to 
address the problem of food security. We need new 
technologies, new institutional responses and above all 
a global compact to ensure food and livelihood 
security. This will require transfer of technology and 
innovation from developed to developing countries. 
India is very keen to expand cooperation with Africa in 
Africa’s quest for food and livelihood security for its 
people. 
 Trade liberalization in agriculture can help, 
provided it adequately takes into account the livelihood 
concerns of poor and vulnerable farmers in the 
developing and least developed countries. 
 It is feared that many of the conflicts of the 
twenty-first century will be over water. We must 
therefore reflect on how to use this scarce resource 
most efficiently. We need to invest in new technologies 
and new production regimes for rain-fed and dryland 
agriculture and explore cost-effective desalination 
technologies. 
 Poverty, ignorance and disease still afflict 
millions and millions of people. The commitment to 
achieve the ambitious targets set as part of the 
Millennium Development Goals was an 
acknowledgement by the international community that 
global prosperity and welfare are indivisible and that 
affluence cannot coexist with pervasive poverty. 
 Unfortunately, solemn commitments made for the 
transfer of financial resources from the developed to 
the developing world have remained largely 
unfulfilled. The commitment of developed countries to 
move to the target set long ago of 0.7 per cent of gross 
national income as official development assistance 
needs to be honoured as a matter of priority. In this 
context, special efforts have to be made to address the 
concerns of Africa for adequate resource flows to 
support its development. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
closely linked to energy security. We need a much 
greater measure of predictability and stability in the oil 
and gas markets. We need to think of ways and means, 
such as early warning mechanisms, to help countries 
cope with oil shocks. 
 We must put in place a global cooperative 
network of institutions of developed and developing 
countries engaged in research and development in 
energy efficiency, clean energy technologies, and 
renewable sources of energy. 
 India is registering rapid economic growth, and 
has combined it with declining energy intensity of its 
economy. However, our total demand will keep 
increasing, and we are actively looking for all possible 
sources of clean energy. 
 The opening of international civil nuclear 
cooperation with India will have a positive impact on 
global energy security and on the efforts to combat 
climate change. This is a vindication of India’s 
impeccable record on non-proliferation and testifies to 
our long-standing commitment to nuclear disarmament 
that is global, universal and non-discriminatory in 
nature. The blueprint for this was spelled out by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in this very Assembly 20 years 
ago. 
 I reiterate India’s proposal for a nuclear weapons 
convention prohibiting the development, production, 
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and providing 
for their complete elimination within a specified time 
frame. 
 Climate change can be overcome successfully 
only through a collaborative and cooperative global 
effort. 
 We support the multilateral negotiations now 
taking place under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. The outcome must be 
fair and equitable and recognize the principle that each 
citizen of the world has equal entitlement to the global 
atmospheric space. 
 I believe that the pursuit of ecologically 
sustainable development need not be in contradiction 
to achieving our growth objectives. As Mahatma 
Gandhi once said, “The earth has enough resources to 
meet people’s needs, but will never have enough to 
satisfy people’s greed.”  
  
 
08-52265 10 
 
 India has unveiled an ambitious national action 
plan on climate change. Even as we pursue economic 
growth, we are committed to our per capita emissions 
of greenhouse gases not exceeding those of the 
developed countries. 
 The growing assertion of separate identities and 
ethnic, cultural and religious intolerance threaten our 
developmental efforts and our peace and stability. It is 
vital that we strengthen international cooperation to 
combat terrorism and to bring the perpetrators, 
organizers, financers and sponsors of terrorism to 
justice. We should conclude expeditiously the draft 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 In this context, the situation in Afghanistan is a 
matter of deep concern. The international community 
must pool all its resources to ensure the success of 
Afghanistan’s reconstruction efforts and its emergence 
as a moderate, pluralistic and democratic society. 
 We welcome the return of democracy in Pakistan. 
We are committed to resolving all outstanding issues 
between India and Pakistan, including the issue of 
Jammu and Kashmir, through peaceful dialogue. 
 We also welcome the coming to power of 
democratically elected Governments in Nepal and 
Bhutan. We seek to expand areas of cooperation with 
all these countries to deal with the challenges of 
sustainable development and poverty eradication. 
 The United Nations is a living symbol of 
pluralism. It has weathered many storms. It is the 
vehicle through which our combined will and efforts to 
address global challenges must be articulated and 
implemented. Unless we rise to the task, we will 
bequeath to succeeding generations a world of 
diminishing prospects. Over 60 years have passed 
since the General Assembly voted on the historic 
resolution that would have put an end to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Resolution 181 (II) called for the 
establishment of a Jewish State and an Arab State. Its 
title was: “Plan of Partition with Economic Union”. It 
envisioned two States for two peoples, fulfilling a 
distinct national aspiration. The Jewish people adopted 
the resolution and established the State of Israel. The 
Arabs rejected it, and this led to war. 
 What happened in the ensuing years is much 
different from the resolution’s original intent. While 
much has changed since then, the ironies of history 
summon similar circumstances today. Today, again, we 
are in the middle of the lake. There is no sense going 
back. Continuing forward will show how near we are 
to achieving the initial goal. 
 A year prior to Israel’s declaration of statehood, 
its first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, called me, 
a young man from a kibbutz, to serve in our national 
defence. Since then, I have participated in Israel’s 
dynamic realities: the building of security; the striving 
for peace. So, I need no books to learn the history, 
since I witnessed its miraculous unfolding. We went 
through seven wars. All have paid heavily. Tears still 
flow down the faces of bereaved mothers. 
Remembrance days fill the air with silent prayers of 
widowed families who lost young boys and girls in 
battle. They are, today, the same age, but lifeless.  
 Israel turned military victories into peace 
processes, knowing that the cost of life renders 
imperfect peace superior to perfect victories. 
 We have also achieved two peace agreements: the 
first, with the largest Arab country, Egypt; the second, 
with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. All the land, 
all the water, all the natural resources that fell into our 
hands through war were completely repatriated after 
peace was signed.  
 But for peace, the call in our region is to repair 
the damaged environment and the wounded land which 
leads to poverty. If we do not overcome the desert, the 
thirst, the pollution, they will overcome us. Joint 
 
 
33 08-51749 
 
ventures can meet this call. Nature does not carry a 
national passport. 
 With the Palestinians, we negotiate full peace. 
Both parties agreed to building a Palestinian State side 
by side with Israel, living in peace, security and 
respect. We tried to conclude those negotiations this 
year. Apparently, this will take a longer time. I believe 
it can be accomplished, in spite of this, within the next 
year. 
 I know that our Prime Minister is more than 
ready to conclude an agreement. And knowing 
President Abbas as well, I am sure he will not miss this 
opportunity. We agreed to progress in spite of possible 
changes that may take place in the leadership. Gaps 
have been narrowed through negotiations, particularly, 
and hopefully, the territorial ones. 
 But peace is not just a matter of territorial 
compromise. Rogue politics rejects peace even when 
and where territorial disputes have been resolved. In 
Lebanon, we implemented the resolutions of the United 
Nations, but Hizbullah paralysed the country and cut 
the road to peace. 
 From Gaza, we withdrew completely and 
dismantled all of our settlements. I know there are a 
great many complaints about the settlements: in Gaza, 
we dismantled 30 settlements by order of the 
Government; Hamas responded with a bloody takeover 
and turned the Strip into a base for rocket fire. 
 These militants offer no positive alternative but 
the agonies of Job. They added kidnapping to 
bombings, bringing strife to innocent families. From 
this rostrum, I call for the immediate release of Gilad 
Shalit, the son of Aviva and Noam, a most peace-loving 
family. This Assembly should place the release of that 
person at the top of its priorities. Holding a hostage in 
Gaza, causes Gaza’s isolation and could cause further 
deterioration. 
 At the centre of this violence and fanaticism 
stands Iran. It presents a danger to the entire world. Its 
quest for religious hegemony and regional dominance 
divides the Middle East and holds back chances for 
peace, including among Arabs, while undermining 
human rights. 
 Iranian support for Hizbullah divides Lebanon. 
Its support for Hamas splits the Palestinians; it 
postpones the establishment of the Palestinian State. 
Yesterday, from this very rostrum, the Iranian leader 
renewed the darkest anti-Semitic libel — the 
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion” — bringing to life 
one of the ugliest plots against the Jewish people. Their 
despicable denial of the Holocaust is a mockery of 
indisputable evidence and a cynical offence against the 
survivors of the Holocaust, contrary to the resolutions 
adopted by this very Assembly. 
 Iran continues to develop enriched uranium and 
long-range missiles. It has introduced a religion of fear, 
opposing the call of the Lord to respect human life: all 
humans; all life. The Iranian people are not our 
enemies. Their fanatical leadership is their problem 
and the world’s woe. Their leader is a danger to his 
own people, to the region and to the world. He is a 
disgrace to the ancient Iranian people and tradition. He 
is a disgrace to the values of Islam and all religions. He 
is a disgrace to this House, the United Nations, and its 
basic principles and values. His appearance here is a 
shame.  
 The Jewish people have known throughout 
history that they must stand firm and face evil. 
Enlightened humanity should make it possible for 
freedom and respect to prevail for all of us.  
 Tehran combines long-range missiles with short-
range minds. It is pregnant with tragedies. The General 
Assembly and the Security Council bear the 
responsibility to prevent agonies before they take 
place.  
 Israel has shown that democracies can defend 
themselves. We are able to defend ourselves. We do not 
intend to change that capacity to defend ourselves.  
 Terrorism has not solved a single problem. It 
never has; it never will. It will make the world 
ungovernable. If groups of killers are allowed to 
threaten innocent masses, the world — if it continues 
to survive — will be without order and security, a 
hopeless battleground. The free world must unite to 
stop this, to combat it. 
 Israel, for its part, shall continue to seek peace 
sincerely and fully. We suggest immediate peace with 
Lebanon. Israeli Prime Ministers have indicated to 
Syria that, for peace, we are ready to explore a 
comprehensive compromise. To gain trust and save 
time, we have suggested a face-to-face meeting with 
President Assad. I say to the President: “Follow the 
successful example set by President Sadat and King 
Hussein”. We await an answer. 
  
 
08-51749 34 
 
 I know there is a growing concern that peace is 
far away. My lifelong experience provides me with a 
different judgement. True, I have seen stagnation, 
regression and failure in our journey, but today I can 
identify a road leading in the right direction. In 
addition to the peace agreements, a series of summits 
have taken place: Madrid, Oslo, Wye, Camp David, 
Sharm el-Sheik, Annapolis. In fact, Israelis and Arabs 
are marching towards peace. After a long internal 
debate, Israel has chosen to support the two-State 
solution. 
 Furthermore, I must say that in Beirut, the Arab 
League replaced the three “nays” of Khartoum — 
which were no peace, no negotiation, no recognition — 
with an initiative inaugurated by King Abdullah Bin 
Abdulaziz Al Saud. I call upon the King to further his 
initiative. It may become an invitation for 
comprehensive peace — one to transform a 
battleground into a common ground. 
 I respectfully invite all leaders to come to discuss 
peace in Jerusalem — which is holy to all of us — 
where all of us are praying to the same Lord as 
offspring of the same Father. Israel shall gladly accept 
an Arab invitation to designate a venue where a 
meaningful dialogue may take place at their choice. 
 We are facing a serious economic crisis in the 
world. Perhaps it has happened because we are rich and 
light with funds and poor and heavy with ideas, while 
we live in an era in which science, not land, is the basis 
for a successful economy. Science does not stop at 
borders; it is not disturbed by distances. Wisdom 
cannot be conquered by armies. Knowledge diminishes 
discrimination because it operates through goodwill 
and transcends race, nationality, colour and gender. 
 The global dangers unite and divide us at the 
same time. The dangers are clear: degradation of the 
environment, shortage of water, lack of renewable 
energy, the spread of terrorism and, alas, increased 
poverty among millions and millions of people. The 
divisions of the free world may increase them. Unity 
may offer alternatives. It would direct global 
investments to new areas and to demanding challenges 
such as health, security, education and the 
environment. 
 The future is not in the hands of oil or gold. 
Intellectual assets, new inventions and superior 
education hold the key to the future of each of us. In 
our region, border areas could become open economic 
zones, permitting the free movement of people, 
commodities and ideas. They could encourage tourism 
and build high-tech incubators. They could cultivate 
and advance modern agriculture. Economic zones 
would provide a million jobs and produce billions of 
cubic metres of desalinated water for the Arabs, for the 
Palestinians, for the Jordanians, for Israel — for all of 
us. We have already started to do this; the initial steps 
are promising. 
 The Jewish people are celebrating a New Year. I 
would like to end with a quote by Rabbi Nachman of 
Breslav: 
 “May it be thy will to remove war and bloodshed 
from the world and perpetuate the wonders and 
greatness of peace. All the inhabitants of the 
world shall recognize and know the truth: that we 
have not been placed on this earth to wage war 
and not for hatred or bloodshed.” 
I will repeat it in Hebrew. 
 (The speaker repeated the quote in Hebrew)Sixty-three years 
after its formation, the United Nations remains the 
world’s central international body. Only here do all 
countries come together to devise solutions and to 
forge collective action on global challenges. And these 
are particularly challenging times. As the Secretary-
General and many others have noted, we are facing a 
global financial crisis, a global energy crisis and a 
global food crisis. More than ever before, we are an 
interconnected and interdependent world community. 
The Charter goals of peace and prosperity require the 
full support of all United Nations Members. New 
Zealand was a founding member in 1945, and our 
commitment to this body is as strong now as it was 
then. 
 At such a difficult time in the world we need 
leadership, courage and a recommitment of our 
resources to tackle the issues before us. When the food 
crisis was first in the headlines, the Secretary-
General’s High-Level Task Force provided a 
mechanism for us all to respond. Having contributed 
nearly $NZ 10 million to date, New Zealand is among 
those assisting with urgent food security needs and 
medium-term policy responses. A successful 
conclusion of the Doha Development Round would 
alleviate much of the pressure on the demand-supply 
imbalance. 
 On the development theme of this sixty-third 
session, New Zealand fully associates with the 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Global Call to 
Action Campaign. Support is urgently needed to 
revitalize collective efforts, including developing and 
strengthening partnerships between traditional and new 
donors, the private sector and civil society, and through 
South-South cooperation. We are set to play our part. 
 New Zealand is significantly stepping up official 
development assistance (ODA) from 0.27 per cent of 
gross national income in 2007 to 0.35 per cent by 
2010-2011. That 62 per cent increase will take New 
Zealand aid to over $NZ 600 million. 
 We are acutely aware that the Pacific is the 
second region after sub-Saharan Africa that is least 
likely to meet the MDG targets. We are therefore 
looking to direct our increased ODA there, through a 
Pacific strategy, which focuses poverty reduction 
efforts around four key pillars: strengthening 
governance, achieving broader-based growth and 
sustainable livelihoods, improving health and 
education, and reducing vulnerabilities, including to 
climate change. 
 In these challenging times, we look to the United 
Nations to deliver effectively for development, for 
peace and security and on human rights. Our 
Organization must continue to evolve along with the 
changing demands on it. Momentum needs to be 
maintained in the modernization of the United Nations. 
We share the Secretary-General’s vision for that and 
support his proposals to fix the human resources 
management system, which he has characterized as 
dysfunctional. 
 I would now like to turn to the challenges of 
peace and security around the world, from which our 
own region is not immune. At the Pacific Islands 
Forum held in Niue last month, New Zealand and other 
members of the Pacific Forum community expressed 
profound disappointment at Fiji’s lack of progress 
towards restoring democratic government. The Forum 
communiqué urged the interim regime in Fiji to fulfil 
  
 
08-53141 26 
 
its promise to hold elections in accordance with Fiji’s 
existing constitution by March next year. Leaders also 
acknowledged that there were long-term issues to be 
resolved in Fiji and supported a Commonwealth-led 
independent and inclusive political dialogue process to 
address them. That will not only create a more 
conducive environment for elections, but also enable a 
newly elected Government to engage with key 
stakeholders to promote national reconciliation. New 
Zealand urges all United Nations Members to support 
the steps taken by the Pacific Islands Forum to 
encourage Fiji to return to democratic and 
constitutional government as soon as possible. 
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Our region is also home to Timor-Leste, a partner 
and friend of New Zealand. We are pleased to see 
encouraging progress since last year’s elections, 
especially the building of institutions and improving 
governance. That was achieved despite assassination 
attempts on Timor-Leste’s leadership. The United 
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) 
and the International Stabilization Force continue to 
play a valuable role in helping to maintain security. 
New Zealand strongly supports the UNMIT mandate 
and its extension beyond February 2009. Planning for 
security in the longer term, to ensure appropriately 
sized and resourced institutions with clearly delineated 
roles and responsibilities, is also a key issue, and we 
stand ready to help. 
 Also within our region, the political, economic 
and human rights situation in Myanmar remains 
troubling. We urge the Myanmar authorities to achieve 
national reconciliation through open and constructive 
dialogue and to respect universal human rights in the 
country, consistent with international obligations. We 
support the efforts of the United Nations to sustain a 
dialogue with the Myanmar Government in order to 
build foundations for the future. 
 On the African continent, the humanitarian 
disaster caused by the conflict in Darfur is 
unacceptable. The targeting of civilians by State and 
non-State parties, is a flagrant breach of international 
human rights law. The widespread absence of justice 
and accountability for such human rights violations and 
the impunity that this promotes represent major 
obstacles to improving the human rights situation in 
Darfur. 
 In the case of Zimbabwe, the recent 
announcement of a power-sharing agreement offers 
hope that the long period of violent repression and 
human rights abuses by the previous Government can 
be brought to a close. The international community 
will be watching closely to see that all parties fulfil the 
commitments that they have made to bring about 
peace, respect for political freedom and human rights 
and a Government which reflects the will of the 
people. 
 Let me turn now to the Middle East. New 
Zealand continues to be strongly supportive of all 
attempts to find a lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. We share the international community’s vision 
for a viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian 
State, existing side by side in peace and security with 
the State of Israel. 
 In Afghanistan, despite political progress, the 
overall situation is fragile. The international 
community needs to devote more resources to ending 
the conflict and to assisting the people of Afghanistan 
in their efforts to stabilize and rebuild their country. 
New Zealand has expressed a strong commitment to 
restoring peace and security in Afghanistan with our 
assistance, both military and developmental, totalling 
more than 160 million New Zealand dollars to date. 
 Closer to home, New Zealand welcomes the 
recent improvement in cross-Strait relations. Cross-
Strait stability is vital to the security of the greater 
Asia-Pacific region. We encourage China and Taiwan 
to maintain the dialogue which has been established. 
 New Zealand remains a strong supporter of 
efforts to protect and maintain the international rule of 
law. To that end, one of the most significant advances 
in recent times has been the establishment of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). When the ICC was 
first established, it was widely considered to herald the 
beginning of a new era in international criminal justice. 
The Court has now reached a crucial stage in its 
development, and it has become clear that the 
establishment of a global justice system brings with it 
many challenges. It is of the utmost importance that 
States rise to those challenges. To fail to do so would 
be a betrayal of the victims of egregious crimes. New 
Zealand urges States to make every effort to ensure the 
independence and success of the Court. The Court 
needs our full support and cooperation to ensure that 
individuals responsible for the most serious violations 
 
 
27 08-53141 
 
of international law are brought to justice without 
delay. 
 In this sixtieth anniversary year of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, we acknowledge the 
many international human rights conventions that have 
arisen out of that unique statement of overriding 
principles. New Zealand played an active part in the 
design of the new Human Rights Council, and we are 
seeking election to the Council next year, so as to be 
more closely involved in its work. 
 The newest member of the family of human 
rights treaties is the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, which New Zealand ratified 
this month. We look forward to the first conference of 
States parties, and to the opportunity the Convention 
offers to make a real improvement in the lives and 
human rights of disabled people everywhere. 
 Finally, let me reiterate the importance that New 
Zealand attaches to the concept of the responsibility to 
protect. The United Nations, through the Security 
Council, should be prepared to protect people against 
ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes and crimes 
against humanity when national authorities fail to do 
so. There is a clear need to enhance early warning 
systems to enable the Council to act in a timely 
manner. We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General on the responsibility to protect, and we stand 
ready to help to take that important initiative forward. 
 As we look forward to the year ahead, New 
Zealand pledges to work actively with others in our 
collective stewardship of the United Nations. We shall 
play our part in the continuing, patient process of 
renewing our Organization and of making it more 
resilient and responsive. On 11 September 2001, the world changed, 
and it rallied together in the fight against the threat of 
terror, a threat that was common for all and knew no 
boundaries. I am referring to threat of terrorism. The 
world displayed an unprecedented level of solidarity by 
rejecting old phobias and stereotypes. It seemed that 
the global counter-terrorism coalition became a new 
reality that from then on would define the development 
of a system of international relations free from double 
standards and beneficial to all. 
 The cohesion in the face of the deadly threats 
emerging from Al-Qaida and other elements of 
international terrorism made it possible to achieve 
tangible success during the initial stage. But later, 
problems began to appear. A painful blow to the unity 
of the anti-terrorism coalition was delivered by the war 
in Iraq, when — as it turned out later, under the false 
pretext of the fight against terror and nuclear arms 
proliferation — international law was violated. The 
deepest crisis was thus created in a completely 
artificial way and even today it is far from being 
resolved. 
 Ever more questions are being raised about what 
is going on in Afghanistan. First and foremost, what is 
the acceptable price to pay in terms of the loss of 
civilians’ lives in the ongoing counter-terrorism 
operation? Who decides on criteria for determining 
proportionality in the use of force? And why are the 
international contingents that are present unwilling to 
engage in the fight against the proliferating drug threat 
that causes increasing suffering in the countries of 
Central Asia and Europe? These and other factors give 
us reason to believe that the counter-terrorism coalition 
is faced with a crisis.  
 Looking at the core of the problem, it seems that 
this coalition lacks the requisite collective 
arrangements: equality among all its members in 
deciding on strategy and, especially, operational 
tactics. But in order to control the entirely new 
situation that evolved after 9/11, which required 
genuine cooperative effort, including joint analysis and 
coordination of practical steps, mechanisms designed 
for a unipolar world began to be used; decisions were 
taken in a single centre of power, while the rest merely 
had to follow. 
 We ended up with a privatization of the 
international community’s efforts in the fight against 
terrorism. The inertia of the unipolar world also 
revealed itself in other spheres of international life, 
including unilateral steps taken in anti-missile defence 
and the militarization of outer space as well as in 
attempts to bypass parity in arms control regimes, 
expansion of political-military blocs, and politicization 
  
 
08-53129 2 
 
of the issues of access to and transport of energy 
resources. 
 The illusion of the existence of a unipolar world 
confused many. For some people, it generated a desire 
to place all of their eggs in one basket. In exchange for 
absolute loyalty, there was an expectation of carte 
blanche to resolve all problems, using any means. The 
emerging syndrome of complete permissiveness that 
developed led to a rampage on the night of 8 August, 
when aggression was unleashed on South Ossetia. The 
bombing of the sleeping city of Tskhinvali and the 
killing of civilians and peacekeepers trampled under 
foot all existing settlement agreements, thus putting an 
end to the territorial integrity of Georgia. 
 Russia helped South Ossetia to repel that 
aggression, and carried out its duty to protect its 
citizens and fulfil its peacekeeping commitments. 
Russia’s recognition of the independence of South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia was the only possible step to 
ensure not only their security, but also the very survival 
of their peoples, considering the previous record of 
chauvinism of the Georgian leaders — starting with the 
Georgian leader Zviad Gamsakhurdia who, in 1991, 
under the slogan of “Georgia for Georgians”, ordered 
the deportation of Ossetians to Russia, abolished the 
autonomous status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and 
later unleashed a bloody war against them.  
 That war was brought to an end at the cost of 
innumerable human lives, and peacekeeping and 
negotiation mechanisms were established with the 
approval of the United Nations and the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
However, the current Georgian leadership has pursued 
a persistent policy of undermining those mechanisms 
through relentless provocation, and finally nullified the 
peace process by launching a new murderous war on 
the night of 8 August. 
 This problem is now closed. The future of the 
peoples of Abkhazia and South Ossetia has been 
reliably secured by the treaties between Moscow and 
Tskhinvali and Sukhumi. With the implementation of 
the Medvedev-Sarkozy plan, to which we are strongly 
committed, the situation around the two republics will 
finally be stabilized. It is important that this plan 
should be strictly and unswervingly implemented by all 
parties. We are concerned, however, by the attempts to 
rewrite it after the fact. 
 I believe that everyone here has tired of playing 
the role of extras for the Georgian regime, whose 
words contain not a shred of truth and whose foreign 
policy is aimed exclusively at provoking confrontation 
throughout the world in the pursuit of their own 
objectives which invariably run counter to the 
objectives of the Georgian people and to the goal of 
ensuring security in the Caucasus. 
 Today, it is necessary to analyse the crisis in the 
Caucasus from the viewpoint of its impact on the 
region and the international community as a whole. 
The world has changed yet again. It has become 
absolutely clear that the solidarity demonstrated after 
9/11 must be revived through approaches untainted by 
geopolitical expediency and built on the rejection of 
double standards when fighting against any violations 
or breaches of international law — whether on the part 
of terrorists, political extremists or any others. 
 The crisis in the Caucasus has proved again that 
it is impossible to resolve the problems we face when 
blinded by the mirage of a unipolar world. The price 
we will have to pay in terms of human lives and 
destinies is too high. We cannot tolerate any attempts 
to resolve conflict situations by violating international 
agreements or by the unlawful use of force. If we allow 
that to occur once, then we run the risk of unleashing it 
in the future. 
 One cannot invoke the duty to defend in the 
abstract, and then be outraged when that principle is 
used in practice — and in strict conformity with Article 
51 of the United Nations Charter and other norms of 
international law. In South Ossetia, Russia defended 
the highest of our common values, the most essential 
human right: the right to live.  
 The existing security architecture in Europe did 
not pass the test of recent events. Attempts to adjust it 
to the rules of a unipolar world led to a situation where 
that architecture proved incapable of containing an 
aggressor or  preventing the supply of offensive 
weapons to it, contrary to all existing relevant codes of 
conduct. 
 We propose that this issue should be addressed in 
a comprehensive manner. President Dmitry 
A. Medvedev, of Russia, speaking in Berlin on 5 June, 
proposed an initiative on developing a Euro-Atlantic 
security treaty, a type of “Helsinki II”. This work could 
have been started at the Pan-European summit with the 
 
 
3 08-53129 
 
participation of all States as well as all organizations 
working in the region. 
 The treaty which we are proposing is meant to 
create a reliable collective security system that would 
ensure equal security for all States and set out, in 
legally binding form, the bases of relations among all 
participants, with a view to strengthening peace, 
ensuring stability and promoting integrated and 
manageable development efforts across the vast Euro-
Atlantic region. This would be a process in which all 
parties would reaffirm their commitment to 
fundamental principles of international law, such as the 
non-use of force; peaceful settlement of disputes; 
sovereignty; territorial integrity; non-interference in 
internal affairs; and the inadmissibility of 
strengthening one’s own security by infringing upon or 
endangering the security of others. We also need to 
consider together new mechanisms to ensure 
compliance with those fundamental principles. 
Naturally, such a treaty should organically fit into the 
legal framework of the United Nations Charter and its 
principles of collective security. 
 The cold war distorted the nature of international 
relations and turned them into an arena for ideological 
confrontation. Only now, after the cold war has ended, 
can the United Nations, created on the basis of a 
polycentric vision of the world, fully realize its 
potential. Today as never before, it is important that all 
States reaffirm their commitment to the United Nations 
as a global forum, to which there is no alternative and 
which possesses a universal mandate and generally 
recognized legitimacy, and as a centre for open, candid 
and frank debate and coordination of world policies on 
a just and equitable basis free from double standards. 
This is an essential requirement to ensure that the 
world regains its equilibrium. 
 The multitude of challenges that humanity is 
facing require comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations. In order to keep up with the times, the 
United Nations requires further rational reform to be 
able to gradually adapt itself to existing political and 
economic realities. On the whole, we are satisfied by 
the progress of the reform, including the initial results 
of the activities of the recently established 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council.  
 With regard to expansion of the membership of 
the Security Council, we will, of course, welcome 
proposals that do not divide United Nations Member 
States but rather facilitate the search for mutually 
acceptable compromises and lead to a broad-based 
agreement. 
 Of increasing importance in the reform process is 
the promotion of dialogue and partnership among 
civilizations. Russia supports the Alliance of 
Civilizations and other initiatives in that regard. We 
reiterate our proposal that a consultative council of 
religions be established under United Nations auspices, 
taking into account the increasing role of the religious 
aspect in international life. That would assist in 
strengthening moral principles and incorporating them 
into international affairs.  
 Among the priorities of United Nations activities, 
a number of urgent issues have recently appeared on 
the Organization’s agenda, including climate change 
and food and energy security. Those problems are 
global and interrelated, and they can be addressed and 
resolved only through a global partnership at a 
qualitatively new level, with active involvement by 
Governments, the scientific and business communities 
and civil society. 
 In particular, the current financial crisis requires 
urgent attention and synergy of efforts. From this 
rostrum, the President of France has put forward 
important initiatives aimed at a cooperative search for 
ways to revitalize the international financial system 
that involve the world’s leading economies. In that 
context, we support the further development of 
partnerships between the members of the Group of 
Eight and key States in all developing regions. The 
Economic and Social Council could also play a role 
here. Russia will continue to participate responsibly in 
the work of various bodies of the United Nations 
system and in other contexts to help find an equitable 
solution to all those problems. 
 The international development assistance 
mechanisms being established in Russia will help us to 
increase the extent and effectiveness of our 
participation in international efforts to fight hunger and 
disease, to promote broader access to education and to 
overcome energy shortages, which will be our 
additional contribution to the achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals. It is only natural that, 
in so doing, we should pay particular attention to 
assisting nearby countries. All countries have partners 
with which they share traditional friendly relations 
  
 
08-53129 4 
 
based on a common history and geography. It is wrong 
to artificially undermine such relationships for the 
benefit of geopolitical schemes and against the will of 
the people.  
 We will continue to work together with all our 
neighbours. First and foremost, along with the other 
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
we will continue to develop the integration processes 
within the Collective Security Treaty Organization and 
the Eurasian Economic Community in order to 
preserve and promote our common heritage of culture 
and civilization, which, in a globalizing world, is a 
major resource of the Commonwealth and of each of its 
member States. That is why we have a particular 
interest in cooperating with those countries, and it is 
also why they view Russia as an area of special 
interest. We will therefore base our relations on the 
principles of equality, mutual benefit, respect for and 
consideration of one another’s interests and compliance 
with existing agreements, in particular those on the 
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is also the way in 
which we intend to develop our relations in other 
regions of the world: openly, on the basis of 
international law and without any zero-sum games. 
Those principles were set out in the foreign policy 
concept approved by President Medvedev in July this 
year.  
 Russia is consistently implementing its network 
diplomacy and promoting cooperation in various 
formats: the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the 
BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India and China — 
partnership mechanisms with the European Union, the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of 
Arab States and regional organizations in Latin 
America. 
 The developments that occurred in August gave 
us yet another occasion to think about the 
responsibility to report events accurately. Distortions 
of reality hamper international efforts to settle conflicts 
and crises and revive the worst practices of the cold-
war era. If we wish to prevent the truth from becoming 
the first casualty of war, we must draw the appropriate 
conclusions, in particular in the light of a provision of 
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International 
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation 
among States in accordance with the Charter of the 
United Nations, which states that States have the duty 
to refrain from propaganda for wars of aggression. 
That is in line with the Guidelines on protecting 
freedom of expression and information in times of 
crisis, recently adopted by the Committee of Ministers 
of the Council of Europe. I propose that the United 
Nations also issue a statement on that issue, this time 
in a universal context.  
 The obvious global effects of the crisis in the 
Caucasus show that the world has changed for 
everyone. There are now fewer illusions and fewer 
pretexts for refusing to respond to the most urgent 
challenges of modern times. That is precisely why we 
hope that the international community will, on the 
basis of common sense, finally manage to develop a 
programme of collective action for the twenty-first 
century. I am pleased to be here to 
address the General Assembly. Sixty-three years ago, 
representatives from around the world gathered in San 
Francisco to complete the founding of the Charter of 
the United Nations. They met in the shadow of a 
devastating war, with grave new dangers on the 
horizon. They agreed on a historic pledge to reaffirm 
faith in fundamental human rights and unite their 
strength to maintain international peace and security. 
That noble pledge has endured trying hours in United 
Nations history, and it still guides our work today.  
 
 
9 08-51570 
 
 Yet the ideals of the Charter are now facing a 
challenge as serious as any since the United Nations 
founding: a global movement of violent extremists. By 
deliberately murdering the innocent to advance their 
aims, those extremists defy the fundamental principles 
of international order. They show contempt for all who 
respect life and value human dignity. They reject the 
words of the Bible, the Koran, the Torah or any 
standard of conscience of morality. They imperil the 
values of justice and human rights that gave birth to the 
United Nations — values that have fuelled an 
unprecedented expansion of freedom across the world.  
 To uphold the words of the Charter in the face of 
this challenge, every nation in this Hall has 
responsibilities. As sovereign States, we have an 
obligation to govern responsibly and solve problems 
before they spill across borders. We have an obligation 
to prevent our territory from being used as a sanctuary 
for terrorism, proliferation, human trafficking and 
organized crime. We have an obligation to respect the 
rights and respond to the needs of our people.  
 Multilateral organizations have responsibilities. 
For eight years, the nations in this Assembly have 
worked together to confront the extremist threat. We 
have witnessed successes and setbacks, and through it 
all a clear lesson has emerged. The United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations are needed more 
urgently than ever. To be successful, we must be 
focused, resolute and effective.  
 Instead of only adopting resolutions decrying 
terrorist acts after they occur, we must cooperate more 
closely to keep terrorist attacks from happening in the 
first place. Instead of treating all forms of Government 
as equally tolerable, we must actively challenge the 
conditions of tyranny and despair that allow terror and 
extremists to thrive. By acting together to meet the 
fundamental challenge of our time, we can lead 
towards a world that is more secure, more prosperous 
and more hopeful.  
 In the decades ahead, the United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations must continually 
confront terror. That mission requires clarity of vision. 
We must see the terrorists for what they are: ruthless 
extremists who exploit the desperate, subvert the tenets 
of a great religion and seek to impose their will on as 
many people as possible. Some suggest that those men 
would pose less of a threat if we would only leave 
them alone, yet their leaders make clear that no 
concession could ever satisfy their ambitions. Bringing 
the terrorists to justice does not create terrorism. It is 
the best way to protect our people.  
 Multilateral organizations must respond by taking 
an unequivocal moral stand against terrorism. No cause 
can justify the deliberate taking of innocent life, and 
the international community is nearing universal 
agreement on this truth. The vast majority of nations in 
this Assembly now agree that tactics like suicide 
bombing, hostage-taking and hijacking are never 
legitimate. The Security Council has adopted 
resolutions declaring terror unlawful and requiring all 
nations to crack down on terrorist financing. Earlier 
this month, the Secretary-General held a conference to 
highlight victims of terror, where he stated that 
terrorism can never be justified. 
 Other multilateral organizations have spoken 
clearly as well. The Group of 8 has declared that all 
terrorist acts are criminal and must be universally 
condemned. The Secretary-General of the Organization 
of the Islamic Conference recently spoke out against 
suicide bombing, which he said runs counter to the 
teachings of Islam.  
 The message behind those statements is 
resolutely clear. Like slavery and piracy, terrorism has 
no place in the modern world. Around the globe, 
nations are turning those words into action. Members 
of the United Nations are sharing intelligence with one 
another, conducting joint operations and freezing 
terrorists’ finances. While terrorists continue to carry 
out attacks like the terrible bombing in Islamabad last 
week, our joint actions have spared our citizens from 
many devastating blows.  
 The brutal nature of the extremists is increasingly 
clear and the coalition of nations confronting terrorists 
is growing stronger. Over the past seven years, 
Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from 
regimes that actively sponsor terror to democracies that 
fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror 
and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi 
Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. 
A few nations, regimes like Syria and Iran, continue to 
sponsor terror, yet their numbers are growing fewer 
and they are growing more isolated from the world.  
 As the twenty-first century unfolds, some may be 
tempted to assume that the threat has receded. That 
would be comforting. It would be wrong. The terrorists 
believe time is on their side, so they have made waiting 
  
 
08-51570 10 
 
out civilized nations part of their strategy. We must not 
allow them to succeed. The nations of this body must 
stand united in the fight against terror. We must 
continue working to deny the terrorists refuge 
anywhere in the world, including ungoverned spaces. 
We must remain vigilant against proliferation by fully 
implementing the terms of resolution 1540 (2004) and 
enforcing sanctions against North Korea and Iran. We 
must not relent until our people are safe from this 
threat to civilization. 
 To uphold the Charter’s promise of peace and 
security in the twenty-first century, we must also 
confront the ideology of the terrorists. At its core, the 
struggle against extremists is a battle of ideas. 
Terrorists envision a world in which religious freedom 
is denied, women are oppressed and all dissent is 
crushed. The nations represented in this Hall must 
present a more hopeful alternative — a vision where 
people can speak freely, worship as they choose and 
pursue their dreams in liberty.  
 Advancing this vision of freedom serves our 
highest ideals, as expressed in the United Nations 
Charter’s commitment to the dignity and worth of the 
human person. Advancing this vision also serves our 
security interests. History shows that when citizens 
have a voice in choosing their own leaders, they are 
less likely to search for meaning in radical ideologies, 
and when Governments respect the rights of their 
people, they are more likely to respect the rights of 
their neighbours. 
 For all these reasons, the nations of this body 
must challenge tyranny as vigorously as we challenge 
terror. Some question whether people in certain parts of 
the world actually desire freedom. This self-serving 
condescension has been disproved before our eyes. 
From the voting booths of Afghanistan, Iraq and 
Liberia to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Rose 
Revolution in Georgia, the Cedar Revolution in 
Lebanon and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, we 
have seen people consistently make the courageous 
decision to demand their liberty. 
 For all the suggestions to the contrary, the truth is 
that, whenever and wherever people are given the 
choice, they choose freedom. Nations represented in 
this Hall have supported the efforts of dissidents, 
reformers and civil society advocates in newly free 
societies through the new United Nations Democracy 
Fund, and we appreciate those efforts. As young 
democracies around the world continue to make brave 
stands for liberty, multilateral organizations like the 
United Nations must continue to stand with them. 
 In Afghanistan, a determined people are working 
to overcome decades of tyranny and protect their newly 
free society. They have strong support from all 26 
nations of the NATO alliance. I appreciate the United 
Nations decision this week to renew the mandate of the 
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
The United Nations also has an active civilian presence 
in Afghanistan, where experts are doing important 
work helping to improve education, facilitate 
humanitarian aid and protect human rights. We must 
continue to help the Afghan people defend their young 
democracy so that the Taliban does not return to power 
and Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terror. 
 In Iraq, the fight has been difficult, yet daily life 
has improved dramatically over the past 20 months 
thanks to the courage of the Iraqi people, a determined 
coalition of nations and a surge of American troops. 
The United Nations has provided the mandate for 
multinational forces in Iraq through this December, and 
the United Nations is carrying out an ambitious 
strategy to strengthen Iraq’s democracy, including 
helping Iraqis prepare for their next round of free 
elections. Whatever disagreements our nations have 
had on Iraq, we should all welcome this progress 
towards stability and peace and we should stand united 
in helping Iraq’s democracy succeed.  
 We must stand united in our support of other 
young democracies, from the people of Lebanon 
struggling to maintain their hard-won independence to 
the people of the Palestinian territories, who deserve a 
free and peaceful State of their own. We must stand 
united in our support of the people of Georgia. The 
United Nations Charter sets forth the equal rights of 
nations large and small; Russia’s invasion of Georgia 
was a violation of those rights. Young democracies 
around the world are watching to see how we respond 
to this test. The United States has worked with allies in 
such multilateral institutions as the European Union 
and NATO to uphold Georgia’s territorial integrity and 
provide humanitarian relief. Our nations will continue 
to support Georgia’s democracy. 
 In this Hall are representatives of Georgia, 
Ukraine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Liberia, Iraq and other 
brave young democracies. We admire their courage, we 
honour their sacrifices, and we thank them for their 
 
 
11 08-51570 
 
inspiring example. We will continue to stand with all 
who stand for freedom. This noble goal is worthy of 
the United Nations and it should have the support of 
every member of this Assembly.  
 Extending the reach of political freedom is 
essential to prevailing in the great struggle of our time, 
but it is not enough. Many in this Hall have answered 
the call to help their brothers and sisters in need by 
working to alleviate hopelessness. Those efforts to 
improve the human condition honour the highest ideals 
of this institution. They also advance our security 
interests. The extremists find their most fertile 
recruiting grounds in societies trapped in chaos and 
despair — places where people see no prospect of a 
better life. In the shadows of hopelessness, radicalism 
thrives. Eventually, that radicalism can boil over into 
violence, cross borders and take innocent lives across 
the world.  
 Overcoming hopelessness requires addressing its 
causes: poverty, disease and ignorance. Challenging 
these conditions is in the interest of every nation in this 
Hall, and democracies are particularly well positioned 
to carry out that work because we have experience 
responding to the needs of our own people. We are 
natural partners in helping other nations respond to the 
needs of theirs. Together, we must commit our 
resources and efforts to advancing education, health 
and prosperity.  
 Over the years, many nations have made well-
intentioned efforts to promote these goals, but the 
success of these efforts must be measured by more than 
intentions. It must be measured by results. My nation is 
placing insistence on results at the heart of our foreign 
assistance programmes. We launched a new initiative, 
called the Millennium Challenge Account, which 
directs our help to countries that demonstrate their 
ability to produce results by governing justly, fighting 
corruption and pursuing market-based economic 
policies, as well as investing in their people. Every 
country and institution that provides foreign assistance, 
including the United Nations, will be more effective by 
showing faith in the people of the developing world 
and insisting on performance in return for aid.  
 Experience also shows that, to be effective, we 
must adopt a model of partnership, not paternalism. 
This approach is based on our conviction that people in 
the developing world have the capacity to improve 
their own lives and will rise to meet high expectations 
if we set them. America sought to apply this model in 
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Every nation that 
receives American support through this initiative 
develops its own plan for fighting HIV/AIDS and 
measures the results.  
 So far, these results are inspiring. Five years ago, 
50,000 people in sub-Saharan Africa were receiving 
treatment for HIV/AIDS; today, that number is nearly 
1.7 million. We are taking a similar approach to 
fighting malaria, and so far we have supported local 
efforts to protect more than 25 million Africans. 
Multilateral organizations have made bold 
commitments of their own to fight disease. The G-8 
has pledged to match America’s efforts on malaria and 
HIV/AIDS. Through the Global Fund, many countries 
are working to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria and 
tuberculosis. Lives in the developing world depend on 
these programmes, and all who have made pledges to 
fight disease have an obligation to follow through on 
their commitments.  
 One of the most powerful engines of development 
and prosperity are trade and investment, which create 
new opportunities for entrepreneurs, help people rise 
out of poverty and reinforce such fundamental values 
as transparency and the rule of law. For all these 
reasons, many represented in this Hall have conducted 
free-trade agreements at the bilateral and regional 
levels.  
 The most effective step of all would be an 
agreement that tears down trade barriers at the global 
level. The recent impasse in the Doha round is 
disappointing, but that does not have to be the final 
word. I urge every nation to seize this opportunity to 
lift up economies around the world and reach a 
successful Doha agreement as soon as possible. 
Beyond Doha, our nations must renew our commitment 
to open economies and stand firm against economic 
isolationism. These objectives are being tested by 
turbulence in the global financial markets.  
 Our economies are more closely connected than 
ever before, and I know that many of you here are 
watching how the United States Government will 
address the problems in our financial system. In recent 
weeks we have taken bold steps to prevent a severe 
disruption of the American economy, which would 
have a devastating effect on other economies around 
the world. We promote stability in the markets by 
preventing the disorderly failure of major companies. 
  
 
08-51570 12 
 
The Federal Reserve has injected urgently needed 
liquidity into the system. Last week, I announced 
decisive action by the federal Government to address 
the root cause of much of the instability in our 
financial markets by purchasing illiquid assets that are 
weighing down balance sheets and restricting the flow 
of credit. I can assure the Assembly that my 
Administration and our Congress are working together 
to quickly pass legislation approving this strategy. And 
I am confident that we will act in the urgent time frame 
required.  
 The objectives I have laid out for multilateral 
institutions confronting terror, opposing tyranny and 
promoting effective development are difficult, but they 
are necessary tasks. To have maximum impact, 
multilateral institutions must take on challenging 
missions, and like all of us in this Hall they must work 
towards measurable goals, be accountable for their 
actions and hold true to their word.  
 In the twenty-first century, the world needs a 
competent and effective United Nations. This unique 
institution should build on its successes and improve 
its performance. Where there is inefficiency and 
corruption, that must be corrected. Where there are 
bloated bureaucracies, they must be streamlined. 
Where Members fail to uphold their obligations, there 
must be strong action — for example, there should be 
an immediate review of the Human Rights Council, 
which has routinely protected violators of human 
rights. There should be a stronger effort to help the 
people of Burma live free of the repression they have 
suffered for too long. All nations, especially members 
of the Security Council, must act decisively to ensure 
that the Government of the Sudan upholds its 
commitment to address the violence in Darfur. 
 The United Nations is an Organization of 
extraordinary potential. As it rebuilds its Headquarters, 
it must also open the door to a new age of 
transparency, accountability and seriousness of 
purpose. With determination and clear purpose, the 
United Nations can be a powerful force for good as we 
head into the twenty-first century. It can affirm the 
great promise of its founding.  
 In the final days of the San Francisco Conference, 
the delegates negotiating the United Nations Charter 
received a visit from President Harry Truman. He 
acknowledged the enormous challenges they faced and 
said that success was possible only because of what he 
called an unshakable unity of determination. Today, the 
world is engaged in another period of great challenge, 
and by continuing to work together, that unshakable 
unity of determination will be ours. Together we can 
confront and defeat the evil of terrorism. Together we 
can secure the Almighty’s gift of liberty and justice to 
millions who have not known it. Together we can build 
a world that is freer, safer and better for the 
generations who follow. My 
delegation and I join in expressing our congratulations 
to you, Father Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, on your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session, and we hope you have a very 
successful and rewarding term at the helm of this body. 
We express our gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Srgjan 
Kerim for the excellent work done during his tenure as 
President of the Assembly at its sixty-second session.  
 Once again, we have come to this body to 
reaffirm the need for what we have always called for: 
the implementation of all the promises and pledges that 
we have made before. The focus of the sixty-third 
session of the General Assembly is on the global food 
crisis, climate change and reform of the United 
Nations. The confluence of the food, fuel and financial 
crises, as well as the effects of climate change, pose the 
real threat that they will undermine the progress made 
by developing countries in the struggle against poverty 
and underdevelopment. 
 During the Millennium Summit, held in 2000, our 
heads of State and Government adopted a Declaration 
(resolution 55/2) that communicated a message of hope 
and a vision of a better world. Included in the 
Declaration was an important section on the special 
needs of Africa. In paragraph 24 of the Declaration, the 
leaders stated that they would  
“spare no effort to promote democracy and 
strengthen the rule of law, as well as respect for 
all internationally recognized human rights and 
fundamental freedoms, including the right to 
development”.  
 African and many other, developing countries 
have indeed taken responsibility for promoting 
democracy, good governance, peace and stability and 
human rights. They are also hard at work rolling back 
the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment. But, 
despite those strides, it is clear that many in 
sub-Saharan Africa will not achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). Part of the reason is that 
the global partnership for development on which the 
achievement of the MDGs was predicated has not been 
fully implemented. Despite the lofty ideas expressed at 
previous sessions of the Assembly, we continue to fall 
short in meeting our commitments to implement that 
partnership, in particular in the areas of trade, aid and 
debt relief.  
 We express the fervent hope that the high-level 
meetings organized by yourself, Mr. President, and the 
Secretary-General, on Africa’s development needs and 
on the MDGs, have served not only as important 
reminders of the challenges we face, but also as a 
catalyst that will cause the world to feel a greater sense 
of urgency. 
 The necessary resources exist in the world to 
achieve the MDGs. We need to summon the necessary 
political will and compassion. So we join the sister 
countries of our continent in calling for massive 
resource transfers through development assistance, 
investment, trade, technology transfers and human 
resource development. These will ensure that African 
and other developing countries are able to successfully 
adapt to the devastating impact of climate change and 
achieve the MDGs. 
 However, in order to accelerate the achievement 
of all the Millennium Development Goals, much more 
attention needs to be focused on Goal 3, regarding the 
empowerment of women. Women need to be at the 
centre of development as agents of change, socially, 
economically and politically.  
  
 
08-53141 12 
 
 Billions of the people of the world, whom we are 
privileged to represent in the Assembly, have cast their 
eyes on this gathering of leaders. They have done so 
because they have hope that this leadership will take 
the required measures in order to address poverty and 
underdevelopment. We dare not fail them. 
 The food crisis has to be addressed in the short 
and medium terms. The Green Revolution that has 
been launched by the African Union needs partnerships 
in order to succeed. In addition, support for the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development will be a major 
contributor to the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. In that context, allow me, Mr. 
President, to quote from your own statement to the 
General Assembly with regard to that socio-economic 
programme as well as the role of our immediate former 
President, Thabo Mbeki:  
“During his presidency of the rainbow nation, 
spanning nearly a decade, he, along [with] other 
African leaders, championed the vision of 
NEPAD we still pursue today. When the affluent 
listen to Africa and partner with it, that vision is 
within reach. To quote NEPAD’s founding 
document: `In fulfilling its promise, this agenda 
must give hope to the emaciated African child 
that the twenty-first century is indeed Africa’s 
century.’” (, p. 3)  
 The Doha Development Round has stalled despite 
seven years of negotiations. We are convinced that 
trade and increased market access will make a major 
contribution to the achievement of the MDGs. In that 
regard, it is our submission that the Doha Round of 
trade negotiations should not be allowed to die, but 
must remain focused on development, as originally 
envisaged.  
 In recent years, we have all witnessed the 
devastating effects of climate change, especially on 
island States. Hurricanes have become more frequent 
and more vicious, together with droughts, floods and 
unpredictable extreme weather patterns in the rest of 
the world. Of course, climate change requires an urgent 
response. Given the agreement in Bali last year on a 
road map for negotiations, it is our hope that the 
negotiations, to be completed in Copenhagen in 2009, 
will necessarily set the stage for more concerted action 
by all countries to address climate change and all its 
manifestations, with the developed countries taking the 
lead. South Africa commits itself to approaching the 
preparations for Copenhagen constructively and with a 
view to reaching an agreement that is ambitious, 
balanced and inclusive. 
 We join the many leaders of the world who have 
expressed their support for fundamental reform of the 
system of global governance, including the United 
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions. It is 
important to understand that the critical issues facing 
the world today — the current financial, food and 
energy crises — cannot be addressed effectively when 
so many countries and regions of the world are left out 
of the key decision-making processes of important 
institutions of global governance. South Africa stands 
ready to work with other members of the United 
Nations to advance the goal of reform.  
 Equally, the reform of the Security Council need 
not be re-emphasized. We reiterate our view that a 
reformed Security Council would have more legitimacy 
and that its decisions would have more credibility. We 
welcome the recent decision (decision 62/557) to 
launch in the General Assembly inter-governmental 
negotiations on Security Council reform, to discuss 
plans for expanding the Security Council in both the 
non-permanent and permanent categories. It is of 
course a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
constitutes a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Unless 
the ideals of freedom, justice and equality become the 
character of the United Nations, including the Security 
Council, the dominant will continue to dictate to the 
dominated, while the dreams of the dominated will 
forever be deferred. 
 In December this year, my country will complete 
its tenure as a non-permanent member of the Security 
Council. We have indeed been privileged to serve the 
peoples of Africa and the world in that capacity; it has 
been a historic first for us as a young democracy. In 
that capacity, we were indeed honoured to contribute 
meaningfully to global efforts to create peace and 
stability in all regions of the world. Accordingly, we 
express the humble gratitude of the people of our 
country to the general membership of the United 
Nations for the trust placed in us in helping the world 
discharge this mandate. 
 During our tenure, the Security Council also 
focused on the important question of enhancing the 
relationship between the United Nations and regional 
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU). 
 
 
13 08-53141 
 
We were honoured to be able to contribute to that 
work. We congratulate the Secretary-General on 
appointing an African Union-United Nations panel of 
distinguished persons whose mandate is to explore 
financing modalities for AU-led peacekeeping 
missions. 
 Peace continues to evade the Middle East. South 
Africa participated in the Annapolis Conference in 
2007 with great expectations and hopes that progress 
would indeed be made to advance the goal of peace in 
that region. We will continue to support all 
international efforts to help the peoples of Palestine 
and Israel in their endeavour to find a lasting and 
peaceful solution to their challenges, leading to the 
establishment of a viable Palestinian State, coexisting 
side by side with the State of Israel, within secure 
borders. We understand full well the pain, suffering 
and agony that conflict brings to bear on the lives of 
ordinary people, particularly women and children. 
Those ordinary souls continue to cry out to this 
Assembly of the world, as they have done in the past, 
to help bring an end to the conflict. 
 South Africa will continue to work with the sister 
peoples of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Burundi and Côte d’Ivoire in their efforts to 
consolidate peace and democracy in their respective 
countries. With regard to Zimbabwe, the Assembly 
must certainly be aware of the recent developments led 
by our former President Thabo Mbeki in his capacity as 
the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) facilitator, which culminated in the signing of 
an agreement between the main political protagonists 
in the country. We hope that the leadership of 
Zimbabwe win soon finalize aspects of that agreement 
to make possible the formation of a new Government 
that will help lay the groundwork to address the 
political and economic challenges facing their country. 
SADC, the African Union and the facilitator stand as 
guarantors of the agreement. We call on the 
international community to spare neither strength nor 
effort in lending a hand to the people of Zimbabwe as 
they embark on the difficult path of reconciliation and 
reconstruction. 
 Equally, the situations in Somalia and the Sudan, 
and especially in Darfur, remain matters of great 
concern. South Africa will continue to do whatever it 
can, both bilaterally and in the context of the African 
Union and the United Nations, to help the peoples of 
Sudan and Somalia find peace among themselves. 
 We remain concerned about the impasse on the 
question of Western Sahara. South Africa is committed 
to seeking a just, mutually acceptable and lasting 
solution to that problem.  
 This year also marks the sixtieth anniversary of 
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. During the past six decades, the Declaration 
has remained the key standard for human rights, justice 
and dignity. We should therefore use this anniversary 
period to strengthen our resolve to defend human 
rights. South Africa has also had the honour to be 
reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review 
mechanism of the new Human Rights Council. We 
were also honoured with the appointment of our own 
Justice Navi Pillai to lead that very important 
international institution. 
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 We wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of 
the United Nations. In the Millennium Declaration, we 
reaffirmed that the United Nations “is the 
indispensable common house of the entire human 
family, through which we will seek to realize our 
universal aspirations for peace, cooperation and 
development” (resolution 55/2, para. 32). Leading 
South Africa’s delegation to the Millennium Summit 
was our former President, Thabo Mbeki, who reminded 
the Assembly that  
“Billions among the living struggle to survive in 
conditions of poverty, deprivation and 
underdevelopment ... as offensive to everything 
humane as anything we decry about the second 
millennium.” (A/55/PV.5, p. 18) 
 It is that understanding that has correctly 
informed the engagement of successive leaders of our 
democratic State with this body over the years. In that 
regard, we are touched and humbled by the kind 
comments made in the Assembly by the various heads 
of State or Government and heads of delegation, 
directed at our immediate former President, Thabo 
Mbeki. We most certainly shall, through our 
Government, convey those sentiments to that noble son 
of our people and our continent, and citizen of the 
world. 
 Accordingly, from this rostrum may I also 
express our sincere gratitude to the general 
membership of the United Nations for the support that 
  
 
08-53141 14 
 
former President Mbeki and our country received over 
the past nine-and-a-half years of his stewardship of our 
country. As the leadership of our country is passed on, 
we confirm that South Africa, under the guidance of 
President Kgalema Motlanthe, shall indeed continue to 
be a trusted and dependable partner in the common 
endeavour to strengthen our institutions of 
multilateralism, starting from the correct premise that 
multilateralism remains the only hope in addressing the 
challenges facing humanity today, whether they be 
terrorism, threats to human rights, peace and stability 
or, of course, the central struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. For 
China, this has been a special year. We experienced 
 
 
35 08-51749 
 
two major events. One was the devastating earthquake 
in Wenchuan, which caused grave loss of life and 
property. In the face of the disaster, the Chinese people 
showed great strength, courage, solidarity and 
resilience. By now, the people affected by the 
earthquake have been properly relocated and recovery 
and reconstruction work is well under way. The other 
event was the successful hosting of the Beijing 
Olympic Games. That grand sporting event provided a 
good opportunity for athletes from around the world to 
show true sportsmanship. It also enabled the world to 
learn more about China and for China to learn more 
about the world.  
 In our fight against the earthquake disaster and 
our efforts to host the Games, we received 
understanding, support and assistance from the 
international community. I wish to take this 
opportunity to express sincere gratitude on behalf of 
the Chinese Government and people.  
 Now the whole world wants to know in what 
direction China is heading, both politically and 
economically, after the Beijing Olympic Games. Let 
me tell you in unequivocal terms that China will 
remain committed to the path of peaceful development, 
unswervingly pursue reform and opening-up, and 
continue to adhere to an independent foreign policy of 
peace. This is in the fundamental interests of the 
Chinese people and the people of all other countries. It 
is also in keeping with the trend of the world. 
 The Olympic Games that just concluded were 
held in China, the largest developing country in the 
world. The international community has highly 
commended the efforts made by the Chinese 
Government and people for the Games, and their 
success has greatly inspired the Chinese people and 
given them even more confidence and strength to 
achieve modernization of the country.  
 At the same time, however, we are soberly aware 
that China is a country with 1.3 billion people. 
Although its total GDP is one of the highest in the 
world, it trails behind more than 100 countries in terms 
of per capita income. Development between urban and 
rural areas and among different regions in China is 
unbalanced. The rural areas, particularly in western 
China, are underdeveloped. Tens of millions of Chinese 
lack adequate food and clothing.  
 China is still a developing country, where 
productivity remains low and further development is 
constrained by the shortage of resources and energy 
and by environmental consequences. Our socialist 
market economic system, democracy and the rule of 
law need to be further improved, and certain 
outstanding social issues are yet to be resolved. To 
achieve China’s modernization is a daunting task, and 
we still have a long way to go. Both the opportunities 
and challenges that we face are unprecedented. We will 
seize the opportunities, rise up to challenges, dedicate 
ourselves to nation-building and focus on development. 
That is what the Chinese Government and people have 
been thinking and doing. 
 People may ask how China is achieving its 
development. The answer is through reform and 
opening up. This year marks the thirtieth anniversary 
of China’s reform and opening-up policy, a policy that 
fundamentally changed the closed, backward and 
ossified situation that had existed in China for years. It 
is a policy that freed people’s minds and aroused their 
initiative, liberated the productive forces, generated 
great economic and social progress and instilled vigour 
and vitality into the country. Without that policy, there 
would not have been such change in China in the last 
30 years.  
 To achieve the goal of modernization and build a 
strong, prosperous, democratic, culturally advanced 
and harmonious country, we will pursue the reform and 
opening-up policy. It is of vital importance to the 
development of China today. It is also a strategy that 
will shape China’s future. We are firm in carrying this 
policy forward. 
 The Chinese nation has all along cherished the 
fine tradition and benefited from the wisdom of being 
open to new ideas and drawing on the strengths of 
others. The Chinese people have learned from 30 years 
of reform and opening up that only continued 
economic and political restructuring and reform in 
other fields can lead to sustained economic growth and 
social progress. And only continued opening up in an 
all-round way can lead the country to greater national 
strength and prosperity. This is the conclusion we have 
drawn both from our practice and exploration and from 
historical experiences. 
 The world needs peace, for only with peace can 
there be development. China earnestly hopes to have a 
peaceful international environment in order to achieve 
its development goals. The Chinese Government is 
committed to an independent foreign policy of peace 
  
 
08-51749 36 
 
and stands ready to work with other countries to 
advance the noble cause of the peace and progress of 
mankind. 
 Respect for sovereignty and non-interference in 
the internal affairs of other countries is the prerequisite 
for sound State-to-State relations. The Chinese people 
have learned from their modern history of humiliation 
that when a country loses its sovereignty, its people 
lose dignity and status. China is firm in upholding its 
hard-won sovereignty and territorial integrity and will 
never tolerate any external interference. Following the 
principle of treating each other as equals, China also 
respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
other countries, as well as the independent choices of 
their people for their own social systems and 
development paths. 
 China is ready to develop friendly relations with 
all countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit 
rather than on ideology or on a political system. In 
handling international affairs, we make our own 
judgement on the merit of each case and take our 
position in light of our national interests and the well-
being of the world’s people. We will neither blindly 
follow the position of others nor give way to the 
pressure of any forces. In international relations, China 
does not seek to build alliances or become a leader and 
will never do so in the future. 
 Peaceful settlement of international disputes is a 
founding purpose of the United Nations and a basic 
principle of international law. China is committed to 
addressing historical issues and current differences 
with other countries through dialogue and negotiation. 
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China 
will continue to play an active and constructive role in 
promoting the peaceful settlement of international 
hotspot issues and regional conflicts. 
 China’s development is peaceful in nature. It will 
not harm anyone or pose a threat to anyone. China does 
not seek hegemony now, nor will it do so in the future. 
China keeps and develops an appropriate level of 
military capability solely for the purpose of 
safeguarding China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 
 The confidence and pride of the Chinese nation 
today are based on China’s economic development, 
social justice, the civility of its people and moral 
strength. China will, through its own development, 
contribute to the peace and development of the world. 
 In the long history of humankind, the destinies of 
countries have never been so closely linked as they are 
today. Given the global nature of issues threatening the 
survival and development of mankind, such as global 
warming, environmental degradation, resource 
constraints, frequent outbreaks of diseases and natural 
disasters and the spread of terrorism, and in the face of 
the intertwining challenges related to finance, energy 
and food, no country can expect to avoid difficulties or 
to handle the problems alone.  
 Ongoing financial volatility, in particular, has 
affected many countries, and its impact is likely to 
become more serious. To tackle the challenge, we must 
all make concerted efforts. So long as people of all 
countries, including their leaders, can do away with 
hostility, exclusion and prejudice, treat each other with 
sincerity and an open mind and forge ahead hand in 
hand, humankind will overcome all difficulties and 
embrace a brighter and better future. 
 China, as a responsible major developing country, 
is ready to work with other members of the 
international community to strengthen cooperation, 
share opportunities, meet challenges and contribute to 
the harmonious and sustainable development of the 
world. I offer my 
congratulations to Mr. Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann on 
his election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I wish him every success. 
 The United Nations mandate to establish and 
maintain peace and security has lost none of its 
urgency in 2008. The task remains. However, fulfilling 
it is more demanding than ever. 
 When the Berlin Wall fell, no one had greater 
hopes than we Germans not only that Germany would 
be reunited but that a new age of global cooperation — 
beyond the traditional front lines — would begin. The 
Iron Curtain had divided the world into two blocs and 
when it came to dealing with crises and conflicts, often 
enough, loyalty within the blocs had priority; what was 
needed to improve the lot of ordinary people was of 
secondary importance. 
 
 
47 08-52265 
 
 The end of the East-West confrontation in the 
early nineties seemed to mark the dawn of a new age of 
effective multilateralism, while the United Nations 
seemed to be on the threshold of a great renaissance. 
Disillusionment has now set in, more quickly and more 
profoundly than we had feared. The hoped-for peace 
dividend did not materialize. On the contrary, the 
cynical certainties of the cold war had disappeared, and 
they were not replaced by new ones.  
 The world is clearly searching for a new order, 
and multilateralism does not always seem to be the first 
choice in this quest. What we have experienced since 
then is the confluence of the traditional power politics 
of the 19th century, the legacies of the cold war and the 
new challenges of the 21st century. 
 At the same time, new players and Powers that 
have still to find their place in the international order 
are seeking to enter the global stage. It is now 
generally accepted that we can master the new 
challenges of the twenty-first century, such as climate 
change, scarcity of raw materials, access to food and 
water and the fight against epidemics, pandemics and 
terrorism, only if we act together. Although we know 
that and although it is absolutely vital that we focus on 
finding common solutions to the key issues of the 
future, time and again we are called upon to resolve 
conflicts that have their roots in a past that we have 
only seemingly put behind us. 
 One conflict that smouldered for some time and 
then escalated suddenly and violently is the crisis in 
Georgia, where an entire region found itself on the 
edge of the abyss of war and destruction and where 
common sense failed to prevail on all sides. The United 
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union agree that 
the weapons must be silenced for good. We must help 
the suffering population without delay. That does not 
mean accepting the status quo; nor does it mean the 
calling into question of Georgia’s territorial integrity. 
 Nevertheless, we have to work together to ensure 
reconstruction, the return home of the refugees and 
long-term security in Georgia and the entire region. 
The European Union is making an important 
contribution by sending an observer mission, which my 
country is leading. Together with the United Nations 
and the OSCE, the mission will put forward a 
comprehensive strategy in Geneva this October. We are 
aiming to pave the way towards the durable resolution 
of the conflict through stabilization and confidence-
building in this particular region of the world, the 
Southern Caucasus. 
 The same task is even more demanding in 
Afghanistan, a country where the situation is still 
precarious. It is clear to us that, without security, 
Afghanistan will not, and indeed cannot, develop. 
Equally, however, we need economic development in 
order to improve the security situation and to 
encourage people to reject fundamentalism and terror. 
 We have achieved much together in recent 
months and years. Millions of children — many of 
them girls — are going to school again, while streets, 
bridges and hospitals are being built. The training and 
build-up of the Afghan police force and army are 
progressing. Compared to the deteriorating security 
situation, however, they are not progressing fast 
enough, especially in the present situation. Germany 
intends to do even more in the future. 
 However, we cannot afford to look at Afghanistan 
by itself. We need to step up our efforts to help 
Pakistan master the economic and social challenges it 
faces. Pakistan’s internal stability is crucial to stability 
in the entire region. This will require concrete support 
from everyone in the international community, and my 
country — rest assured — will play its part. 
 International engagement is also still necessary in 
the Middle East. In the current phase of domestic 
uncertainty, we call upon all parties to the conflict not 
to ease up in their efforts to resolve the conflict. As 
experience has shown, to stand still in the Middle East 
often means to take a step backward. A new wave of 
terror and violent clashes would result, and neither 
Israel nor Palestine, nor the international community, 
can afford to let that happen. 
 Germany believes it has a particular 
responsibility to provide concrete assistance to 
improve the framework conditions. Just recently, at the 
Berlin Conference in Support of Palestinian Civil 
Security and the Rule of Law — which many of those 
here attended — we agreed on concrete measures to 
strengthen the Palestinian security sector. Those 
measures are already having an impact. 
 An Iran armed with nuclear weapons would pose 
a threat to security throughout the Middle East and 
would trigger a nuclear arms race. Therefore, Iran must 
put its cards on the table. We have made our offer, 
  
 
08-52265 48 
 
which is a tangible solution. The delaying tactics of the 
Iranian side must not exhaust the patience of the 
international community. We expect a clear signal from 
Iran indicating its willingness to comply with the 
international community’s demands and to build 
confidence. And let me make the following very clear: 
the Iranian President’s remarks concerning Israel are 
irresponsible and unacceptable. In my view, the blatant 
anti-Semitism that he expressed in his statement once 
again this year (see ) is outrageous and 
should be condemned by all of us. We must stand 
together on that issue. 
 The problems in Georgia, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and the Middle East highlight one fact: it is more 
urgent than ever that we develop the foundations for a 
stable world order. My country stands for dialogue and 
the reconciliation of interests. That does not mean 
dialogue for the sake of discussion, without any 
results; nor does reconciliation of interests imply that 
we are prepared to abandon our own principles. We 
believe that it is essential to renounce violence, ensure 
fairness and recognize international law.  
 For us, that is the alternative vision to a world of 
fabricated opposing interests, the bloc mentality and 
oversimplified categories such as good and evil. East 
against West, North against South — that is yesterday’s 
thinking, and it no longer has a place in today’s world. 
In order to resolve the problems of today and 
tomorrow, we all need more partners, not more 
opponents. The twenty-first century is the first in 
which we can resolve problems only if we work 
together. 
 The same applies to disarmament policy. Only a 
partnership of shared global responsibility can achieve 
lasting results. The dangerous trend in which an ever-
increasing number of countries strive to gain access to 
nuclear technology, or even to build nuclear weapons, 
must be stopped. My proposal to multilateralize the 
fuel cycle showed how those risks can at the very least 
be minimized. Furthermore, I call upon all States to 
sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, 
because its entry into force would mean a huge gain in 
security. 
 For all that, however, we must remember that 
more people die every day as a result of hunger than as 
a result of war. The pledges that we made at the turn of 
the millennium must not remain a mere piece of paper. 
The fight against hunger and poverty is also part of a 
global responsibility partnership. Germany will 
therefore step up its efforts to promote poverty 
reduction and global fairness. As part of those efforts, 
we will increase our official development assistance 
contributions in accordance with the plan of the 
European Union. In the next budget alone, we will 
increase development assistance by $1.2 billion.  
 In that connection, I would like to say something 
about Africa. For too long, we have perceived that part 
of the world only as a continent of wars and conflicts. 
However, I also know an Africa that has set off on the 
road to the future with courage and resolve. It deserves 
our partnership and support along that road. 
 At present, the headlines are dominated by the 
international financial crisis. Recklessness, greed and a 
lack of common sense among those involved has set us 
back years. The long-term consequences cannot be 
assessed yet. However, I am certain that the painful 
tremors on the world financial markets will accelerate 
the multipolarization of the international financial 
system. There can be no future without rules, and no 
single player will be able to lay down those rules. It 
will no longer be possible for any one country to act as 
if it were immune to undesirable developments. 
Europe, with its tried-and-tested policy of mediation 
and reconciliation of interests, could play a key role in 
this. 
 Together, we must now finally ensure long-
overdue transparency, stability and provisions to guard 
against risks on the world financial markets, along with 
oversight. My country developed concrete proposals in 
that regard a few years ago. I hope that, in the face of 
this deep crisis, the international community will now 
act quickly and with resolve. We need universal rules 
for the international financial markets. 
 That does not apply only to the international 
financial sphere, however; clear rules, solid structures 
and joint action are the vital prerequisites for meeting 
global challenges. That is why we need a strong and 
effective United Nations that enjoys the confidence of 
the international community, has the requisite 
legitimacy and can be the umbrella for a global 
responsibility partnership. 
 We therefore support the process of reforming the 
United Nations and its organs. Security Council reform 
is overdue, as we are all aware. The Council’s 
composition must reflect the realities of world politics 
today. Germany is prepared to shoulder greater 
 
 
49 08-52265 
 
responsibility in that area. Less than two weeks ago, 
the General Assembly unanimously decided to begin 
the negotiations on reform soon (see decision 62/557). 
That important step must now be followed by others. 
Germany is firmly convinced that, in the twenty-first 
century, we need the United Nations more urgently 
than ever before. I bring 
you fraternal greetings from Europe — Europe that is 
conscious of its responsibilities and wishes to act; 
Europe that is true to its values — democracy and 
freedom; Europe that is loyal to its friends, but also 
Europe that wishes to speak to the whole world in 
service of dialogue and of peace. 
 At a time when the world is deeply troubled, I 
have come to tell you, on behalf of Europe, that in the 
midst of so many difficulties the international 
community has a political and moral responsibility that 
we must shoulder. Let us not forget that if we are 
gathered here today, it is because following one of the 
most terrible tragedies that humankind has ever known, 
there were men and women of good will who were 
determined that in the future no one could ever say, 
when faced with misfortune: “There is nothing we can 
 
 
13 08-51570 
 
do.” That is why we are here, because those who went 
before us did not renounce their responsibility. Europe 
believes that today, our duty is to act and to refuse to 
submit.  
 We can wait no longer. We are beginning to 
gauge the tragic consequences of having already 
waited too long. We cannot wait to achieve peace, to 
end the tragedy in Darfur. We cannot wait to fight 
terrorism, to avert the food crisis that condemns so 
many human beings to die of hunger. We cannot wait 
to prepare for the post-petroleum world, to fight global 
warming, to save the oceans, to put an end to monetary, 
social and ecological dumping. We cannot wait to bring 
ethics to financial capitalism.  
 For too long we have all been resigned to being 
powerless. For too long we have retreated before the 
need to give to the globalized world institutions that 
will enable it to be regulated. 
 The world of the twenty-first century cannot be 
governed with the institutions of the twentieth century. 
We are a century behind. Let today’s major Powers and 
the Powers of tomorrow unite to shoulder together the 
responsibilities their influence gives them in world 
affairs.  
 To all those who are hesitant, I wish to say that 
enlarging the Security Council and the G-8 is not just a 
matter of fairness, it is also a question of effectiveness. 
We can no longer wait to turn the G-8 into the G14 and 
to bring in China, India, South Africa, Mexico and 
Brazil. Italy is proposing a major step in that direction 
at the next summit, which it will host, and Italy is 
right. 
 Let us act to make our international institutions 
more representative, because if they are more 
representative they will be stronger, more effective and 
more respected. A new world is emerging not only 
through all our successes, but also through all the 
crises besetting the planet. However, we cannot receive 
that new world passively, we must build it. 
 Let us learn to manage together the most acute 
crises that no one, not even the most powerful among 
us, can resolve alone. I am convinced that it is the duty 
of the heads of State and Government of the countries 
most directly concerned to meet before the end of the 
year to examine together the lessons of the most 
serious financial crisis the world has experienced since 
that of the 1930s. Who would understand it if the 
world’s major economies should fail to take the time to 
meet to discuss what we must do together and the 
lessons we must draw from what has happened? 
 Let us rebuild together a regulated capitalism, in 
which entire swathes of financial activity are not left to 
the sole judgement of market operators; in which banks 
do their job; which is to finance economic development 
rather than to fuel speculation; in which rules of 
prudence apply to all and serve to avert and soften 
shocks instead of exacerbating them; in which the 
credit agencies are controlled and punished when 
necessary; in which transparency of transactions 
replaces such opacity that today it is difficult to 
understand what is happening; and in which modes of 
remuneration do not drive people to take unreasonable 
risks. It is my duty to say that those who jeopardize 
people’s savings should be punished and at last face up 
to their responsibilities. We will succeed in that on the 
condition that we work together. 
 In our globalized world, the fate of each is linked 
to that of all others. The negotiations on climate 
change, begun in Bali, will conclude in Copenhagen 
next year. Whatever our particular interests, we do not 
have the right to fail. 
 Europe will adopt an unprecedented raft of 
measures on energy and climate in December. Europe 
does not wish to teach lessons; it wishes to set an 
example. Europe also wishes to set the example by 
acting to bring about peace. It did so in Georgia. It did 
so with the Union for the Mediterranean. Because for 
over half a century Europe has undertaken to stop the 
endless cycle of war, vengeance and hate that has 
periodically taken it to the edge of the precipice, it 
does not want war. It does not want a war of 
civilizations. It does not want a war of religion. It does 
not want a cold war.  
 Europe wants peace, and because it wants peace 
it says to Russia that it wants links of solidarity with 
that country, that it wants to build a shared future, and 
that it wants to be Russia’s partner. Why not build a 
continent-wide common economic space that would 
unite Russia and Europe? However, Europe also says 
to Russia with the same sincerity that it cannot 
compromise on the principle of the sovereignty and 
independence of States, their territorial integrity or 
respect for international law. Europe’s message to all 
States is that it cannot accept the use of force to settle a 
dispute. 
  
 
08-51570 14 
 
 Europe says to Iran that it respects that country, 
that Iran has the right to civil nuclear energy and that it 
will explore all avenues of dialogue. However, it says 
to Iran with the same sincerity that it cannot accept a 
nuclear-armed Iran that would endanger the peace and 
stability of the whole region. Nor can Europe 
tolerate — and I say this solemnly — Iran calling for 
the destruction of the State of Israel. 
 Europe says to Israel that it is its friend and that it 
will let no one threaten its existence. Europe says to 
Israel that it will always be at its side in the fight 
against terrorism, but with the same sincerity says to 
telling Israel that there will be no peace until there is a 
viable Palestinian State with recognized borders. 
 Europe says to Afghanistan that it will continue 
to stand by it and that it will not permit barbarians 
allied with Al-Qaida again to take an entire people 
hostage and to turn an entire country into a terrorist 
base.  
 Europe says to Somalia that it will help it, with 
the support of the United Nations, to combat the 
scourge of piracy off its coasts. Until all States join 
together to establish a maritime police force, we cannot 
allow some hundreds of pirates to threaten the free 
passage of ships throughout the world. 
 Europe says to Africa that it is committed to 
co-development, that it wishes to be Africa’s privileged 
partner, and that it has a common destiny with Africa 
and a profound sense of solidarity. Europe says to 
Africa that it has its place among the permanent 
members of the Security Council and in the enlarged 
G-8. How can one ever hope to settle the great issues 
of the world while ignoring Africa, South America or a 
large part of Asia? Europe believes in the African 
renaissance, which is under way and, first and 
foremost, is in the hands of the Africans, particularly 
those of African youth, which is the youth of the world. 
 Essentially, what brings us here together in this 
forum, where everyone must listen to the others and 
thereby show them a form of respect, is something 
more basic even than democracy. What brings us 
together is respect for the dignity of all just as they are, 
and for diversity of their opinions, cultures and beliefs. 
Human dignity is a universal value. What we must 
promote everywhere is respect for that diversity, which 
is the surest guarantor of peace and human fraternity 
and the surest antidote to intolerance, hatred, violence, 
obscurantism and fanaticism. 
 That is what Europe wants: peoples united in 
respect, understanding and solidarity; peoples united 
throughout the world working together for the great 
common cause of safeguarding of humanity. Time is at 
a premium; the world cannot wait. It is humbling to 
stand before this great Assembly today. Events of 
recent weeks have proved beyond doubt that we are 
now in a new global age. Living through the first 
financial crisis and the first resources crisis of 
globalization, we are a world not simply in transition, 
but facing transformation, with change more far-
reaching than anything we have seen in our lifetimes. 
The challenges, the opportunities for us and the risks 
that we now face come together at the global 
crossroads of the United Nations, providing the focus 
for debate and decision here in this General Assembly 
Hall.  
 A predecessor of mine said that if one built the 
present only in the image of the past, one would miss 
out entirely on the challenges of the future. It is to 
those challenges of the future that I want to address my 
remarks today. 
 In the next two decades, our world economy will 
double in size. That means double the opportunities 
and potential for more businesses, more jobs and more 
prosperity. Extraordinary promise and opportunity 
await, but there are also wholly new insecurities and 
pressures — global problems that will require global 
solutions. 
 The twin shocks of a global credit crunch and 
soaring commodity prices lead straight to the front 
doors of every family in every country, with higher oil, 
gas and food prices, and higher costs for credit. But 
because it is a global financial crisis and a global 
shortage of food and resources, it will not be resolved 
simply by individual nations acting in isolation, 
although there is much that they can do themselves. It 
will be solved in the end by us acting together. 
 I want to talk about how we can work together to 
tackle financial instability and the intense pressure now 
on our finite world resources. The immediate priority is 
to help people everywhere cope with these difficult 
times and to do so fairly. That is why, in Britain, we 
have acted to help those hit hardest, assisting people 
with the costs of gas and electricity, supporting 
homeowners and the housing market and helping 
people acquire the skills to do the new jobs of the 
twenty-first century. 
 But if we have learned anything in the past few 
years about the world in which we are now living, it is 
that the world we share is more interconnected than 
ever before and that the solutions have to be similarly 
coordinated. 
 First, we must do all that it takes to stabilize the 
still turbulent financial markets and, in the months 
ahead, we must work together to rebuild the world 
financial system around clear principles. In the short 
term, each country is taking action to deal with the 
fallout of the credit crunch, and the United States of 
America deserves support from the rest of the world as 
it seeks to agree on in detail what all parties agree on 
in principle. 
 In Britain, we have taken decisive action to 
promote stability in our banking system, protecting 
depositors and introducing a temporary ban on short-
selling. We have already injected billions into the 
market, making in excess of £100 billion available, and 
announced only last week that our special liquidity 
scheme will be extended until the end of January next 
year. 
 Confidence in the future is also needed to build 
confidence today, and that confidence will be built by 
showing that what are global problems can be 
addressed by globally coordinated solutions. I believe 
there are five key principles behind that all nations 
should unite around as we examine the future of our 
financial system. 
 The first principle is that of transparency. People 
must know what they are buying and selling, and they 
must know what they are dealing with and not fear 
what might be hidden on each other’s books. We must 
look at the rapid introduction of improved 
internationally acceptable accounting standards and 
disclosure. 
 Secondly, there must be sound banking practice 
and more effective regulation that looks not just at 
solvency but at liquidity, at managing and pricing risks 
for bad times and for good times, together. 
 Thirdly, there must be responsibility. No member 
of senior management should be able to say he or she 
did not understand the risks they were running and 
walk away from his or her obligations. 
 Fourthly, there must be integrity. Most people 
agree that companies should align reward with stability 
and long-term gain because what matters is hard work, 
 
 
19 08-52272 
 
effort and enterprise. We should align the advice of 
credit-rating agencies with the interests of the 
investors. 
 Fifthly, just as banks are global and the flows of 
capital are global, so oversight can no longer just be 
national but must also include global supervision. That 
is why we want to work to support immediately the 
establishment of international colleges for each of the 
largest global financial institutions — 30 of them by 
the end of the year.  
 The international institutions built in the wake of 
the Second World War have not kept pace with the 
changing global economy. We need national regulators 
to be cooperative, rules and principles to be consistent, 
and international movements of capital to be 
transparent. 
 The current era has been one of global prosperity. 
It has also been an era of global turbulence, and while 
there has been irresponsibility, we must now say 
clearly that the age of irresponsibility must be ended. 
We must now build that new global financial order, 
founding it on transparency, not opacity; rewarding 
success, not excess; and responsibility, not impunity. 
That order must be global, not national. 
 Global action cannot be limited to financial 
stability. We must also address another problem of 
globalization — the global scramble for resources. We 
need global action to deal with high commodity prices 
and a rising global population demanding more energy. 
Only by taking tough decisions on energy security and 
climate change and by bringing together a new global 
partnership of oil producers and oil consumers can we 
bring stability to global energy markets and secure 
sustainable energy supplies for the long term. 
 We are committed to tackling the global 
challenge of climate change. Oil will of course 
continue to meet a large part of our global energy 
needs for some decades to come, but over the past year 
we have seen the price of oil rise to as high as $146 per 
barrel before falling again to $90 in the past month — 
a fall of nearly 40 per cent. Such high and volatile 
prices have a harmful impact on the global economy, 
and all countries surely have a shared interest in 
avoiding such dramatic swings in the price of scarce 
resources. 
 We must now therefore consider whether the 
current international architecture can bring the more 
transparent and stable energy markets this global 
economy clearly needs. We must bring producers and 
consumers together, build common understanding and 
address the issues through meaningful and sustained 
dialogue. At the end of this year, I will be hosting a 
global energy summit in London, building on the 
momentum generated in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, to agree 
on key areas for further action. It is only by acting 
together that we can make the most of the world’s 
scarce resources and harness the power of our greater 
interdependence for our common good. 
 Some say that in a time of difficulty we should 
look inwards and cut aid; that we have an excuse for 
walking by on the other side; and that, by our inaction, 
we tolerate famine — but in today’s world, there is no 
other side. 
 Africa is not part of the problem, but an 
indisputable part of the solution. It is only by helping 
Africa to become a net exporter of food rather than a 
net importer that we can hope to achieve a long-term 
end to soaring food prices. Only by restarting and 
seeing the trade talks through can we help our 
economies benefit from the annual boost of 
$150 billion that would be achieved by removing the 
protectionist trade barriers and trade-distorting 
subsidies that currently cost developing countries the 
most — $15 billion a year in their agricultural incomes 
alone. 
 As Governments and as nations, we must respond 
with courage and vision to the new insecurities that 
face people, because while the global changes 
happening all around us are complex, the instincts they 
summon up in people are not. We must resist those 
instincts that are protectionist. Now is not the time to 
pull up the drawbridge, to seek solace in isolation or to 
revert to an outdated and futile protectionism. It is only 
by maintaining our open, flexible and dynamic 
economies that we can best secure people’s jobs, 
homes and standards of living in a global age.  
 Our global institutions have always had a 
sweeping ambition, set up not against a single enemy 
but against poverty, conflict, injustice and intolerance, 
and set up in the belief that, for peace to last, 
prosperity must be shared. Now we must build on the 
idealism of the era that created those institutions and 
change and evolve those institutions to meet the 
challenges of the global age. This United Nations is 
where the world turns to confront some of its greatest 
  
 
08-52272 20 
 
challenges. It is where international law is made, where 
the most acute political problems are addressed, and 
where the hopes of the world for a better future 
ultimately rest. 
 For the past 40 years, it has been this United 
Nations that has been the key forum where the 
international community has sought peace in the 
Middle East, and it is the United Nations that must help 
the next Government of Israel build on the foundations 
laid by Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas to 
agree to a two-State solution that guarantees the 
security of Israel and gives the Palestinians a viable 
State. 
 In Cyprus, where the United Nations has been 
present for 30 years and more, we have a real chance of 
a settlement, thanks to new leadership, which has our 
support. 
 In Afghanistan, the International Security 
Assistance Force is training Afghans to take back their 
country after two generations of almost constant 
conflict. When the Afghan Government can deny its 
land to Al-Qaida and its associates, the international 
community will have done its job, but the task is hard 
and long. Progress is encouraging, but must be 
continued and stepped up. 
 In the Sudan, United Nations peacekeepers help 
keep the fragile North-South peace agreement in place, 
but Darfur remains for all of us a disaster. It is the 
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan to create 
the conditions in Darfur that will allow the conflict to 
end and a new deal for the people of Darfur to be put in 
place. Justice has to be part of any sustainable peace. 
 Difficulty has never daunted the United Nations. 
Where we are rebuffed, we are resolute, so we must 
also send a powerful signal of our support for 
democracy and human rights in Zimbabwe. We must 
stand firm against oppression in Burma. We must, as 
we did yesterday, reaffirm the practical measures that 
underpin our determination to defeat poverty. Now 
would be the worst time to turn our back on the 
Millennium Development Goals. 
 We have reached a unique point in the world’s 
history. For the first time in human history, we have the 
opportunity to come together around a global covenant, 
to reframe the international architecture to make it fit 
for the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century, 
and to build the first truly global society and global 
citizenship. Our history is not our destiny, it is what we 
choose to make it. 
 Let us resolve today to end any irresponsibility, 
to protect the global public interest by cleaning up the 
world’s financial system and to reaffirm our 
commitment to meeting our global responsibilities on 
trade, poverty, energy and climate change, and let us 
act upon that as people, as Governments, as nations 
united. Let history record that ours was a truly global 
response to the first truly global crisis.May I first congratulate you, 
Sir, on your election as President of the Assembly at its 
sixty-third session. I am sure that your wisdom and 
vast experience will guide us as we deliberate the many 
challenges that the world faces today. 
 The United Nations is the embodiment of our 
faith in the benefits of collective action and of 
multilateral approaches in resolving global issues. At 
the 2005 World Summit we pledged ourselves to an 
agenda for early and meaningful reform of the United 
Nations. However, we must acknowledge frankly that 
there has been little progress on the core elements of 
the reform agenda. 
 We need to make more determined efforts to 
revitalize the General Assembly to enable it to fulfil its 
rightful role as the principal deliberative organ of the 
United Nations system. The composition of the 
Security Council needs to change to reflect 
contemporary realities of the twenty-first century. Only 
a truly representative and revitalized United Nations 
can become the effective focal point for the 
cooperative efforts of the world community. We need 
to expeditiously hold negotiations towards this end. 
 Globalization has contributed to ever-widening 
circles of prosperity, and we in India have also 
benefited from it. But its benefits have not been 
equitably distributed. Ensuring inclusive growth within 
nations, and inclusive globalization across nations, is a 
central challenge facing us all. 
 The development gains that many countries have 
made are today threatened by a possible food crisis, a 
global energy crisis and, most recently, unprecedented 
upheavals in international financial markets. 
 The net impact of these problems is that both the 
industrialized economies and the developing 
economies face inflation and a slowdown in growth 
after several years of robust expansion. Industrialized 
countries can afford periods of slow growth. 
Developing countries cannot. There is therefore an 
urgent need for coordinated action by the global 
community on several fronts. 
 The explosion of financial innovation 
unaccompanied by credible systemic regulation has 
made the financial system vulnerable. The resulting 
crisis of confidence threatens global prosperity in the 
increasingly interdependent world in which we all live. 
There is, therefore, a need for a new international 
initiative to bring structural reform in the world’s 
financial system, with more effective regulation and 
 
 
9 08-52265 
 
stronger systems of multilateral consultations and 
surveillance. This must be designed in as inclusive a 
manner as possible. 
 The world food crisis is the cumulative 
consequence of the neglect of agriculture in the 
developing world, exacerbated by distortionary 
agricultural subsidies in the developed world. 
Diversion of cultivable land for producing biofuels is 
compounding the problem. 
 The world needs a second green revolution to 
address the problem of food security. We need new 
technologies, new institutional responses and above all 
a global compact to ensure food and livelihood 
security. This will require transfer of technology and 
innovation from developed to developing countries. 
India is very keen to expand cooperation with Africa in 
Africa’s quest for food and livelihood security for its 
people. 
 Trade liberalization in agriculture can help, 
provided it adequately takes into account the livelihood 
concerns of poor and vulnerable farmers in the 
developing and least developed countries. 
 It is feared that many of the conflicts of the 
twenty-first century will be over water. We must 
therefore reflect on how to use this scarce resource 
most efficiently. We need to invest in new technologies 
and new production regimes for rain-fed and dryland 
agriculture and explore cost-effective desalination 
technologies. 
 Poverty, ignorance and disease still afflict 
millions and millions of people. The commitment to 
achieve the ambitious targets set as part of the 
Millennium Development Goals was an 
acknowledgement by the international community that 
global prosperity and welfare are indivisible and that 
affluence cannot coexist with pervasive poverty. 
 Unfortunately, solemn commitments made for the 
transfer of financial resources from the developed to 
the developing world have remained largely 
unfulfilled. The commitment of developed countries to 
move to the target set long ago of 0.7 per cent of gross 
national income as official development assistance 
needs to be honoured as a matter of priority. In this 
context, special efforts have to be made to address the 
concerns of Africa for adequate resource flows to 
support its development. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
closely linked to energy security. We need a much 
greater measure of predictability and stability in the oil 
and gas markets. We need to think of ways and means, 
such as early warning mechanisms, to help countries 
cope with oil shocks. 
 We must put in place a global cooperative 
network of institutions of developed and developing 
countries engaged in research and development in 
energy efficiency, clean energy technologies, and 
renewable sources of energy. 
 India is registering rapid economic growth, and 
has combined it with declining energy intensity of its 
economy. However, our total demand will keep 
increasing, and we are actively looking for all possible 
sources of clean energy. 
 The opening of international civil nuclear 
cooperation with India will have a positive impact on 
global energy security and on the efforts to combat 
climate change. This is a vindication of India’s 
impeccable record on non-proliferation and testifies to 
our long-standing commitment to nuclear disarmament 
that is global, universal and non-discriminatory in 
nature. The blueprint for this was spelled out by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in this very Assembly 20 years 
ago. 
 I reiterate India’s proposal for a nuclear weapons 
convention prohibiting the development, production, 
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and providing 
for their complete elimination within a specified time 
frame. 
 Climate change can be overcome successfully 
only through a collaborative and cooperative global 
effort. 
 We support the multilateral negotiations now 
taking place under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. The outcome must be 
fair and equitable and recognize the principle that each 
citizen of the world has equal entitlement to the global 
atmospheric space. 
 I believe that the pursuit of ecologically 
sustainable development need not be in contradiction 
to achieving our growth objectives. As Mahatma 
Gandhi once said, “The earth has enough resources to 
meet people’s needs, but will never have enough to 
satisfy people’s greed.”  
  
 
08-52265 10 
 
 India has unveiled an ambitious national action 
plan on climate change. Even as we pursue economic 
growth, we are committed to our per capita emissions 
of greenhouse gases not exceeding those of the 
developed countries. 
 The growing assertion of separate identities and 
ethnic, cultural and religious intolerance threaten our 
developmental efforts and our peace and stability. It is 
vital that we strengthen international cooperation to 
combat terrorism and to bring the perpetrators, 
organizers, financers and sponsors of terrorism to 
justice. We should conclude expeditiously the draft 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 In this context, the situation in Afghanistan is a 
matter of deep concern. The international community 
must pool all its resources to ensure the success of 
Afghanistan’s reconstruction efforts and its emergence 
as a moderate, pluralistic and democratic society. 
 We welcome the return of democracy in Pakistan. 
We are committed to resolving all outstanding issues 
between India and Pakistan, including the issue of 
Jammu and Kashmir, through peaceful dialogue. 
 We also welcome the coming to power of 
democratically elected Governments in Nepal and 
Bhutan. We seek to expand areas of cooperation with 
all these countries to deal with the challenges of 
sustainable development and poverty eradication. 
 The United Nations is a living symbol of 
pluralism. It has weathered many storms. It is the 
vehicle through which our combined will and efforts to 
address global challenges must be articulated and 
implemented. Unless we rise to the task, we will 
bequeath to succeeding generations a world of 
diminishing prospects. Over 60 years have passed 
since the General Assembly voted on the historic 
resolution that would have put an end to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Resolution 181 (II) called for the 
establishment of a Jewish State and an Arab State. Its 
title was: “Plan of Partition with Economic Union”. It 
envisioned two States for two peoples, fulfilling a 
distinct national aspiration. The Jewish people adopted 
the resolution and established the State of Israel. The 
Arabs rejected it, and this led to war. 
 What happened in the ensuing years is much 
different from the resolution’s original intent. While 
much has changed since then, the ironies of history 
summon similar circumstances today. Today, again, we 
are in the middle of the lake. There is no sense going 
back. Continuing forward will show how near we are 
to achieving the initial goal. 
 A year prior to Israel’s declaration of statehood, 
its first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, called me, 
a young man from a kibbutz, to serve in our national 
defence. Since then, I have participated in Israel’s 
dynamic realities: the building of security; the striving 
for peace. So, I need no books to learn the history, 
since I witnessed its miraculous unfolding. We went 
through seven wars. All have paid heavily. Tears still 
flow down the faces of bereaved mothers. 
Remembrance days fill the air with silent prayers of 
widowed families who lost young boys and girls in 
battle. They are, today, the same age, but lifeless.  
 Israel turned military victories into peace 
processes, knowing that the cost of life renders 
imperfect peace superior to perfect victories. 
 We have also achieved two peace agreements: the 
first, with the largest Arab country, Egypt; the second, 
with the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. All the land, 
all the water, all the natural resources that fell into our 
hands through war were completely repatriated after 
peace was signed.  
 But for peace, the call in our region is to repair 
the damaged environment and the wounded land which 
leads to poverty. If we do not overcome the desert, the 
thirst, the pollution, they will overcome us. Joint 
 
 
33 08-51749 
 
ventures can meet this call. Nature does not carry a 
national passport. 
 With the Palestinians, we negotiate full peace. 
Both parties agreed to building a Palestinian State side 
by side with Israel, living in peace, security and 
respect. We tried to conclude those negotiations this 
year. Apparently, this will take a longer time. I believe 
it can be accomplished, in spite of this, within the next 
year. 
 I know that our Prime Minister is more than 
ready to conclude an agreement. And knowing 
President Abbas as well, I am sure he will not miss this 
opportunity. We agreed to progress in spite of possible 
changes that may take place in the leadership. Gaps 
have been narrowed through negotiations, particularly, 
and hopefully, the territorial ones. 
 But peace is not just a matter of territorial 
compromise. Rogue politics rejects peace even when 
and where territorial disputes have been resolved. In 
Lebanon, we implemented the resolutions of the United 
Nations, but Hizbullah paralysed the country and cut 
the road to peace. 
 From Gaza, we withdrew completely and 
dismantled all of our settlements. I know there are a 
great many complaints about the settlements: in Gaza, 
we dismantled 30 settlements by order of the 
Government; Hamas responded with a bloody takeover 
and turned the Strip into a base for rocket fire. 
 These militants offer no positive alternative but 
the agonies of Job. They added kidnapping to 
bombings, bringing strife to innocent families. From 
this rostrum, I call for the immediate release of Gilad 
Shalit, the son of Aviva and Noam, a most peace-loving 
family. This Assembly should place the release of that 
person at the top of its priorities. Holding a hostage in 
Gaza, causes Gaza’s isolation and could cause further 
deterioration. 
 At the centre of this violence and fanaticism 
stands Iran. It presents a danger to the entire world. Its 
quest for religious hegemony and regional dominance 
divides the Middle East and holds back chances for 
peace, including among Arabs, while undermining 
human rights. 
 Iranian support for Hizbullah divides Lebanon. 
Its support for Hamas splits the Palestinians; it 
postpones the establishment of the Palestinian State. 
Yesterday, from this very rostrum, the Iranian leader 
renewed the darkest anti-Semitic libel — the 
“Protocols of the Elders of Zion” — bringing to life 
one of the ugliest plots against the Jewish people. Their 
despicable denial of the Holocaust is a mockery of 
indisputable evidence and a cynical offence against the 
survivors of the Holocaust, contrary to the resolutions 
adopted by this very Assembly. 
 Iran continues to develop enriched uranium and 
long-range missiles. It has introduced a religion of fear, 
opposing the call of the Lord to respect human life: all 
humans; all life. The Iranian people are not our 
enemies. Their fanatical leadership is their problem 
and the world’s woe. Their leader is a danger to his 
own people, to the region and to the world. He is a 
disgrace to the ancient Iranian people and tradition. He 
is a disgrace to the values of Islam and all religions. He 
is a disgrace to this House, the United Nations, and its 
basic principles and values. His appearance here is a 
shame.  
 The Jewish people have known throughout 
history that they must stand firm and face evil. 
Enlightened humanity should make it possible for 
freedom and respect to prevail for all of us.  
 Tehran combines long-range missiles with short-
range minds. It is pregnant with tragedies. The General 
Assembly and the Security Council bear the 
responsibility to prevent agonies before they take 
place.  
 Israel has shown that democracies can defend 
themselves. We are able to defend ourselves. We do not 
intend to change that capacity to defend ourselves.  
 Terrorism has not solved a single problem. It 
never has; it never will. It will make the world 
ungovernable. If groups of killers are allowed to 
threaten innocent masses, the world — if it continues 
to survive — will be without order and security, a 
hopeless battleground. The free world must unite to 
stop this, to combat it. 
 Israel, for its part, shall continue to seek peace 
sincerely and fully. We suggest immediate peace with 
Lebanon. Israeli Prime Ministers have indicated to 
Syria that, for peace, we are ready to explore a 
comprehensive compromise. To gain trust and save 
time, we have suggested a face-to-face meeting with 
President Assad. I say to the President: “Follow the 
successful example set by President Sadat and King 
Hussein”. We await an answer. 
  
 
08-51749 34 
 
 I know there is a growing concern that peace is 
far away. My lifelong experience provides me with a 
different judgement. True, I have seen stagnation, 
regression and failure in our journey, but today I can 
identify a road leading in the right direction. In 
addition to the peace agreements, a series of summits 
have taken place: Madrid, Oslo, Wye, Camp David, 
Sharm el-Sheik, Annapolis. In fact, Israelis and Arabs 
are marching towards peace. After a long internal 
debate, Israel has chosen to support the two-State 
solution. 
 Furthermore, I must say that in Beirut, the Arab 
League replaced the three “nays” of Khartoum — 
which were no peace, no negotiation, no recognition — 
with an initiative inaugurated by King Abdullah Bin 
Abdulaziz Al Saud. I call upon the King to further his 
initiative. It may become an invitation for 
comprehensive peace — one to transform a 
battleground into a common ground. 
 I respectfully invite all leaders to come to discuss 
peace in Jerusalem — which is holy to all of us — 
where all of us are praying to the same Lord as 
offspring of the same Father. Israel shall gladly accept 
an Arab invitation to designate a venue where a 
meaningful dialogue may take place at their choice. 
 We are facing a serious economic crisis in the 
world. Perhaps it has happened because we are rich and 
light with funds and poor and heavy with ideas, while 
we live in an era in which science, not land, is the basis 
for a successful economy. Science does not stop at 
borders; it is not disturbed by distances. Wisdom 
cannot be conquered by armies. Knowledge diminishes 
discrimination because it operates through goodwill 
and transcends race, nationality, colour and gender. 
 The global dangers unite and divide us at the 
same time. The dangers are clear: degradation of the 
environment, shortage of water, lack of renewable 
energy, the spread of terrorism and, alas, increased 
poverty among millions and millions of people. The 
divisions of the free world may increase them. Unity 
may offer alternatives. It would direct global 
investments to new areas and to demanding challenges 
such as health, security, education and the 
environment. 
 The future is not in the hands of oil or gold. 
Intellectual assets, new inventions and superior 
education hold the key to the future of each of us. In 
our region, border areas could become open economic 
zones, permitting the free movement of people, 
commodities and ideas. They could encourage tourism 
and build high-tech incubators. They could cultivate 
and advance modern agriculture. Economic zones 
would provide a million jobs and produce billions of 
cubic metres of desalinated water for the Arabs, for the 
Palestinians, for the Jordanians, for Israel — for all of 
us. We have already started to do this; the initial steps 
are promising. 
 The Jewish people are celebrating a New Year. I 
would like to end with a quote by Rabbi Nachman of 
Breslav: 
 “May it be thy will to remove war and bloodshed 
from the world and perpetuate the wonders and 
greatness of peace. All the inhabitants of the 
world shall recognize and know the truth: that we 
have not been placed on this earth to wage war 
and not for hatred or bloodshed.” 
I will repeat it in Hebrew. 
 (The speaker repeated the quote in Hebrew)Sixty-three years 
after its formation, the United Nations remains the 
world’s central international body. Only here do all 
countries come together to devise solutions and to 
forge collective action on global challenges. And these 
are particularly challenging times. As the Secretary-
General and many others have noted, we are facing a 
global financial crisis, a global energy crisis and a 
global food crisis. More than ever before, we are an 
interconnected and interdependent world community. 
The Charter goals of peace and prosperity require the 
full support of all United Nations Members. New 
Zealand was a founding member in 1945, and our 
commitment to this body is as strong now as it was 
then. 
 At such a difficult time in the world we need 
leadership, courage and a recommitment of our 
resources to tackle the issues before us. When the food 
crisis was first in the headlines, the Secretary-
General’s High-Level Task Force provided a 
mechanism for us all to respond. Having contributed 
nearly $NZ 10 million to date, New Zealand is among 
those assisting with urgent food security needs and 
medium-term policy responses. A successful 
conclusion of the Doha Development Round would 
alleviate much of the pressure on the demand-supply 
imbalance. 
 On the development theme of this sixty-third 
session, New Zealand fully associates with the 
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Global Call to 
Action Campaign. Support is urgently needed to 
revitalize collective efforts, including developing and 
strengthening partnerships between traditional and new 
donors, the private sector and civil society, and through 
South-South cooperation. We are set to play our part. 
 New Zealand is significantly stepping up official 
development assistance (ODA) from 0.27 per cent of 
gross national income in 2007 to 0.35 per cent by 
2010-2011. That 62 per cent increase will take New 
Zealand aid to over $NZ 600 million. 
 We are acutely aware that the Pacific is the 
second region after sub-Saharan Africa that is least 
likely to meet the MDG targets. We are therefore 
looking to direct our increased ODA there, through a 
Pacific strategy, which focuses poverty reduction 
efforts around four key pillars: strengthening 
governance, achieving broader-based growth and 
sustainable livelihoods, improving health and 
education, and reducing vulnerabilities, including to 
climate change. 
 In these challenging times, we look to the United 
Nations to deliver effectively for development, for 
peace and security and on human rights. Our 
Organization must continue to evolve along with the 
changing demands on it. Momentum needs to be 
maintained in the modernization of the United Nations. 
We share the Secretary-General’s vision for that and 
support his proposals to fix the human resources 
management system, which he has characterized as 
dysfunctional. 
 I would now like to turn to the challenges of 
peace and security around the world, from which our 
own region is not immune. At the Pacific Islands 
Forum held in Niue last month, New Zealand and other 
members of the Pacific Forum community expressed 
profound disappointment at Fiji’s lack of progress 
towards restoring democratic government. The Forum 
communiqué urged the interim regime in Fiji to fulfil 
  
 
08-53141 26 
 
its promise to hold elections in accordance with Fiji’s 
existing constitution by March next year. Leaders also 
acknowledged that there were long-term issues to be 
resolved in Fiji and supported a Commonwealth-led 
independent and inclusive political dialogue process to 
address them. That will not only create a more 
conducive environment for elections, but also enable a 
newly elected Government to engage with key 
stakeholders to promote national reconciliation. New 
Zealand urges all United Nations Members to support 
the steps taken by the Pacific Islands Forum to 
encourage Fiji to return to democratic and 
constitutional government as soon as possible. 
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Our region is also home to Timor-Leste, a partner 
and friend of New Zealand. We are pleased to see 
encouraging progress since last year’s elections, 
especially the building of institutions and improving 
governance. That was achieved despite assassination 
attempts on Timor-Leste’s leadership. The United 
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) 
and the International Stabilization Force continue to 
play a valuable role in helping to maintain security. 
New Zealand strongly supports the UNMIT mandate 
and its extension beyond February 2009. Planning for 
security in the longer term, to ensure appropriately 
sized and resourced institutions with clearly delineated 
roles and responsibilities, is also a key issue, and we 
stand ready to help. 
 Also within our region, the political, economic 
and human rights situation in Myanmar remains 
troubling. We urge the Myanmar authorities to achieve 
national reconciliation through open and constructive 
dialogue and to respect universal human rights in the 
country, consistent with international obligations. We 
support the efforts of the United Nations to sustain a 
dialogue with the Myanmar Government in order to 
build foundations for the future. 
 On the African continent, the humanitarian 
disaster caused by the conflict in Darfur is 
unacceptable. The targeting of civilians by State and 
non-State parties, is a flagrant breach of international 
human rights law. The widespread absence of justice 
and accountability for such human rights violations and 
the impunity that this promotes represent major 
obstacles to improving the human rights situation in 
Darfur. 
 In the case of Zimbabwe, the recent 
announcement of a power-sharing agreement offers 
hope that the long period of violent repression and 
human rights abuses by the previous Government can 
be brought to a close. The international community 
will be watching closely to see that all parties fulfil the 
commitments that they have made to bring about 
peace, respect for political freedom and human rights 
and a Government which reflects the will of the 
people. 
 Let me turn now to the Middle East. New 
Zealand continues to be strongly supportive of all 
attempts to find a lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. We share the international community’s vision 
for a viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian 
State, existing side by side in peace and security with 
the State of Israel. 
 In Afghanistan, despite political progress, the 
overall situation is fragile. The international 
community needs to devote more resources to ending 
the conflict and to assisting the people of Afghanistan 
in their efforts to stabilize and rebuild their country. 
New Zealand has expressed a strong commitment to 
restoring peace and security in Afghanistan with our 
assistance, both military and developmental, totalling 
more than 160 million New Zealand dollars to date. 
 Closer to home, New Zealand welcomes the 
recent improvement in cross-Strait relations. Cross-
Strait stability is vital to the security of the greater 
Asia-Pacific region. We encourage China and Taiwan 
to maintain the dialogue which has been established. 
 New Zealand remains a strong supporter of 
efforts to protect and maintain the international rule of 
law. To that end, one of the most significant advances 
in recent times has been the establishment of the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). When the ICC was 
first established, it was widely considered to herald the 
beginning of a new era in international criminal justice. 
The Court has now reached a crucial stage in its 
development, and it has become clear that the 
establishment of a global justice system brings with it 
many challenges. It is of the utmost importance that 
States rise to those challenges. To fail to do so would 
be a betrayal of the victims of egregious crimes. New 
Zealand urges States to make every effort to ensure the 
independence and success of the Court. The Court 
needs our full support and cooperation to ensure that 
individuals responsible for the most serious violations 
 
 
27 08-53141 
 
of international law are brought to justice without 
delay. 
 In this sixtieth anniversary year of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, we acknowledge the 
many international human rights conventions that have 
arisen out of that unique statement of overriding 
principles. New Zealand played an active part in the 
design of the new Human Rights Council, and we are 
seeking election to the Council next year, so as to be 
more closely involved in its work. 
 The newest member of the family of human 
rights treaties is the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, which New Zealand ratified 
this month. We look forward to the first conference of 
States parties, and to the opportunity the Convention 
offers to make a real improvement in the lives and 
human rights of disabled people everywhere. 
 Finally, let me reiterate the importance that New 
Zealand attaches to the concept of the responsibility to 
protect. The United Nations, through the Security 
Council, should be prepared to protect people against 
ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes and crimes 
against humanity when national authorities fail to do 
so. There is a clear need to enhance early warning 
systems to enable the Council to act in a timely 
manner. We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General on the responsibility to protect, and we stand 
ready to help to take that important initiative forward. 
 As we look forward to the year ahead, New 
Zealand pledges to work actively with others in our 
collective stewardship of the United Nations. We shall 
play our part in the continuing, patient process of 
renewing our Organization and of making it more 
resilient and responsive. On 11 September 2001, the world changed, 
and it rallied together in the fight against the threat of 
terror, a threat that was common for all and knew no 
boundaries. I am referring to threat of terrorism. The 
world displayed an unprecedented level of solidarity by 
rejecting old phobias and stereotypes. It seemed that 
the global counter-terrorism coalition became a new 
reality that from then on would define the development 
of a system of international relations free from double 
standards and beneficial to all. 
 The cohesion in the face of the deadly threats 
emerging from Al-Qaida and other elements of 
international terrorism made it possible to achieve 
tangible success during the initial stage. But later, 
problems began to appear. A painful blow to the unity 
of the anti-terrorism coalition was delivered by the war 
in Iraq, when — as it turned out later, under the false 
pretext of the fight against terror and nuclear arms 
proliferation — international law was violated. The 
deepest crisis was thus created in a completely 
artificial way and even today it is far from being 
resolved. 
 Ever more questions are being raised about what 
is going on in Afghanistan. First and foremost, what is 
the acceptable price to pay in terms of the loss of 
civilians’ lives in the ongoing counter-terrorism 
operation? Who decides on criteria for determining 
proportionality in the use of force? And why are the 
international contingents that are present unwilling to 
engage in the fight against the proliferating drug threat 
that causes increasing suffering in the countries of 
Central Asia and Europe? These and other factors give 
us reason to believe that the counter-terrorism coalition 
is faced with a crisis.  
 Looking at the core of the problem, it seems that 
this coalition lacks the requisite collective 
arrangements: equality among all its members in 
deciding on strategy and, especially, operational 
tactics. But in order to control the entirely new 
situation that evolved after 9/11, which required 
genuine cooperative effort, including joint analysis and 
coordination of practical steps, mechanisms designed 
for a unipolar world began to be used; decisions were 
taken in a single centre of power, while the rest merely 
had to follow. 
 We ended up with a privatization of the 
international community’s efforts in the fight against 
terrorism. The inertia of the unipolar world also 
revealed itself in other spheres of international life, 
including unilateral steps taken in anti-missile defence 
and the militarization of outer space as well as in 
attempts to bypass parity in arms control regimes, 
expansion of political-military blocs, and politicization 
  
 
08-53129 2 
 
of the issues of access to and transport of energy 
resources. 
 The illusion of the existence of a unipolar world 
confused many. For some people, it generated a desire 
to place all of their eggs in one basket. In exchange for 
absolute loyalty, there was an expectation of carte 
blanche to resolve all problems, using any means. The 
emerging syndrome of complete permissiveness that 
developed led to a rampage on the night of 8 August, 
when aggression was unleashed on South Ossetia. The 
bombing of the sleeping city of Tskhinvali and the 
killing of civilians and peacekeepers trampled under 
foot all existing settlement agreements, thus putting an 
end to the territorial integrity of Georgia. 
 Russia helped South Ossetia to repel that 
aggression, and carried out its duty to protect its 
citizens and fulfil its peacekeeping commitments. 
Russia’s recognition of the independence of South 
Ossetia and Abkhazia was the only possible step to 
ensure not only their security, but also the very survival 
of their peoples, considering the previous record of 
chauvinism of the Georgian leaders — starting with the 
Georgian leader Zviad Gamsakhurdia who, in 1991, 
under the slogan of “Georgia for Georgians”, ordered 
the deportation of Ossetians to Russia, abolished the 
autonomous status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and 
later unleashed a bloody war against them.  
 That war was brought to an end at the cost of 
innumerable human lives, and peacekeeping and 
negotiation mechanisms were established with the 
approval of the United Nations and the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). 
However, the current Georgian leadership has pursued 
a persistent policy of undermining those mechanisms 
through relentless provocation, and finally nullified the 
peace process by launching a new murderous war on 
the night of 8 August. 
 This problem is now closed. The future of the 
peoples of Abkhazia and South Ossetia has been 
reliably secured by the treaties between Moscow and 
Tskhinvali and Sukhumi. With the implementation of 
the Medvedev-Sarkozy plan, to which we are strongly 
committed, the situation around the two republics will 
finally be stabilized. It is important that this plan 
should be strictly and unswervingly implemented by all 
parties. We are concerned, however, by the attempts to 
rewrite it after the fact. 
 I believe that everyone here has tired of playing 
the role of extras for the Georgian regime, whose 
words contain not a shred of truth and whose foreign 
policy is aimed exclusively at provoking confrontation 
throughout the world in the pursuit of their own 
objectives which invariably run counter to the 
objectives of the Georgian people and to the goal of 
ensuring security in the Caucasus. 
 Today, it is necessary to analyse the crisis in the 
Caucasus from the viewpoint of its impact on the 
region and the international community as a whole. 
The world has changed yet again. It has become 
absolutely clear that the solidarity demonstrated after 
9/11 must be revived through approaches untainted by 
geopolitical expediency and built on the rejection of 
double standards when fighting against any violations 
or breaches of international law — whether on the part 
of terrorists, political extremists or any others. 
 The crisis in the Caucasus has proved again that 
it is impossible to resolve the problems we face when 
blinded by the mirage of a unipolar world. The price 
we will have to pay in terms of human lives and 
destinies is too high. We cannot tolerate any attempts 
to resolve conflict situations by violating international 
agreements or by the unlawful use of force. If we allow 
that to occur once, then we run the risk of unleashing it 
in the future. 
 One cannot invoke the duty to defend in the 
abstract, and then be outraged when that principle is 
used in practice — and in strict conformity with Article 
51 of the United Nations Charter and other norms of 
international law. In South Ossetia, Russia defended 
the highest of our common values, the most essential 
human right: the right to live.  
 The existing security architecture in Europe did 
not pass the test of recent events. Attempts to adjust it 
to the rules of a unipolar world led to a situation where 
that architecture proved incapable of containing an 
aggressor or  preventing the supply of offensive 
weapons to it, contrary to all existing relevant codes of 
conduct. 
 We propose that this issue should be addressed in 
a comprehensive manner. President Dmitry 
A. Medvedev, of Russia, speaking in Berlin on 5 June, 
proposed an initiative on developing a Euro-Atlantic 
security treaty, a type of “Helsinki II”. This work could 
have been started at the Pan-European summit with the 
 
 
3 08-53129 
 
participation of all States as well as all organizations 
working in the region. 
 The treaty which we are proposing is meant to 
create a reliable collective security system that would 
ensure equal security for all States and set out, in 
legally binding form, the bases of relations among all 
participants, with a view to strengthening peace, 
ensuring stability and promoting integrated and 
manageable development efforts across the vast Euro-
Atlantic region. This would be a process in which all 
parties would reaffirm their commitment to 
fundamental principles of international law, such as the 
non-use of force; peaceful settlement of disputes; 
sovereignty; territorial integrity; non-interference in 
internal affairs; and the inadmissibility of 
strengthening one’s own security by infringing upon or 
endangering the security of others. We also need to 
consider together new mechanisms to ensure 
compliance with those fundamental principles. 
Naturally, such a treaty should organically fit into the 
legal framework of the United Nations Charter and its 
principles of collective security. 
 The cold war distorted the nature of international 
relations and turned them into an arena for ideological 
confrontation. Only now, after the cold war has ended, 
can the United Nations, created on the basis of a 
polycentric vision of the world, fully realize its 
potential. Today as never before, it is important that all 
States reaffirm their commitment to the United Nations 
as a global forum, to which there is no alternative and 
which possesses a universal mandate and generally 
recognized legitimacy, and as a centre for open, candid 
and frank debate and coordination of world policies on 
a just and equitable basis free from double standards. 
This is an essential requirement to ensure that the 
world regains its equilibrium. 
 The multitude of challenges that humanity is 
facing require comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations. In order to keep up with the times, the 
United Nations requires further rational reform to be 
able to gradually adapt itself to existing political and 
economic realities. On the whole, we are satisfied by 
the progress of the reform, including the initial results 
of the activities of the recently established 
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights 
Council.  
 With regard to expansion of the membership of 
the Security Council, we will, of course, welcome 
proposals that do not divide United Nations Member 
States but rather facilitate the search for mutually 
acceptable compromises and lead to a broad-based 
agreement. 
 Of increasing importance in the reform process is 
the promotion of dialogue and partnership among 
civilizations. Russia supports the Alliance of 
Civilizations and other initiatives in that regard. We 
reiterate our proposal that a consultative council of 
religions be established under United Nations auspices, 
taking into account the increasing role of the religious 
aspect in international life. That would assist in 
strengthening moral principles and incorporating them 
into international affairs.  
 Among the priorities of United Nations activities, 
a number of urgent issues have recently appeared on 
the Organization’s agenda, including climate change 
and food and energy security. Those problems are 
global and interrelated, and they can be addressed and 
resolved only through a global partnership at a 
qualitatively new level, with active involvement by 
Governments, the scientific and business communities 
and civil society. 
 In particular, the current financial crisis requires 
urgent attention and synergy of efforts. From this 
rostrum, the President of France has put forward 
important initiatives aimed at a cooperative search for 
ways to revitalize the international financial system 
that involve the world’s leading economies. In that 
context, we support the further development of 
partnerships between the members of the Group of 
Eight and key States in all developing regions. The 
Economic and Social Council could also play a role 
here. Russia will continue to participate responsibly in 
the work of various bodies of the United Nations 
system and in other contexts to help find an equitable 
solution to all those problems. 
 The international development assistance 
mechanisms being established in Russia will help us to 
increase the extent and effectiveness of our 
participation in international efforts to fight hunger and 
disease, to promote broader access to education and to 
overcome energy shortages, which will be our 
additional contribution to the achievement of the 
Millennium Development Goals. It is only natural that, 
in so doing, we should pay particular attention to 
assisting nearby countries. All countries have partners 
with which they share traditional friendly relations 
  
 
08-53129 4 
 
based on a common history and geography. It is wrong 
to artificially undermine such relationships for the 
benefit of geopolitical schemes and against the will of 
the people.  
 We will continue to work together with all our 
neighbours. First and foremost, along with the other 
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, 
we will continue to develop the integration processes 
within the Collective Security Treaty Organization and 
the Eurasian Economic Community in order to 
preserve and promote our common heritage of culture 
and civilization, which, in a globalizing world, is a 
major resource of the Commonwealth and of each of its 
member States. That is why we have a particular 
interest in cooperating with those countries, and it is 
also why they view Russia as an area of special 
interest. We will therefore base our relations on the 
principles of equality, mutual benefit, respect for and 
consideration of one another’s interests and compliance 
with existing agreements, in particular those on the 
peaceful settlement of disputes. That is also the way in 
which we intend to develop our relations in other 
regions of the world: openly, on the basis of 
international law and without any zero-sum games. 
Those principles were set out in the foreign policy 
concept approved by President Medvedev in July this 
year.  
 Russia is consistently implementing its network 
diplomacy and promoting cooperation in various 
formats: the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the 
BRIC countries — Brazil, Russia, India and China — 
partnership mechanisms with the European Union, the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of 
Arab States and regional organizations in Latin 
America. 
 The developments that occurred in August gave 
us yet another occasion to think about the 
responsibility to report events accurately. Distortions 
of reality hamper international efforts to settle conflicts 
and crises and revive the worst practices of the cold-
war era. If we wish to prevent the truth from becoming 
the first casualty of war, we must draw the appropriate 
conclusions, in particular in the light of a provision of 
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International 
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation 
among States in accordance with the Charter of the 
United Nations, which states that States have the duty 
to refrain from propaganda for wars of aggression. 
That is in line with the Guidelines on protecting 
freedom of expression and information in times of 
crisis, recently adopted by the Committee of Ministers 
of the Council of Europe. I propose that the United 
Nations also issue a statement on that issue, this time 
in a universal context.  
 The obvious global effects of the crisis in the 
Caucasus show that the world has changed for 
everyone. There are now fewer illusions and fewer 
pretexts for refusing to respond to the most urgent 
challenges of modern times. That is precisely why we 
hope that the international community will, on the 
basis of common sense, finally manage to develop a 
programme of collective action for the twenty-first 
century. I am pleased to be here to 
address the General Assembly. Sixty-three years ago, 
representatives from around the world gathered in San 
Francisco to complete the founding of the Charter of 
the United Nations. They met in the shadow of a 
devastating war, with grave new dangers on the 
horizon. They agreed on a historic pledge to reaffirm 
faith in fundamental human rights and unite their 
strength to maintain international peace and security. 
That noble pledge has endured trying hours in United 
Nations history, and it still guides our work today.  
 
 
9 08-51570 
 
 Yet the ideals of the Charter are now facing a 
challenge as serious as any since the United Nations 
founding: a global movement of violent extremists. By 
deliberately murdering the innocent to advance their 
aims, those extremists defy the fundamental principles 
of international order. They show contempt for all who 
respect life and value human dignity. They reject the 
words of the Bible, the Koran, the Torah or any 
standard of conscience of morality. They imperil the 
values of justice and human rights that gave birth to the 
United Nations — values that have fuelled an 
unprecedented expansion of freedom across the world.  
 To uphold the words of the Charter in the face of 
this challenge, every nation in this Hall has 
responsibilities. As sovereign States, we have an 
obligation to govern responsibly and solve problems 
before they spill across borders. We have an obligation 
to prevent our territory from being used as a sanctuary 
for terrorism, proliferation, human trafficking and 
organized crime. We have an obligation to respect the 
rights and respond to the needs of our people.  
 Multilateral organizations have responsibilities. 
For eight years, the nations in this Assembly have 
worked together to confront the extremist threat. We 
have witnessed successes and setbacks, and through it 
all a clear lesson has emerged. The United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations are needed more 
urgently than ever. To be successful, we must be 
focused, resolute and effective.  
 Instead of only adopting resolutions decrying 
terrorist acts after they occur, we must cooperate more 
closely to keep terrorist attacks from happening in the 
first place. Instead of treating all forms of Government 
as equally tolerable, we must actively challenge the 
conditions of tyranny and despair that allow terror and 
extremists to thrive. By acting together to meet the 
fundamental challenge of our time, we can lead 
towards a world that is more secure, more prosperous 
and more hopeful.  
 In the decades ahead, the United Nations and 
other multilateral organizations must continually 
confront terror. That mission requires clarity of vision. 
We must see the terrorists for what they are: ruthless 
extremists who exploit the desperate, subvert the tenets 
of a great religion and seek to impose their will on as 
many people as possible. Some suggest that those men 
would pose less of a threat if we would only leave 
them alone, yet their leaders make clear that no 
concession could ever satisfy their ambitions. Bringing 
the terrorists to justice does not create terrorism. It is 
the best way to protect our people.  
 Multilateral organizations must respond by taking 
an unequivocal moral stand against terrorism. No cause 
can justify the deliberate taking of innocent life, and 
the international community is nearing universal 
agreement on this truth. The vast majority of nations in 
this Assembly now agree that tactics like suicide 
bombing, hostage-taking and hijacking are never 
legitimate. The Security Council has adopted 
resolutions declaring terror unlawful and requiring all 
nations to crack down on terrorist financing. Earlier 
this month, the Secretary-General held a conference to 
highlight victims of terror, where he stated that 
terrorism can never be justified. 
 Other multilateral organizations have spoken 
clearly as well. The Group of 8 has declared that all 
terrorist acts are criminal and must be universally 
condemned. The Secretary-General of the Organization 
of the Islamic Conference recently spoke out against 
suicide bombing, which he said runs counter to the 
teachings of Islam.  
 The message behind those statements is 
resolutely clear. Like slavery and piracy, terrorism has 
no place in the modern world. Around the globe, 
nations are turning those words into action. Members 
of the United Nations are sharing intelligence with one 
another, conducting joint operations and freezing 
terrorists’ finances. While terrorists continue to carry 
out attacks like the terrible bombing in Islamabad last 
week, our joint actions have spared our citizens from 
many devastating blows.  
 The brutal nature of the extremists is increasingly 
clear and the coalition of nations confronting terrorists 
is growing stronger. Over the past seven years, 
Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from 
regimes that actively sponsor terror to democracies that 
fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror 
and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi 
Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. 
A few nations, regimes like Syria and Iran, continue to 
sponsor terror, yet their numbers are growing fewer 
and they are growing more isolated from the world.  
 As the twenty-first century unfolds, some may be 
tempted to assume that the threat has receded. That 
would be comforting. It would be wrong. The terrorists 
believe time is on their side, so they have made waiting 
  
 
08-51570 10 
 
out civilized nations part of their strategy. We must not 
allow them to succeed. The nations of this body must 
stand united in the fight against terror. We must 
continue working to deny the terrorists refuge 
anywhere in the world, including ungoverned spaces. 
We must remain vigilant against proliferation by fully 
implementing the terms of resolution 1540 (2004) and 
enforcing sanctions against North Korea and Iran. We 
must not relent until our people are safe from this 
threat to civilization. 
 To uphold the Charter’s promise of peace and 
security in the twenty-first century, we must also 
confront the ideology of the terrorists. At its core, the 
struggle against extremists is a battle of ideas. 
Terrorists envision a world in which religious freedom 
is denied, women are oppressed and all dissent is 
crushed. The nations represented in this Hall must 
present a more hopeful alternative — a vision where 
people can speak freely, worship as they choose and 
pursue their dreams in liberty.  
 Advancing this vision of freedom serves our 
highest ideals, as expressed in the United Nations 
Charter’s commitment to the dignity and worth of the 
human person. Advancing this vision also serves our 
security interests. History shows that when citizens 
have a voice in choosing their own leaders, they are 
less likely to search for meaning in radical ideologies, 
and when Governments respect the rights of their 
people, they are more likely to respect the rights of 
their neighbours. 
 For all these reasons, the nations of this body 
must challenge tyranny as vigorously as we challenge 
terror. Some question whether people in certain parts of 
the world actually desire freedom. This self-serving 
condescension has been disproved before our eyes. 
From the voting booths of Afghanistan, Iraq and 
Liberia to the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Rose 
Revolution in Georgia, the Cedar Revolution in 
Lebanon and the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, we 
have seen people consistently make the courageous 
decision to demand their liberty. 
 For all the suggestions to the contrary, the truth is 
that, whenever and wherever people are given the 
choice, they choose freedom. Nations represented in 
this Hall have supported the efforts of dissidents, 
reformers and civil society advocates in newly free 
societies through the new United Nations Democracy 
Fund, and we appreciate those efforts. As young 
democracies around the world continue to make brave 
stands for liberty, multilateral organizations like the 
United Nations must continue to stand with them. 
 In Afghanistan, a determined people are working 
to overcome decades of tyranny and protect their newly 
free society. They have strong support from all 26 
nations of the NATO alliance. I appreciate the United 
Nations decision this week to renew the mandate of the 
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
The United Nations also has an active civilian presence 
in Afghanistan, where experts are doing important 
work helping to improve education, facilitate 
humanitarian aid and protect human rights. We must 
continue to help the Afghan people defend their young 
democracy so that the Taliban does not return to power 
and Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terror. 
 In Iraq, the fight has been difficult, yet daily life 
has improved dramatically over the past 20 months 
thanks to the courage of the Iraqi people, a determined 
coalition of nations and a surge of American troops. 
The United Nations has provided the mandate for 
multinational forces in Iraq through this December, and 
the United Nations is carrying out an ambitious 
strategy to strengthen Iraq’s democracy, including 
helping Iraqis prepare for their next round of free 
elections. Whatever disagreements our nations have 
had on Iraq, we should all welcome this progress 
towards stability and peace and we should stand united 
in helping Iraq’s democracy succeed.  
 We must stand united in our support of other 
young democracies, from the people of Lebanon 
struggling to maintain their hard-won independence to 
the people of the Palestinian territories, who deserve a 
free and peaceful State of their own. We must stand 
united in our support of the people of Georgia. The 
United Nations Charter sets forth the equal rights of 
nations large and small; Russia’s invasion of Georgia 
was a violation of those rights. Young democracies 
around the world are watching to see how we respond 
to this test. The United States has worked with allies in 
such multilateral institutions as the European Union 
and NATO to uphold Georgia’s territorial integrity and 
provide humanitarian relief. Our nations will continue 
to support Georgia’s democracy. 
 In this Hall are representatives of Georgia, 
Ukraine, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Liberia, Iraq and other 
brave young democracies. We admire their courage, we 
honour their sacrifices, and we thank them for their 
 
 
11 08-51570 
 
inspiring example. We will continue to stand with all 
who stand for freedom. This noble goal is worthy of 
the United Nations and it should have the support of 
every member of this Assembly.  
 Extending the reach of political freedom is 
essential to prevailing in the great struggle of our time, 
but it is not enough. Many in this Hall have answered 
the call to help their brothers and sisters in need by 
working to alleviate hopelessness. Those efforts to 
improve the human condition honour the highest ideals 
of this institution. They also advance our security 
interests. The extremists find their most fertile 
recruiting grounds in societies trapped in chaos and 
despair — places where people see no prospect of a 
better life. In the shadows of hopelessness, radicalism 
thrives. Eventually, that radicalism can boil over into 
violence, cross borders and take innocent lives across 
the world.  
 Overcoming hopelessness requires addressing its 
causes: poverty, disease and ignorance. Challenging 
these conditions is in the interest of every nation in this 
Hall, and democracies are particularly well positioned 
to carry out that work because we have experience 
responding to the needs of our own people. We are 
natural partners in helping other nations respond to the 
needs of theirs. Together, we must commit our 
resources and efforts to advancing education, health 
and prosperity.  
 Over the years, many nations have made well-
intentioned efforts to promote these goals, but the 
success of these efforts must be measured by more than 
intentions. It must be measured by results. My nation is 
placing insistence on results at the heart of our foreign 
assistance programmes. We launched a new initiative, 
called the Millennium Challenge Account, which 
directs our help to countries that demonstrate their 
ability to produce results by governing justly, fighting 
corruption and pursuing market-based economic 
policies, as well as investing in their people. Every 
country and institution that provides foreign assistance, 
including the United Nations, will be more effective by 
showing faith in the people of the developing world 
and insisting on performance in return for aid.  
 Experience also shows that, to be effective, we 
must adopt a model of partnership, not paternalism. 
This approach is based on our conviction that people in 
the developing world have the capacity to improve 
their own lives and will rise to meet high expectations 
if we set them. America sought to apply this model in 
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Every nation that 
receives American support through this initiative 
develops its own plan for fighting HIV/AIDS and 
measures the results.  
 So far, these results are inspiring. Five years ago, 
50,000 people in sub-Saharan Africa were receiving 
treatment for HIV/AIDS; today, that number is nearly 
1.7 million. We are taking a similar approach to 
fighting malaria, and so far we have supported local 
efforts to protect more than 25 million Africans. 
Multilateral organizations have made bold 
commitments of their own to fight disease. The G-8 
has pledged to match America’s efforts on malaria and 
HIV/AIDS. Through the Global Fund, many countries 
are working to fight HIV/AIDS, malaria and 
tuberculosis. Lives in the developing world depend on 
these programmes, and all who have made pledges to 
fight disease have an obligation to follow through on 
their commitments.  
 One of the most powerful engines of development 
and prosperity are trade and investment, which create 
new opportunities for entrepreneurs, help people rise 
out of poverty and reinforce such fundamental values 
as transparency and the rule of law. For all these 
reasons, many represented in this Hall have conducted 
free-trade agreements at the bilateral and regional 
levels.  
 The most effective step of all would be an 
agreement that tears down trade barriers at the global 
level. The recent impasse in the Doha round is 
disappointing, but that does not have to be the final 
word. I urge every nation to seize this opportunity to 
lift up economies around the world and reach a 
successful Doha agreement as soon as possible. 
Beyond Doha, our nations must renew our commitment 
to open economies and stand firm against economic 
isolationism. These objectives are being tested by 
turbulence in the global financial markets.  
 Our economies are more closely connected than 
ever before, and I know that many of you here are 
watching how the United States Government will 
address the problems in our financial system. In recent 
weeks we have taken bold steps to prevent a severe 
disruption of the American economy, which would 
have a devastating effect on other economies around 
the world. We promote stability in the markets by 
preventing the disorderly failure of major companies. 
  
 
08-51570 12 
 
The Federal Reserve has injected urgently needed 
liquidity into the system. Last week, I announced 
decisive action by the federal Government to address 
the root cause of much of the instability in our 
financial markets by purchasing illiquid assets that are 
weighing down balance sheets and restricting the flow 
of credit. I can assure the Assembly that my 
Administration and our Congress are working together 
to quickly pass legislation approving this strategy. And 
I am confident that we will act in the urgent time frame 
required.  
 The objectives I have laid out for multilateral 
institutions confronting terror, opposing tyranny and 
promoting effective development are difficult, but they 
are necessary tasks. To have maximum impact, 
multilateral institutions must take on challenging 
missions, and like all of us in this Hall they must work 
towards measurable goals, be accountable for their 
actions and hold true to their word.  
 In the twenty-first century, the world needs a 
competent and effective United Nations. This unique 
institution should build on its successes and improve 
its performance. Where there is inefficiency and 
corruption, that must be corrected. Where there are 
bloated bureaucracies, they must be streamlined. 
Where Members fail to uphold their obligations, there 
must be strong action — for example, there should be 
an immediate review of the Human Rights Council, 
which has routinely protected violators of human 
rights. There should be a stronger effort to help the 
people of Burma live free of the repression they have 
suffered for too long. All nations, especially members 
of the Security Council, must act decisively to ensure 
that the Government of the Sudan upholds its 
commitment to address the violence in Darfur. 
 The United Nations is an Organization of 
extraordinary potential. As it rebuilds its Headquarters, 
it must also open the door to a new age of 
transparency, accountability and seriousness of 
purpose. With determination and clear purpose, the 
United Nations can be a powerful force for good as we 
head into the twenty-first century. It can affirm the 
great promise of its founding.  
 In the final days of the San Francisco Conference, 
the delegates negotiating the United Nations Charter 
received a visit from President Harry Truman. He 
acknowledged the enormous challenges they faced and 
said that success was possible only because of what he 
called an unshakable unity of determination. Today, the 
world is engaged in another period of great challenge, 
and by continuing to work together, that unshakable 
unity of determination will be ours. Together we can 
confront and defeat the evil of terrorism. Together we 
can secure the Almighty’s gift of liberty and justice to 
millions who have not known it. Together we can build 
a world that is freer, safer and better for the 
generations who follow. My 
delegation and I join in expressing our congratulations 
to you, Father Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, on your 
election as President of the General Assembly at its 
sixty-third session, and we hope you have a very 
successful and rewarding term at the helm of this body. 
We express our gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Srgjan 
Kerim for the excellent work done during his tenure as 
President of the Assembly at its sixty-second session.  
 Once again, we have come to this body to 
reaffirm the need for what we have always called for: 
the implementation of all the promises and pledges that 
we have made before. The focus of the sixty-third 
session of the General Assembly is on the global food 
crisis, climate change and reform of the United 
Nations. The confluence of the food, fuel and financial 
crises, as well as the effects of climate change, pose the 
real threat that they will undermine the progress made 
by developing countries in the struggle against poverty 
and underdevelopment. 
 During the Millennium Summit, held in 2000, our 
heads of State and Government adopted a Declaration 
(resolution 55/2) that communicated a message of hope 
and a vision of a better world. Included in the 
Declaration was an important section on the special 
needs of Africa. In paragraph 24 of the Declaration, the 
leaders stated that they would  
“spare no effort to promote democracy and 
strengthen the rule of law, as well as respect for 
all internationally recognized human rights and 
fundamental freedoms, including the right to 
development”.  
 African and many other, developing countries 
have indeed taken responsibility for promoting 
democracy, good governance, peace and stability and 
human rights. They are also hard at work rolling back 
the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment. But, 
despite those strides, it is clear that many in 
sub-Saharan Africa will not achieve the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). Part of the reason is that 
the global partnership for development on which the 
achievement of the MDGs was predicated has not been 
fully implemented. Despite the lofty ideas expressed at 
previous sessions of the Assembly, we continue to fall 
short in meeting our commitments to implement that 
partnership, in particular in the areas of trade, aid and 
debt relief.  
 We express the fervent hope that the high-level 
meetings organized by yourself, Mr. President, and the 
Secretary-General, on Africa’s development needs and 
on the MDGs, have served not only as important 
reminders of the challenges we face, but also as a 
catalyst that will cause the world to feel a greater sense 
of urgency. 
 The necessary resources exist in the world to 
achieve the MDGs. We need to summon the necessary 
political will and compassion. So we join the sister 
countries of our continent in calling for massive 
resource transfers through development assistance, 
investment, trade, technology transfers and human 
resource development. These will ensure that African 
and other developing countries are able to successfully 
adapt to the devastating impact of climate change and 
achieve the MDGs. 
 However, in order to accelerate the achievement 
of all the Millennium Development Goals, much more 
attention needs to be focused on Goal 3, regarding the 
empowerment of women. Women need to be at the 
centre of development as agents of change, socially, 
economically and politically.  
  
 
08-53141 12 
 
 Billions of the people of the world, whom we are 
privileged to represent in the Assembly, have cast their 
eyes on this gathering of leaders. They have done so 
because they have hope that this leadership will take 
the required measures in order to address poverty and 
underdevelopment. We dare not fail them. 
 The food crisis has to be addressed in the short 
and medium terms. The Green Revolution that has 
been launched by the African Union needs partnerships 
in order to succeed. In addition, support for the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development will be a major 
contributor to the struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. In that context, allow me, Mr. 
President, to quote from your own statement to the 
General Assembly with regard to that socio-economic 
programme as well as the role of our immediate former 
President, Thabo Mbeki:  
“During his presidency of the rainbow nation, 
spanning nearly a decade, he, along [with] other 
African leaders, championed the vision of 
NEPAD we still pursue today. When the affluent 
listen to Africa and partner with it, that vision is 
within reach. To quote NEPAD’s founding 
document: `In fulfilling its promise, this agenda 
must give hope to the emaciated African child 
that the twenty-first century is indeed Africa’s 
century.’” (, p. 3)  
 The Doha Development Round has stalled despite 
seven years of negotiations. We are convinced that 
trade and increased market access will make a major 
contribution to the achievement of the MDGs. In that 
regard, it is our submission that the Doha Round of 
trade negotiations should not be allowed to die, but 
must remain focused on development, as originally 
envisaged.  
 In recent years, we have all witnessed the 
devastating effects of climate change, especially on 
island States. Hurricanes have become more frequent 
and more vicious, together with droughts, floods and 
unpredictable extreme weather patterns in the rest of 
the world. Of course, climate change requires an urgent 
response. Given the agreement in Bali last year on a 
road map for negotiations, it is our hope that the 
negotiations, to be completed in Copenhagen in 2009, 
will necessarily set the stage for more concerted action 
by all countries to address climate change and all its 
manifestations, with the developed countries taking the 
lead. South Africa commits itself to approaching the 
preparations for Copenhagen constructively and with a 
view to reaching an agreement that is ambitious, 
balanced and inclusive. 
 We join the many leaders of the world who have 
expressed their support for fundamental reform of the 
system of global governance, including the United 
Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions. It is 
important to understand that the critical issues facing 
the world today — the current financial, food and 
energy crises — cannot be addressed effectively when 
so many countries and regions of the world are left out 
of the key decision-making processes of important 
institutions of global governance. South Africa stands 
ready to work with other members of the United 
Nations to advance the goal of reform.  
 Equally, the reform of the Security Council need 
not be re-emphasized. We reiterate our view that a 
reformed Security Council would have more legitimacy 
and that its decisions would have more credibility. We 
welcome the recent decision (decision 62/557) to 
launch in the General Assembly inter-governmental 
negotiations on Security Council reform, to discuss 
plans for expanding the Security Council in both the 
non-permanent and permanent categories. It is of 
course a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
constitutes a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Unless 
the ideals of freedom, justice and equality become the 
character of the United Nations, including the Security 
Council, the dominant will continue to dictate to the 
dominated, while the dreams of the dominated will 
forever be deferred. 
 In December this year, my country will complete 
its tenure as a non-permanent member of the Security 
Council. We have indeed been privileged to serve the 
peoples of Africa and the world in that capacity; it has 
been a historic first for us as a young democracy. In 
that capacity, we were indeed honoured to contribute 
meaningfully to global efforts to create peace and 
stability in all regions of the world. Accordingly, we 
express the humble gratitude of the people of our 
country to the general membership of the United 
Nations for the trust placed in us in helping the world 
discharge this mandate. 
 During our tenure, the Security Council also 
focused on the important question of enhancing the 
relationship between the United Nations and regional 
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU). 
 
 
13 08-53141 
 
We were honoured to be able to contribute to that 
work. We congratulate the Secretary-General on 
appointing an African Union-United Nations panel of 
distinguished persons whose mandate is to explore 
financing modalities for AU-led peacekeeping 
missions. 
 Peace continues to evade the Middle East. South 
Africa participated in the Annapolis Conference in 
2007 with great expectations and hopes that progress 
would indeed be made to advance the goal of peace in 
that region. We will continue to support all 
international efforts to help the peoples of Palestine 
and Israel in their endeavour to find a lasting and 
peaceful solution to their challenges, leading to the 
establishment of a viable Palestinian State, coexisting 
side by side with the State of Israel, within secure 
borders. We understand full well the pain, suffering 
and agony that conflict brings to bear on the lives of 
ordinary people, particularly women and children. 
Those ordinary souls continue to cry out to this 
Assembly of the world, as they have done in the past, 
to help bring an end to the conflict. 
 South Africa will continue to work with the sister 
peoples of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Burundi and Côte d’Ivoire in their efforts to 
consolidate peace and democracy in their respective 
countries. With regard to Zimbabwe, the Assembly 
must certainly be aware of the recent developments led 
by our former President Thabo Mbeki in his capacity as 
the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) facilitator, which culminated in the signing of 
an agreement between the main political protagonists 
in the country. We hope that the leadership of 
Zimbabwe win soon finalize aspects of that agreement 
to make possible the formation of a new Government 
that will help lay the groundwork to address the 
political and economic challenges facing their country. 
SADC, the African Union and the facilitator stand as 
guarantors of the agreement. We call on the 
international community to spare neither strength nor 
effort in lending a hand to the people of Zimbabwe as 
they embark on the difficult path of reconciliation and 
reconstruction. 
 Equally, the situations in Somalia and the Sudan, 
and especially in Darfur, remain matters of great 
concern. South Africa will continue to do whatever it 
can, both bilaterally and in the context of the African 
Union and the United Nations, to help the peoples of 
Sudan and Somalia find peace among themselves. 
 We remain concerned about the impasse on the 
question of Western Sahara. South Africa is committed 
to seeking a just, mutually acceptable and lasting 
solution to that problem.  
 This year also marks the sixtieth anniversary of 
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. During the past six decades, the Declaration 
has remained the key standard for human rights, justice 
and dignity. We should therefore use this anniversary 
period to strengthen our resolve to defend human 
rights. South Africa has also had the honour to be 
reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review 
mechanism of the new Human Rights Council. We 
were also honoured with the appointment of our own 
Justice Navi Pillai to lead that very important 
international institution. 
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 We wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of 
the United Nations. In the Millennium Declaration, we 
reaffirmed that the United Nations “is the 
indispensable common house of the entire human 
family, through which we will seek to realize our 
universal aspirations for peace, cooperation and 
development” (resolution 55/2, para. 32). Leading 
South Africa’s delegation to the Millennium Summit 
was our former President, Thabo Mbeki, who reminded 
the Assembly that  
“Billions among the living struggle to survive in 
conditions of poverty, deprivation and 
underdevelopment ... as offensive to everything 
humane as anything we decry about the second 
millennium.” (A/55/PV.5, p. 18) 
 It is that understanding that has correctly 
informed the engagement of successive leaders of our 
democratic State with this body over the years. In that 
regard, we are touched and humbled by the kind 
comments made in the Assembly by the various heads 
of State or Government and heads of delegation, 
directed at our immediate former President, Thabo 
Mbeki. We most certainly shall, through our 
Government, convey those sentiments to that noble son 
of our people and our continent, and citizen of the 
world. 
 Accordingly, from this rostrum may I also 
express our sincere gratitude to the general 
membership of the United Nations for the support that 
  
 
08-53141 14 
 
former President Mbeki and our country received over 
the past nine-and-a-half years of his stewardship of our 
country. As the leadership of our country is passed on, 
we confirm that South Africa, under the guidance of 
President Kgalema Motlanthe, shall indeed continue to 
be a trusted and dependable partner in the common 
endeavour to strengthen our institutions of 
multilateralism, starting from the correct premise that 
multilateralism remains the only hope in addressing the 
challenges facing humanity today, whether they be 
terrorism, threats to human rights, peace and stability 
or, of course, the central struggle against poverty and 
underdevelopment. 