The 
world today is undergoing major developments, major 
changes and major adjustments. The trend towards 
peace, development and cooperation, which represents 
the call of our times, has grown stronger than ever. As 
the world moves further towards multipolarity and 
economic globalization, multilateralism and democracy 
in international relations have won greater popular 
support, while openness and cooperation for mutual 
benefit and win-win progress have become the shared 
aspirations of the international community. Countries 
have become more interdependent. 
 At the same time, the world remains in the grip of 
the financial crisis, and the prospects for economic 
recovery are still not clear. Worldwide, unemployment 
and poverty are worsening, and development 
imbalances are more acute. Global issues such as 
climate change, food security, energy and resource 
security, and public health security have been thrown 
into sharp relief. Non-traditional security threats, 
including terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, transnational organized crime and 
major communicable diseases, are threatening our 
world. Some long-standing hotspot issues remain 
unresolved, while regional and local conflicts continue 
to flare up. The instability and uncertainties on the 
international landscape pose severe challenges to world 
peace and development. 
 In the face of unprecedented opportunities and 
challenges, we members of the international 
community should commit ourselves to peace, 
development, cooperation, common progress and 
tolerance, and continue our joint endeavour to build a 
harmonious world of enduring peace and common 
prosperity and contribute to the noble cause of the 
peace and development of humankind. 
 First, we should view security in a broader 
perspective and safeguard world peace and stability. 
The security of all countries has never been as closely 
interconnected as it is today. Security is not a zero-sum 
game, and there is no isolated or absolute security. No 
country can be safe and stable in the absence of world 
and regional peace and stability. 
 We should embrace a new security mindset of 
mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination. 
While maintaining our own national security, we 
should also respect the security concerns of other 
countries and advance the common security of 
humankind. We should adhere to the purposes and 
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and 
seek peaceful solutions to regional hotspot issues and 
international disputes. There should be no wilful use or 
threat of force. We should support the United Nations 
in continuing to play an important role in the field of 
international security. We should oppose terrorism, 
separatism and extremism in all their manifestations 
and broaden international security cooperation. 
 China has consistently stood for the complete 
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear 
weapons and for a world without nuclear weapons. We 
call on the international community to take credible 
steps to push forward the nuclear disarmament process, 
eradicate the risks of nuclear weapons proliferation and 
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and related 
international cooperation. 
 Secondly, we should take a more holistic 
approach to development and promote common 
prosperity. Increasing economic globalization has 
linked the development of all countries closely 
together. Without the development and equal 
participation of developing countries, there can be 
neither common prosperity in the world nor a more just 
and equitable international economic order. The 
developing countries now face a deteriorating external 
environment brought about by the international 
financial crisis. Their economies are slowing down, 
and their development endeavours are beset by serious 
difficulties. 
 We believe that common development is an 
important way to redress global development 
imbalances and achieve sustainable development. The 
United Nations should increase its input in 
 
 
9 09-52228 
 
development; advance economic globalization in the 
direction of balanced development, shared benefits and 
win-win progress; and foster an international 
environment conducive to the development of 
developing countries. The international financial 
institutions should use their newly increased resources, 
first and foremost, to help developing countries move 
out of poverty and provide loans to them in a more 
flexible, diverse, convenient and efficient manner. 
Great effort should be made to increase the 
representation and voice of developing countries in the 
process of reforming the international financial system. 
 We should take responsible measures to counter 
the international financial crisis, firmly oppose 
protectionism and actively work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations. Developed countries should open 
their markets to developing countries and reduce or 
exempt tariffs for those countries. They should honour 
their official development assistance and debt relief 
commitments and, in particular, increase assistance to 
the least developed countries, with a focus on tackling 
such issues as hunger, health care and education.  
 For developing countries, self-reliance is 
essential. They should explore development models 
conducive to their development and poverty 
eradication efforts. It is also in their interest to increase 
trade and investment cooperation, open markets to one 
another and step up South-South cooperation. 
 Thirdly, we should pursue cooperation with a 
more open mind and work for mutual benefit and 
common progress. Climate change, food security, 
energy and resource security, and public health security 
are all global challenges, and no country is immune to 
them. The only way for us to meet those challenges and 
ensure harmony and peace is to engage in closer 
international cooperation.  
 Climate change is one of the serious challenges to 
human survival and development, and international 
cooperation is the key to tackling that challenge. We 
should retain the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol 
as the main channel in addressing climate change, 
abide by the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities, adhere to the mandate of the Bali Road 
Map, and work for the success of the Copenhagen 
conference with a view to achieving mutual benefit and 
common progress. 
 Food and energy are vital to the livelihood, 
development and stability of all nations. We should 
increase our input into agriculture, develop advanced 
technologies, curb market speculation, increase food 
assistance and intensify cooperation with regard to 
agriculture and food. We should strengthen mutually 
beneficial cooperation in the area of energy, step up the 
research and development of new and renewable 
energies, put in place a system for the research, 
development and dissemination of advanced energy 
technologies, and diversify the energy supply. 
 The continued spread of influenza A — H1N1 — 
has presented a global public health challenge 
confronting the entire international community. China 
is ready to provide help, within its capacities, to other 
developing countries in the prevention and control of 
influenza A. 
 Fourthly, we should be more tolerant towards one 
another and live together in harmony. Mutual learning 
and tolerance among different civilizations are an 
inexhaustible source of strength for social progress, 
and all countries — large or small, strong or weak, rich 
or poor — are equal. We should acknowledge 
differences in our cultural traditions, social systems 
and values, respect the right of all countries to 
independently choose their own development paths, let 
different civilizations and models of development draw 
on one another’s strengths through competition and 
comparison, and achieve common development by 
seeking common ground while reserving the right to 
differ.  
 The Chinese people will soon celebrate the 
sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China. Sixty years ago, the Chinese people 
won independence and liberation after a prolonged, 
hard struggle and became masters of the new China. 
Today, China’s national strength has grown remarkably 
and the people are better off. 
 China’s development has contributed greatly to 
peace and development in the world, and China’s 
future is more closely interconnected with that of the 
world. A more developed China will make greater 
contributions and bring more opportunities to the 
world. We are committed to the path of peaceful 
development and the win-win strategy of opening up. 
We will develop friendly relations and cooperation 
with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of 
Peaceful Coexistence. China has always been and will 
  
 
09-52228 10 
 
continue to be a positive force for world peace and 
common development. 
 As a responsible and major developing country, 
China has always made common development an 
important aspect of its foreign policy. We have made a 
great effort to provide support and assistance to other 
developing countries. To further assist them, China will 
adopt the following measures. 
 First, we will increase support for other 
developing countries hit hard by the financial crisis, 
honestly implement relevant capital increase and 
financing plans, intensify trade and investment 
cooperation and help increase the capacity of relevant 
countries for risk resistance and sustainable 
development.  
 Secondly, we will continue to implement the 
measures announced at the United Nations High-level 
Event on the Millennium Development Goals to assist 
other developing countries in accelerating development 
and facilitating attainment of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Thirdly, China will follow through on the 
measures to help African countries that were 
announced at the Beijing Summit of the Forum on 
China-Africa Cooperation, increase assistance to 
Africa, reduce or cancel debts for African countries, 
expand trade and investment, provide human resources 
and technological support for African countries in such 
areas as agriculture, health, education and disaster 
preparedness and reduction, and intensify personnel 
training tailored to African needs. 
 Fourthly, China will continue to participate in and 
promote regional monetary and financial cooperation, 
maintain financial and economic stability and promote 
financial cooperation and trade in the region. 
 Let us join hands, share the development 
opportunities, rise above the challenges and make an 
unremitting effort towards building a harmonious 
world of enduring peace and common prosperity.In these tumultuous 
times marked by manifold crises, we are more than 
ever in need of a global Organization that all Members 
make use of and support. We need the United Nations. 
The comprehensive, universal system of the United 
Nations forms the heart of the global system of crisis 
prevention and mitigation. Now more than ever, 
Germany pledges its active and extensive support to 
this world Organization. 
 This past year taught us bitter lessons, and today 
it seems clearer than ever: we must secure the 
sustainability of the economic recovery. That applies 
not only to the financial sector, but also, and in 
particular, to the most vulnerable in the world — the 
poorest of the poor in the developing countries — as 
well as to our environment and the world’s climate. 
 The consultations on a charter for sustainable 
economic activity point in the right direction. The 
United Nations should be actively involved in that 
process. We must turn the crisis into an opportunity for 
development and a truly green recovery. 
 The aftermath of the financial crisis is 
jeopardizing our progress on the path towards 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Therefore, we must do our utmost to avoid any 
setbacks in that regard. Donor States must continue 
their efforts for development, all the more so in times 
of crisis. Germany has continually increased its official 
development assistance contributions in recent years. 
In 2008, my country was the second-largest donor of 
official development assistance. We will also 
significantly increase our contributions to the 
multilateral development banks. 
 All of this underscores one thing: Germany, as 
one of the world’s largest economies, stands by its 
global responsibility. But developing countries must 
also live up to their responsibilities. Responsible 
governance, respect for human rights, environmental 
protection, the fight against epidemics, the 
strengthening of the rights of women — those are the 
challenges that each country has the responsibility to 
meet. 
 Climate change is the pre-eminent challenge of 
the twenty-first century. It threatens our well-being, 
our security and our economic development. It will 
lead to uncontrollable risks and dramatic damage, if we 
do not take resolute action — not in some distant 
future, but right now. 
 I can assure the Assembly: Germany will 
continue to be a leader in climate protection. But we 
will be successful only if we act together. We need an 
inclusive process in which those countries directly 
affected by climate change, such as the small island 
States, can also play a part. The United Nations is the 
only reliable framework for this. I would like to thank 
the Secretary-General for his very timely initiative in 
convening a United Nations summit last week 
addressing this key issue. 
 Disarmament and arms control can help create 
better conditions for global cooperation and increase 
security and stability. We warmly welcome the new 
dynamic in the area of nuclear disarmament. The call 
for a nuclear-weapon-free world enjoys widespread 
support, including that of Germany. We must seize this 
opportunity for progress in all areas of disarmament. 
Germany has underlined that sub-strategic nuclear 
weapons must also be incorporated into the continuing 
process of disarmament. Our clear commitment to 
ridding the world of all nuclear weapons is the best 
way to strengthen the international non-proliferation 
regime. 
 We need a new international consensus at the 
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the 
launching of negotiations in Geneva on a fissile 
material cut-off treaty and the entry into force of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. In order to 
avoid a conflict of objectives between 
non-proliferation and peaceful uses, Germany supports 
multilateral solutions to nuclear-fuel supply and has 
put forward its own proposal on that issue. 
 The international community must not relent in 
its commitment to banning all weapons of mass 
destruction. A model in that respect is the Chemical 
Weapons Convention, which outlaws a whole category 
of weapons of mass destruction. Its implementing 
organization needs strong and dynamic leadership. 
Germany has always had a particular commitment to 
 
 
55 09-52604 
 
the Chemical Weapons Convention, and we stand ready 
to accept greater responsibility in that organization. 
 We view the ongoing nuclear programme in Iran 
with great concern. The belated admittance by Iran 
concerning the construction of a second enrichment 
plant underlines the fact that our concerns are more 
than justified. Even before this latest event, the report 
by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
Director-General El Baradei emphasized the urgency of 
the matter. Unfortunately, the Iranian Government still 
refuses to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to remove 
serious doubts concerning the peaceful character of its 
nuclear programme. We urge Iran to grant an IAEA 
verification team access to the newly disclosed site 
without delay. 
 We sincerely hope that Iran will use the 
opportunity of the upcoming talks between it and the 
E3+3 — the United Kingdom, France and Germany, 
plus the United States, the Russian Federation and 
China — to demonstrate its willingness to engage in 
honest and speedy negotiations. If Iran’s leaders 
continue to stall, the international community will have 
no other choice but to take additional measures to 
emphasize the seriousness of our common concern. 
 Iran has a long and great history. It witnessed the 
origins of civilization. It can become an anchor of 
stability in its region — a respected member of the 
international community. But that involves, in addition 
to a diplomatic resolution of questions regarding its 
nuclear programme, a responsible foreign policy 
towards its neighbours. The key to this is the 
recognition of Israel’s right to exist. 
 Since the escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip 
at the beginning of the year, we have seen some 
encouraging signs of a return to the peace process. The 
resumption of negotiations aimed at the two-State 
solution is still possible. Germany strongly supports 
President Obama’s intensive commitment and regional 
approach. Together with the partners of the European 
Union, we are prepared to support efforts towards 
peace through concrete contributions. What we now 
need, however, are courageous gestures of goodwill on 
all sides to create the conditions for serious talks. 
 The successful holding of elections in June was 
an important milestone towards the continuing 
stabilization of Lebanon. What is now important is that 
a new Government soon be formed. The successful 
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) 
mission remains a crucial contribution to securing the 
ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel, and thus to the 
stabilization of the region. By again assuming 
command of the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force on 
1 September, we further strengthened our commitment 
to UNIFIL. 
 For Afghanistan, 2009 is a pivotal year. The 
presidential elections — the first elections in decades 
that were free and organized by the Afghans 
themselves — determined who will control the fate of 
the country over the next five years. They were an 
impressive sign of the resolve of the people of 
Afghanistan to take part in the political process. 
 Against the backdrop of the difficult security 
situation, the further build-up of Afghan security forces 
assumes even greater importance. We will, therefore, 
continue to increase the number of German police 
instructors in Afghanistan, we will support the further 
build-up of the European Union Police Mission, and 
we will help to advance the training of the Afghan 
army within the framework of the International 
Security Assistance Force. 
 Despite all the criticism, there are also 
encouraging accomplishments, especially in the field 
of economic growth and in the reconstruction of the 
country’s infrastructure. The basic prerequisites for 
Afghanistan’s sustainable development are good 
governance, a resolute fight against corruption and an 
improvement in State services. These are essential if 
the population is to once again nurture hope for the 
future. As one of the largest troop-contributing nations 
and one of the main bilateral donors, Germany will 
continue to play an instrumental role in the 
reconstruction of the country. 
 Following the presidential elections, we are now 
entering a new phase of cooperation between the 
international community and Afghanistan. For that 
reason, Germany, together with the United Kingdom 
and France, has taken the initiative to hold an 
international conference that will set out concrete, 
realistic and measurable goals for the future political 
and economic development of Afghanistan. To that 
end, the Afghanistan Compact, which will expire in 
2010, should be further developed. 
 In 2010, we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary 
of the independence of no fewer than 17 African 
States — a fitting moment to also look to the future. 
Despite the global economic crisis, the overall outlook 
  
 
09-52604 56 
 
for Africa and its people is positive. We must succeed 
in utilizing the continent’s enormous potential in terms 
of people, creativity and resources. It remains our 
challenge to support the development of that potential 
while, at the same time, respecting African ownership. 
 African ownership should by no means be 
equated with a withdrawal from our neighbouring 
continent. On the contrary, it means that we should 
cultivate relations with the States of Africa in a spirit 
of partnership — a partnership in which each side 
introduces its ideas, and in which we work together to 
master the challenges we face, whether locally or 
globally. 
 One major common challenge remains the 
containment of violence and the protection of people in 
conflict areas. Germany will continue its extensive 
engagement in Africa, be it in the area of development 
cooperation, peace and security, business and 
technology, the environmental and energy sector or 
educational and scientific cooperation. This also 
applies to cooperation with the African Union, which 
has been expanding increasingly in recent years. 
 United Nations peacekeeping missions are a 
central pillar of the international security architecture. 
Reform of United Nations peacekeeping is an urgent 
issue, and Germany is ready to actively contribute to 
such reform. 
 It is absolutely essential that the cooperation 
between the United Nations and regional organizations 
be further intensified. The European Union has just 
shown that, with its peacekeeping missions in 
Africa — those in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo and Chad, to name just two examples — it is a 
reliable partner of the United Nations when it comes to 
crisis management. 
 We are facing a multitude of global challenges. 
Today, no country is strong enough to tackle those 
challenges on its own. We need a universal forum for 
joint global action. That is why we need a strong 
United Nations that is capable of taking effective 
action. 
 A long chain of high-level meetings — from the 
2005 High-level Event to the Secretary-General’s 
Summit on Climate Change last week — has 
emphasized how urgent it is to adapt the United 
Nations to the challenges of today’s world, for threats 
have become global. Our responses, however, are still 
not always global, and that is true for the United 
Nations as well. 
 Reforms must start with simple questions. Does a 
particular body effectively fulfil its tasks? Does its 
composition reflect the world of today? Where that is 
not the case, reform must have a clear objective: to 
make the United Nations more effective, more credible 
and more assertive. 
 However, we must not limit reforms to the United 
Nations. If we want to deal effectively with the current 
crisis and effectively prevent future crises, we must 
also reform the international financial institutions. 
Isolated reforms of individual institutions will not get 
us anywhere. Reform of the financial institutions and 
of the United Nations must intermesh as a broader 
reform of global governance — a reform that, more 
than six decades after the founding of today’s world 
order, is long overdue. Germany, incidentally, is 
advocating at a high level the improved representation 
of newly industrialized and developing countries as 
part of the reform of the international financial 
institutions. This is our understanding of global 
governance: fair participation for everybody. 
 In 2000 and 2005, heads of State and Government 
called for reform of the Security Council. They did so 
out of the realization that we can meet the threats of 
today only if the Council reflects the world of today. 
One thing is clear: if the Security Council does not 
reform itself, there is a risk that other bodies will 
attempt to take its place. Such a rivalry would be 
detrimental to us all. Let us therefore attempt, at this 
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, to bring 
about concrete results. 
 Germany has been and remains willing to take 
responsibility. That includes assuming a permanent 
seat on a reformed Security Council. We also underline 
this readiness to take responsibility with our candidacy 
for a non-permanent seat on the Council for the period 
2011-2012. Through our work in the Security Council, 
we want to contribute to the success of the United 
Nations, just as we are already contributing to 
worldwide United Nations missions, to development 
funds, humanitarian aid and the United Nations 
Environment Programme. Now and in the future, we 
will work to find common interests, to overcome 
divisions and to strengthen a global partnership of 
responsibility.In 
speaking to the General Assembly in France’s name 
today, I am well aware that we all have a historic 
responsibility in the current circumstances. 
 In the midst of a financial, economic and social 
crisis that has no precedent in the history of the United 
Nations, and faced with the threat a global ecological 
disaster, we must now invent a new world where the 
follies of yesterday are no longer possible. That is our 
responsibility. Now we all know towards what 
catastrophes our obstinate attempts to solve the 
problems of the twenty-first century with twentieth-
century ideas and instruments may lead us. No one 
among us can claim any longer that he did not know. 
There is a universal awareness that the path that 
the world has taken over the past few decades is a dead 
end. This awareness is born of sorrow, suffering and 
fear. We are politically and morally accountable for the 
suffering on our planet. Tens of millions of men and 
women have lost their jobs and their homes. A billion 
human beings are suffering from hunger, and hundreds 
of millions have no access to water, energy or minimal 
health care. 
 To those hundreds of millions of people, we, the 
heads of State and Government, and no one else, must 
restore hope. Those who are paying the price of the 
crisis had no role in bringing it about. We owe an 
answer to the people who are outraged by the 
behaviour of those in the financial world who led us to 
the brink of chaos and continue to seek to enrich 
themselves indecently. We owe an answer to those who 
are still dying in absurd wars from another age, while 
humankind has so many challenges to face.  
 France’s answer is unambiguous. Things cannot 
go on as they were. We must change. We cannot allow 
it to start all over again, leading to another disaster 
tomorrow. After such a strong disavowal of our usual 
thinking and our deep-rooted prejudices, the task 
before us is precisely the same as that faced by men of 
good will who sought here to build a new political, 
economic and monetary world order after the Second 
World War. The generation that preceded us was equal 
to its responsibilities. The question today is: Will we be 
equal to that same responsibility? 
 The world will change. It cannot be otherwise. 
The only question is: Will the world change because 
we are able to act with wisdom, intelligence and 
courage, or because fresh crises will arise if we are not 
wise enough to take the path of radical change? 
 The truth is that we have already waited too long 
to regulate globalization, fight global warming and 
curb nuclear proliferation. And I should like solemnly 
to tell the leaders of Iranian that they would be making 
a tragic mistake in relying on the passive response of 
the international community in order to pursue their 
military nuclear programme.  
 We have waited too long to re-establish peace in 
the Middle East by giving the Palestinian people the 
State to which they are entitled in the name of law and 
in the name of justice. And we have waited too long to 
guarantee the people of Israel the right to live in 
security, which the tragedies of history have made so 
necessary for them. 
 We know what we need to do now: increase the 
number of permanent and non-permanent members of 
the Security Council. I say in the name of France, it is 
unacceptable that the African continent does not have a 
single permanent member on the Security Council — it 
is unacceptable because it is unjust. It is unacceptable 
that the South American continent, with such a great 
power as Brazil, or India with its population of one 
billion, or Japan or Germany, should be excluded from 
among the permanent members of the Council. It is 
unacceptable, and I say here that the legitimacy of the 
United Nations is riding on this reform. Either the 
United Nations reforms and its legitimacy will grow, or 
  
 
09-52179 46 
 
the reform fails and then decisions will be taken 
outside the United Nations.  
 We must reform the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank; that is indispensable. Voting 
rights need to be more equitably distributed. The 
missions of both the Fund and the Bank need to be 
redefined. To maintain the Fund as the guardian of an 
orthodoxy that has been so severely shaken by the 
crisis would be a tragic mistake.  
 The international system has to be reformed. We 
cannot have a politically multipolar world with a single 
currency. That is not acceptable; it is not possible. We 
have to re-engineer the financial capitalism system. If 
we have a system in which the real price of risk or the 
real price of rare resources is not being paid, that is a 
suicidal system.  
 We need to eliminate tax havens, for we must not 
tolerate places where money derived from speculation, 
crime and fraud is stashed. It is up to us. No one in the 
world would understand if we were to fail to live up to 
this objective.  
 We need to curb the price swings of commodities 
that are subject to excessive speculation, starting with 
oil, since this instability is unsustainable. The countries 
that have commodities must be paid a fair price for 
their resources. We must not accept the speculation that 
destabilizes the world over the costs of commodities. 
 In Copenhagen, we need to commit to 
quantitative targets for greenhouse gas emissions. We 
can no longer put off the moment of choice. We need to 
set up a world environment organization. We need to 
acknowledge the legitimacy of the principle of a 
carbon tax border adjustment mechanism so that 
nobody can profit from environmental dumping.  
 We cannot let the law of trade be the only law. I 
believe in free trade, but there are fundamental 
standards. We are members of the World Health 
Organization. How can we impair the right to health of 
those who have nothing? We are members of the 
International Labour Organization, which has defined 
the fundamental standards in this field. How can we 
accept that those standards be flouted? The right to 
health, the right to a minimum respect for one’s social 
rights and the right to protection of the planet are just 
as important as the right to trade. There is no single 
right that is more important than the others. 
 We cannot ask developing countries and poor 
countries to comply with these standards if we, the 
rich, do not help them in their efforts. We all belong to 
the same human race. We all live on the same planet. 
We are all facing the same challenges.  
 So yes, we need to be able to share our 
technology. France is ready to do so, and so are the 
other wealthy countries of the world. Yes, we will need 
to come up with further resources for development 
assistance and for meeting the ecological challenge 
together. I do not hesitate to say that we will find these 
resources by taxing excessive gains from speculation 
and profits. We do not have to look far for resources; 
they are right there. I would like to appeal to all States, 
to all international organizations, that the 
recommendations made by the commission chaired by 
Joseph Stiglitz be disseminated broadly. Let us make 
no mistake about the way we measure economic 
growth.  
 The task is a huge one, and it is only just 
beginning. That is all the more reason for starting now 
and starting quickly. We have little time remaining. 
Each of us needs to realize what would happen if we 
had to go home and explain to our fellow citizens that 
we have been incapable of reaching an agreement, of 
finding new solutions at a time when they are suffering 
so grievously from the consequences of the crisis. I 
wish to say very clearly that nothing would be worse 
that a mediocre compromise in Pittsburgh and in 
Copenhagen. World opinion and the current 
circumstances demand that we find a real solution to 
the problems and not just to pretend. 
 If we do nothing, the threat of the worst crisis is 
not behind us but ahead of us. We are at one of those 
moments in history when political decisions will have 
a profound and lasting impact on the future. We have 
no choice; we must take risks, since the greatest risk 
today would be to do nothing, to let ourselves be 
carried along by the force of habit, to think that we still 
have time. France has come to tell you that we have no 
more time.  
 I hope that this year, 2009, is when a new world 
order — a more fair, more efficient world order — will 
be established, one that each of us will be comfortable 
with.I stand here to 
reaffirm the Charter of the United Nations, not to tear 
it up. I call on every nation to support its universal 
principles.  
 A year ago, we met on the brink of a global crisis 
and, as national leaders spoke in turn at this rostrum, 
the full scale of the danger was becoming clear — a 
threat not just to jobs, businesses and life savings but, 
with the imminent risk of failure of the world’s 
banking system, the prospect of entire countries failing 
as nations across Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin 
America struggled to access credit. 
 That crisis demanded global action. As never 
before, the fate of every country rested on the actions 
of all. And as the fear of the unthinkable took hold, we 
reached a clear choice: to fail separately or to succeed 
together. 
 At the G-20 meetings in Washington and again in 
London, we made our choice. Governments came 
together to begin the fight back against the global 
recession. We acted in concert, recognizing that 
national interests could be protected only by serving 
the common interest, and that in this new global 
economy, the economy is indivisible and recession 
anywhere can threaten prosperity everywhere. We 
reckoned also that, if growth is to be sustained, it has 
to be shared. Global problems can be mastered only 
through global solutions. 
 So I think that today we can draw strength from 
the unprecedented unity that has defined the past year. 
But we cannot be complacent. For while it may seem 
strange to say so after a time of such intense global 
cooperation, our world is now entering a six-month 
period which may prove even more testing for 
international cooperation together. 
 I believe that we face five urgent challenges that 
demand momentous decisions — decisions that I 
would argue are epoch-making — on climate change, 
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, shared prosperity and 
eradicating poverty. 
 Once again, we are at a point of no return. And 
just as the collapse of the banks focused our minds a 
year ago, so we must grasp this next set of challenges 
immediately. 
 If we do not reach a climate change deal at 
Copenhagen, if we miss this great opportunity to agree 
together to protect our planet, we cannot hope for an 
easy second chance some time in the future. There will 
be no retrospective global agreement to undo the 
  
 
09-52179 52 
 
damage that we have caused. This is the moment now 
to limit and reverse the climate change we are 
inflicting on future generations — not later, not at 
another conference, not in a later decade, after we have 
already lost 10 years to inaction and delay. 
 And if, in Afghanistan, we give way to the 
insurgency and Al-Qaida , other terrorist groups and 
Al-Qaida will return and, from that sanctuary once 
again plot, train for and launch attacks on the rest of 
the world. 
 There can be no chance, either, of a nuclear-free 
world if we allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons and, 
in doing so, set off a new arms race. 
 There can be no global compact for jobs and 
growth if we choke off recovery by failing to act 
together to follow through on the coordinated global 
fiscal expansion we agreed and have now put in place. 
 And if we do not act together to prevent 
avoidable illness, there can be no plan to save 
tomorrow the 12,000 children who are dying in Africa 
today and every day. 
 So I say we do need world agreement on urgent 
challenges. 
 Now let me elaborate first on climate change. 
Despite the promises we have made, the road to a 
successful outcome in Copenhagen is not assured. Why 
is that? It is so because, above all, a robust and long-
term deal on climate change requires money. If the 
poorest and most vulnerable are going to be able to 
adapt; if the emerging economies are going to embark 
on low-carbon development paths; and if the forest 
nations are going to slow and stop deforestation, then I 
know that the richer countries must contribute 
financially. 
 That is why I have proposed a new approach to 
financing our action against climate change. It will 
provide substantially increased additional and 
predictable flows. They will be flows of capital from 
both public and private sectors. They would be worth 
around $100  billion a year by 2020. In the coming 
days, we must make progress. 
 A post-2012 agreement on climate change at 
Copenhagen is the next great test of our global 
cooperation. Each of us has a duty of leadership to 
make sure that it happens. We must build on the 
discussions at Secretary-General Ban’s meeting this 
week. I have said that I will go to Copenhagen to 
conclude the deal because I believe that it is too 
important an agreement — for the global economy, and 
for the future of every nation represented here — 
simply to leave it to chance. So I urge my fellow 
leaders to commit themselves to backing up our official 
negotiators by going to Copenhagen too. 
 I believe that a safer Afghanistan means a safer 
world. But none of us can be safe if we walk away 
from that country or from our common mission and 
resolve. NATO and its partners, from Australia to Japan 
to other countries, must agree new ways to implement 
our strategy. I believe that we must ensure that 
“Afghanization” takes place — that the army, people 
and the people of Afghanistan assume greater 
responsibility for the security of their own country. 
 So, too, must we unite against terror and injustice 
wherever they are to be found in our world. I believe 
that it shames us all that the people of Somalia and the 
Sudan are still subject to the most terrible of violence; 
that Israel and Palestine have still not found a way to 
live side by side in security and peace; and that, for the 
people of Burma, their elected leader is subjected to a 
show trial and decades of imprisonment. There is more 
that we can do and more that we must do. And we must 
carry forward our efforts to make a coherent, strategic 
and more effective approach to peacekeeping and 
peacebuilding around the world. 
 Once there were five nuclear-armed Powers. Now 
there are nine. The real and present danger is that more 
will soon follow. And the risk is not just State 
aggression, but the acquisition of nuclear weapons by 
terrorists. So we must accept that we are at a moment 
of danger when decades of preventing proliferation 
could be overturned by a damaging rise in 
proliferation. If we are serious about the ambition of a 
nuclear-free world, we will need statesmanship, not 
brinksmanship. 
 Tomorrow’s Security Council resolution will be 
vital, in my view, as we move forward towards next 
year’s global nuclear security summit in April and the 
Review Conference in May. Our proposal is a grand 
global bargain between nuclear-weapon and  
non-nuclear-weapon States. There are three elements to 
it, where careful and sober international leadership is 
essential and in which Britain will play its part: the 
responsibilities of non-nuclear States, the rights of  
 
 
53 09-52179 
 
non-nuclear States and, of course, the responsibilities 
of nuclear weapon States. 
 First, let there be no ambiguity: Iran and North 
Korea must now know that the world will be even 
tougher on proliferation. We are ready to consider 
further sanctions. Britain will insist in future that the 
onus on non-nuclear States is that in the years ahead it 
is for them to prove that they are not developing 
nuclear weapons. 
 Secondly, Britain will offer civil nuclear power to 
non-nuclear States who are ready to renounce any 
plans for nuclear weapons, helping non-nuclear States 
acquire what President Eisenhower so memorably 
called “atoms for peace”. With others, we will be 
prepared to sponsor a uranium bank outside those 
countries to help them access civil nuclear power. And 
Britain is ready to launch a new nuclear centre of 
excellence to help develop an economic low-carbon 
proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel cycle. 
 My third point is that all nuclear-weapon States 
must reciprocally play their part in reducing nuclear 
weapons as part of an agreement by non-nuclear States 
to renounce them. This is exactly what the  
Non-Proliferation Treaty intended, and in line with 
maintaining our nuclear deterrent I have asked our 
National Security Committee to report to me on the 
potential future reduction of our nuclear weapon 
submarines from four to three. 
 While economic cooperation has stabilized the 
international banking system and forged the foundation 
for the resumption of economic growth, recovery is 
neither entrenched nor irreversible. The great lesson of 
the past year is that only the bold and global action that 
we took prevented a recession becoming a depression. 
We have delivered a coordinated monetary and fiscal 
response that the International Labour Organization 
estimates has saved 7 million to 11 million jobs across 
the world. 
 So at Pittsburgh, when the Group of 20 (G-20) 
meets tomorrow, we must cement a global compact for 
jobs and growth — a compact to bring unemployment 
down and bring rising prosperity across the globe. We 
must maximize the impact of the stimulus measures we 
have agreed. There must be proper planning of exit 
strategies together to make sure the recovery does not 
falter. We do not and must not turn off the life support 
for our economy prematurely. We must also facilitate 
agreement setting clear objectives on how each of us 
can contribute to worldwide growth in the future, and 
we must ensure that such future growth is balanced and 
sustainable. 
 I believe we need stronger economic cooperation 
now as we navigate the uncertainties of recovery. I 
therefore propose we launch the compact by agreeing 
that we are committed to high levels of growth on a 
sustainable and balanced basis. This must be backed up 
by comprehensive reform of the financial sector. It 
must include international principles on bonuses. We 
must strengthen our targeting of tax havens. From next 
month, real sanctions must be meted out against those 
jurisdictions that fail to meet global standards. 
 The voice of Africa will have to be heard and 
heeded to bring recovery in areas devastated by the 
events of the past year and to assure that for all 
developing countries, inside and outside Africa, we do 
not put the Millennium Development Goals beyond 
reach as a result of a wider failure of global 
responsibility. 
 In London, the G-20 agreed on measures worth 
$50 billion for poor countries to help them weather the 
crisis. Because of London, the International Monetary 
Fund can lend $8 billion instead of $2 billion over this 
year and next. This is already helping Kenya and 
Tanzania to increase Government spending in response 
to the crisis. 
 Amid all these challenges, we must remember a 
fundamental promise we made 10 years ago. And this 
is my fifth and final imperative: to achieve a vision for 
2015 that we are in danger of betraying, because on 
present trends it will not take five years — as we 
pledged — and not even 50 years; it will take more 
than 100 years to deliver on some of our Millennium 
Development Goals. And 100 years is too long for the 
peoples of our countries to wait for the justice that has 
been promised.  
 As President Obama has said, we need a global 
plan to make the Millennium Development Goals a 
reality. The unyielding, grinding, soul-destroying, so 
often lethal poverty I saw in Africa and other 
developing countries has convinced me that unless 
empowerment through trade justice is matched by 
empowerment through free education and free health 
care, then this generation in sub-Saharan Africa will 
not have the opportunity they deserve to rise out of 
poverty and will never be fully free. 
  
 
09-52179 54 
 
 I believe the greatest of injustice demands the 
boldest of actions. Today at this United Nations 
General Assembly, we will see history being made with 
the beginnings of universal free health care in Africa 
and Asia as Burundi, Sierra Leone, Malawi, Nepal, 
Liberia and Ghana all make major announcements, 
which I applaud, that extend free health care and 
abolish user fees. As a result of those actions, more 
than 10 million additional people in Africa and Asia 
will now have access to free health services — 
10 million people who will now for the first time get 
the treatment they need without being turned away or 
fearing how they will pay. I urge you all to match the 
leadership of these countries with your own support, 
and I commit the United Kingdom to giving that 
support. 
 Let us remember how in 1945, as the United 
Nations was being created, countries faced a 
multiplicity of challenges but summoned up the energy 
and vision not just to rebuild from the ruin and rubble 
of a war, but to establish a new international order for 
shared security and progress. I believe that these same 
principles must now inspire new and better, more 
representative and more effective ways of cooperating 
globally together. 
 And as we learn from the experience of turning 
common purpose into common action in this our 
shared global society, so we must forge a progressive 
multilateralism for this era, one that depends upon us 
finding within ourselves and together the qualities of 
moral courage and leadership that for our time and for 
our generation can make this world anew. I believe that 
if we take the right decisions and work together, we are 
in the business of creating for the first time in human 
history a truly global society. It is a name to be wished 
for and an aim to be fought for by all of us.I offer my congratulations 
to Mr. Treki on his assumption of the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. My 
delegation assures him of our fullest cooperation 
during his stewardship of this Assembly, which 
embodies the hopes, aspirations and shared vision of 
peace and development of all the peoples of our planet. 
 When this session of the General Assembly ends 
next year, the United Nations will have completed 
65 years of existence. These past decades have seen the 
world change in fundamental ways. Connectivity 
defines our global condition, and the challenges that 
we collectively face are truly global. The resolution of 
these challenges, as we are aware, requires global 
approaches and solutions. What may happen in one 
part of the world has an impact on other regions. In the 
context of these rapidly emerging changes and their 
deep and diverse effects, we must consider more 
deeply whether the United Nations and other global 
governance structures are geared to effectively meeting 
the challenges that confront us all. 
 It is of concern that, even after more than six 
decades of existence, our international governance 
structures are neither inclusive nor participatory. 
Consequently, these structures and institutions have not 
kept pace or evolved with the changed nature, intensity 
and depth of contemporary global issues. The question 
is therefore: Are these institutions able to address these 
challenges adequately or satisfactorily? The reform and 
restructuring of the global governance architecture are 
the critical needs of our times, and the voices of the 
developing world, including those of the small island 
nations and Africa, are of principal and core relevance 
if we are to have truly participatory and global 
responses to global challenges. 
  
 
09-52592 28 
 
 One need not look very far to identify these 
challenges. The current economic and financial 
turmoil, which did not begin in the developing world, 
has affected developing countries the most. Growth has 
slowed, with recession overtaking many countries. The 
international response to this challenge must consist 
not only of the measures that have been taken to 
stimulate economies, but also, more importantly, of 
finding ways to restructure the current international 
governance system, which has failed to respond to the 
virulence of the financial and economic crisis. 
 To gloss over this structural deficit of the current 
global financial and economic architecture would 
imperil the future of a vast majority of the peoples of 
this world and presage greater difficulties in the future. 
In the face of the current economic and financial crisis, 
hard-won gains in alleviating poverty, hunger, illiteracy 
and disease are being reversed. The achievements of 
the Millennium Development Goals are seriously 
threatened. Policies of protectionism under such 
already adverse circumstances will exacerbate the 
serious situation that many countries face. 
 It is imperative that the United Nations act in 
concert to coherently overcome these challenges. India, 
which is actively engaged in the Group of 20 and other 
processes, has always stressed that developing 
countries must receive priority in any global response 
to the crisis. The United Nations Conference on the 
Financial and Economic Crisis held in June was 
opportune and provided a useful platform for 
collectively seeking ways and means to respond to the 
crisis. We now look forward to early implementation 
during the course of this General Assembly of the 
follow-up measures agreed on at the Conference. 
 At the centre stage of multilateralism and 
international cooperation is the United Nations. This 
Organization is a platform on which the world meets to 
express views and undertake commitments on global 
issues of mutual concern on an equal footing. It is no 
wonder, then, that the Charter of the United Nations 
begins with the inspiring words “We the peoples of the 
United Nations”. Inclusiveness and collective action in 
all aspects of the work of the Organization are at the 
heart of its Charter. This vision must be our lodestar, 
the guiding principle of all we undertake. India is 
committed to working with Member States to make the 
United Nations more relevant and attuned to 
contemporary realities.  
 Reforming the United Nations is a matter of the 
highest priority. Four years after the 2005 World 
Summit, there has not been much progress even as 
newer and more global crises and problems have 
emerged. We should not let slowness of action weaken 
the Organization in the face of such challenges. Rather, 
we must work in concert to make it more robust and 
capable of effective response. 
 Reform in the three essentials of the Charter — 
peace and security, development and human rights — 
requires our collective attention. The General 
Assembly must be revitalized in full measure, and its 
role as the anvil of global deliberation must be 
strengthened. The Economic and Social Council must 
become the fulcrum of development. It must be 
accepted that the Security Council must be 
strengthened and made more representative by 
expanding its permanent and non-permanent 
membership. Ongoing intergovernmental negotiations 
during the past six months have unambiguously 
established that an overwhelming majority of Member 
States share the perspective that an expansion in both 
categories of Security Council membership is needed. 
 Climate change is one of the most important 
global challenges that we face today. Developing 
countries bear a disproportionate share of its adverse 
effects, even though they are not responsible for it. 
Cognizant of the serious threat that climate change 
poses, India is engaged in the ongoing negotiations 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), including at the upcoming 
Copenhagen Conference. India will work for an 
outcome that recognizes the development imperatives 
of developing countries and is rooted in the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities. 
 We also must move away from concentrating on 
mitigation only and ensure that there is a focus on 
adaptation, which is critical for developing countries. 
We are hosting a high-level global conference on 
“Climate Change: Technology Development and 
Transfer” on 22 and 23 October 2009, in cooperation 
with the United Nations. The objective of the 
conference is to help formulate a road map for 
technology in the context of climate change mitigation 
and adaptation to support the UNFCCC process. 
 Developing countries must be supported 
financially, technologically and with capacity-building 
 
 
29 09-52592 
 
resources so that they can cope with the immense 
challenges of adaptation. Special efforts are required to 
develop programmes that address the critical needs of 
small island States and of the most vulnerable 
countries. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
central imperatives for India. To that end, accelerated 
economic growth and energy security are critical 
drivers. In pursuing our development goals, India has 
been successful in significantly reducing its energy 
intensity. India will continue to pursue that path. 
 India is aware that the continuing volatility in the 
fossil-fuel markets, together with the threat of climate 
change, makes the development of all renewable and 
clean energy sources — including nuclear energy — 
crucial. In that context, international civil-nuclear 
cooperation is important. 
 India has also taken several independent 
initiatives to address the issue of climate change. We 
have put in place a comprehensive policy and 
legislative framework, as well as a national action plan 
on climate change with eight separate national 
missions. An unprecedented afforestation campaign has 
been launched with a doubling of the forestry budget 
this year to $1.3 billion, and this increase is going to be 
sustained every year. The Prime Minister’s Council has 
approved national missions for enhanced energy 
efficiency and solar energy, setting ambitious goals. 
We are supporting and facilitating major research to 
assess various aspects related to climate change. 
 India attaches the highest priority to the goal of 
nuclear disarmament and has an impeccable 
non-proliferation record. We welcome the renewed 
global debate on achieving a world free of nuclear 
weapons. That corresponds with India’s long-standing 
and consistent advocacy of nuclear disarmament as one 
of the highest priorities of the international community. 
We have put forward a number of proposals on nuclear 
disarmament at the United Nations, including a 
working paper in 2006 proposing elements to fashion a 
new consensus on disarmament and non-proliferation. 
 Last year, at the sixty-third session of the General 
Assembly, consistent with India’s long-standing 
commitment as articulated in the Rajiv Gandhi Action 
Plan in 1988, India reiterated its proposal that a nuclear 
weapons convention be convened to ban the 
production, development, stockpiling and use of 
nuclear weapons and to provide for their complete 
elimination within a time frame. The international 
nuclear order cannot be discriminatory. Further, States 
must fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken. 
Once more, with feeling and with commitment, India 
reiterates that proposal. 
 We will continue to engage with key countries to 
intensify this debate in the hope that greater 
international understanding will lend itself to a firm 
commitment to action on nuclear disarmament. It was 
in that spirit that we supported the adoption of a 
programme of work, including on a fissile material cut-
off treaty (FMCT), at the Conference on Disarmament 
in May this year. It is consistent with India’s position 
to work with others at the Conference on Disarmament 
towards the conclusion of a non-discriminatory, 
multilaterally negotiated and internationally verifiable 
FMCT, provided it corresponds with India’s national 
security interests. We remain committed to a voluntary, 
unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing.  
 India stands committed to the safeguarding of 
international peace and security. Over the past five 
decades, we have contributed more than 
100,000 peacekeepers and have suffered a high number 
of casualties during this time. Strengthening the 
normative basis for peacekeeping operations and 
giving major troop-contributing countries a greater say 
will serve to make peacekeeping more effective. 
 Peace, security, stability and the welfare of our 
neighbourhood are vital for India. There is a new 
beginning in Sri Lanka; in Nepal, strengthening the 
peace process is in our collective interest; and in 
Afghanistan, the international community must remain 
intensively engaged and support its development 
efforts and the maintenance of peace and stability. 
India is committed to establishing good-neighbourly 
relations and resolving all outstanding issues with 
Pakistan through peaceful dialogue. 
 The barbaric terrorist attack on the innocent 
people of Mumbai on 26 November 2008 reminded us 
of the daily and malignant menace that terrorism poses 
to all countries. There can be no justification 
whatsoever for such mindless terrorist acts. It is our 
collective responsibility and duty to work together to 
ensure that terrorists and the organizers, perpetrators 
and supporters of such crimes are brought to justice. 
 In order to strengthen the international legal 
framework of the fight against terrorism, India has 
proposed a comprehensive convention on international 
  
 
09-52592 30 
 
terrorism. Discussions on the draft have gone on for far 
too long. It is time that the convention be finally 
adopted. India earnestly calls upon all countries to 
make serious efforts in the next few weeks to arrive at 
a consensus on the text. 
 In conclusion, I wish to reiterate India’s steadfast 
commitment to the work of the United Nations. 
Speaking to this Assembly 41 years ago, Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi said:  
  “The United Nations is the trustee of the 
world’s peace and represents the hopes of 
mankind. Its very existence gives a feeling of 
assurance that the justice of true causes can be 
brought fearlessly before the world. This 
Assembly and the agencies of the United Nations 
should, in all that they do, sustain those hopes 
and promote the causes of peace.” (A/PV.1693, 
para. 150)  
The truth and conviction of these words are more 
meaningful today than ever before.Nearly 62 years ago, the 
United Nations recognized the right of the Jews, an 
ancient people 3,500 years old, to a State of their own 
in their ancestral homeland. I stand here today as the 
Prime Minister of Israel, the Jewish State, and I speak 
to the Assembly on behalf of my country and my 
people. 
 The United Nations was founded after the 
carnage of the Second World War and the horrors of 
the Holocaust. It was charged with preventing the 
reoccurrence of such horrendous events. Nothing has 
undermined that mission, nothing has impeded it more, 
than the systematic assault on the truth. Yesterday, the 
President of Iran stood at this very rostrum spewing his 
latest anti-Semitic rants. Just a few days earlier, he 
again claimed that the Holocaust was a lie. 
 Last month, I went to a villa in a suburb of Berlin 
called Wannsee. There, on 20 January 1942, after a 
hearty meal, senior Nazi officials met and decided to 
exterminate my people. They left detailed minutes of 
that meeting that have been preserved for posterity by 
successive German Governments. I have here a copy of 
the minutes of the meeting of senior Nazi officials 
instructing the Nazi Government exactly how to carry 
out the extermination of the Jewish people. Is that 
protocol a lie? Are the German Government and all 
German Governments lying? 
 The day before I was in Wannsee, in Berlin I was 
given the original construction plans for the 
Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. I now hold in 
my hand the Auschwitz-Birkenau plans. They contain 
the signature of Heinrich Himmler, Hitler’s deputy, 
himself. Are those plans for the Auschwitz-Birkenau 
concentration camp, where 1 million Jews were 
murdered, a lie too? In June, President Obama visited 
another concentration camp, one of many — the 
 
 
09-52320 36 
 
Buchenwald concentration camp. Did President Obama 
pay tribute to a lie? 
 And what of the Auschwitz survivors, whose 
arms still bear the tattooed numbers branded on them 
by the Nazis? Are those tattoos a lie, too? One third of 
all Jews perished in the great conflagration of the 
Holocaust. Nearly every Jewish family, including my 
own, was affected. My wife’s grandparents, her 
father’s two sisters and three brothers, and all the 
aunts, uncles and cousins were murdered by the Nazis. 
Is that a lie?   
 Yesterday, the man who calls the Holocaust a lie 
spoke from this rostrum. I commend those who refused 
to come and those who left in protest. They stood up 
for moral clarity and brought honour to their countries. 
But to those who gave that denier of the Holocaust a 
hearing, I say on behalf of my people, the Jewish 
people, and of decent people everywhere: Have they no 
shame? Have they no decency? A mere six decades 
after the Holocaust, they give legitimacy to a man who 
denies the murder of 6 million Jews, while promising 
to wipe out the State of Israel, the State of the Jews. 
 That is a disgrace. It is a mockery of the Charter 
of the United Nations. Perhaps some representatives 
think that that man and his odious regime threaten only 
the Jews. If they believe that, they are wrong — dead 
wrong. History has shown us time and again that what 
starts with attacks on the Jews eventually ends up 
engulfing many, many others.  
 For this Iranian regime is fuelled by an extreme 
fundamentalism that burst onto the world scene three 
decades ago after lying dormant for centuries. In the 
past 30 years, that fanaticism has swept across the 
globe with a murderous violence that knows no bounds 
and with a cold-blooded impartiality in the choice of 
its victims. It has callously slaughtered Muslims, 
Christians, Jews, Hindus and many others. The 
adherents of that unforgiving creed, although it is 
comprised of different offshoots, seek to return 
humanity to medieval times. Wherever they can, they 
impose a backward, regimented society where women, 
minorities, gays or anyone else deemed not to be a true 
believer is brutally subjugated.  
 The struggle against that fanaticism does not pit 
faith against faith, or civilization against civilization. It 
pits civilization against barbarism, the twenty-first 
century against the ninth, and those who sanctify life 
against those who glorify death. The primitivism of the 
ninth century ought to be no match for the progress of 
the twenty-first. The allure of freedom, the power of 
technology and the reach of communications should 
surely win the day. Ultimately, the past cannot triumph 
over the future, and our future offers all nations 
magnificent bounties of hope because the pace of 
progress is growing, and growing exponentially.  
 It took us centuries to get from the printing press 
to the telephone, decades to get from the telephone to 
the personal computer, and only a few years to get 
from the personal computer to the Internet. What 
seemed impossible a few years ago is already outdated, 
and we can scarcely fathom the changes that are yet to 
come. We will crack the genetic code. We will cure the 
incurable. We will lengthen our lives. We will find a 
cheap alternative to fossil fuel, and we will clean up 
the planet.    
 I am proud that my country, Israel, is at the 
forefront of many of those advances in science and 
technology, medicine and biology, agriculture and 
water, and energy and the environment. Those 
innovations in my country and in many others offer 
humanity a sunlit future of unimagined promise. 
 However, if the most primitive fanaticism can 
acquire the most deadly weapons, the march of history 
could be reversed for a time and, like the belated 
victory over the Nazis, the forces of progress and 
freedom prevail only after a horrific toll of blood and 
fortune has been exacted from mankind. That is why 
the greatest threat facing the world today is the 
marriage between religious fundamentalism and the 
weapons of mass destruction.  
 The most urgent challenge facing this body today 
is to prevent the tyrants of Tehran from acquiring 
nuclear weapons. Are the Members of the United 
Nations up to that challenge? Will the international 
community confront a despotism that terrorizes its own 
people as they bravely stand up for freedom? Will it 
take action against the dictators who stole an election 
in broad daylight and then gunned down Iranian 
protesters, who died on the sidewalks and in the streets 
choking in their own blood? Will the international 
community thwart the world’s most pernicious sponsor 
and practitioner of terrorism? Above all, will the 
international community stop the terrorist regime of 
Iran from developing atomic weapons and thereby 
endangering the peace of the entire world? 
 
 
37 09-52320 
 
 The people of Iran are courageously standing up 
to this regime. People of goodwill around the world 
stand with them, as do the thousands who have been 
protesting outside this Hall throughout the week. Will 
the United Nations stand with them? 
 The jury is still out on the United Nations. Recent 
signs are not encouraging. Rather than condemning the 
terrorists and their Iranian patrons, some here in the 
United Nations have condemned their victims. This is 
exactly what a recent United Nations report on Gaza 
did, falsely equating the terrorists with those they 
targeted. 
 For eight long years, Hamas fired rockets from 
Gaza on nearby Israeli cities and citizens — thousands 
of missiles and mortars hailing down from the sky on 
schools, homes, shopping centres and bus stops. Year 
after year, as these missiles were deliberately fired on 
our civilians, not one single United Nations resolution 
was passed condemning those criminal attacks. We 
heard nothing — absolutely nothing — from the 
Human Rights Council of the United Nations, a 
misnamed institution if ever there was one. 
 In 2005, hoping to advance peace, Israel 
unilaterally withdrew from every inch of Gaza. It was 
very painful. We dismantled 21 settlements, really 
bedroom communities and farms. We uprooted over 
8,000 Israelis; we just yanked them out of their homes. 
We did this because many in Israel believed that it 
would win peace. Well, we did not get peace. Instead 
we got an Iranian-backed terror base 50 miles from 
Tel Aviv. But life in the Israeli towns and cities 
immediately adjacent to Gaza became nothing less than 
a nightmare. The Hamas rocket attacks not only 
continued after we left, they actually increased 
dramatically. They increased tenfold. And again, the 
United Nations was silent — absolutely silent. 
 Well, after eight years of this unremitting assault, 
Israel was finally forced to respond. But how should 
we have responded? There is only one example in 
history of thousands of rockets being fired on a 
country’s civilian population. This happened when the 
Nazis rocketed British cities during the Second World 
War. During that war, the Allies levelled German cities, 
causing hundreds of thousands of casualties. I am not 
passing judgement; I am stating a fact, a fact that is the 
product of the decisions of great and honourable 
men — the leaders of Britain and the United States — 
fighting an evil force in the Second World War. 
 It is also a fact that Israel chose to respond 
differently. Faced with an enemy committing a double 
war crime — firing on civilians while hiding behind 
civilians — Israel sought to conduct surgical strikes 
against the rocket-launchers themselves. That was no 
easy task because the terrorists were firing their 
missiles from homes and schools, using mosques as 
weapons depots and missile caches, and ferreting 
explosives in ambulances. 
 Israel, by contrast, tried to minimize casualties by 
urging Palestinian civilians to vacate the targeted 
areas. We dropped countless flyers over their homes. 
We sent thousands and thousands of text messages to 
the Palestinian residents. We made thousands and 
thousands of cellular phone calls urging them to 
vacate, to leave. Never has a country gone to such 
extraordinary lengths to remove the enemy’s civilian 
population from harm’s way.  
 Yet faced with an absolutely clear-cut case of 
aggressor and victim, who do you think the United 
Nations Human Rights Council decided to condemn? 
Israel. A democracy legitimately defending itself 
against terror is morally hanged, drawn and quartered, 
and given an unfair trial to boot. By these twisted 
standards, the Human Rights Council would have 
dragged Roosevelt and Churchill to the dock as war 
criminals. What a perversion of truth! What a 
perversion of justice! 
 The delegates to the United Nations and the 
Governments that they represent have a decision to 
make. Will they accept this farce? Because if they do, 
the United Nations would revert to its darkest days, 
when the worst violators of human rights sat in 
judgement against the law-abiding democracies, when 
Zionism was equated with racism and when an 
automatic majority could be mustered to declare that 
the Earth is flat. If you had to choose a date when the 
United Nations began its descent, almost a freefall, and 
lost the respect of many thoughtful people in the 
international community, it was the day in 1975 it 
decided to equate Zionism with racism. 
 Now this body has a choice to make. If it does 
not reject this biased report, it would vitiate itself, it 
would recommence the process of vitiating its own 
relevance and importance. But it would also do 
something else. It would send the message to terrorists 
everywhere that terrorism pays: all you have to do is 
 
 
09-52320 38 
 
launch your attacks from densely populated areas, and 
you will win immunity. 
 A third point: in condemning Israel, this body 
would also deal a mortal blow to peace. Let me explain 
why. When Israel left Gaza, many hoped that the 
missile attacks would stop. Others believed that, even 
if they did not stop, at the very least Israel, in having 
made this extraordinary gesture for peace, would have 
international legitimacy to exercise its right of self-
defence if peace failed. What legitimacy? What self-
defence? 
 The same United Nations that cheered Israel as it 
left Gaza and promised to back our right of self-
defence now accuses us — my people, my country — 
of being war criminals? And for what? For acting 
responsibly in self-defence? For acting in a way that 
any country would act, with a restraint unmatched by 
many? What a travesty! 
 Israel justly defended itself against terror. This 
biased and unjust report provides a clear-cut test for all 
Governments. Will the Assembly stand with Israel or 
will it stand with the terrorists? We must know the 
answer to that question now. Now, not later. Because if 
Israel is again asked to take more risks for peace, we 
must know today that the Assembly will stand with us 
tomorrow. Only if we have the confidence that we can 
defend ourselves can we take further risks for peace. 
 Make no mistake: all of Israel wants peace. Any 
time an Arab leader genuinely wanted peace with us, 
we made peace. We made peace with Egypt led by 
Anwar Sadat. We made peace with Jordan led by King 
Hussein. And if the Palestinians truly want peace, my 
Government and I, and my people, will make peace. 
But we want a genuine peace, a defensible peace, a 
permanent peace.  
 In 1947, this body voted to establish two States 
for two peoples — a Jewish State and an Arab State. 
The Jews accepted that resolution. The Arabs rejected 
it and invaded the embryonic Jewish State with the 
hopes of annihilating it. 
 We ask the Palestinians to finally do what they 
have refused to do for 62 years: say yes to a Jewish 
State. It is as simple, as clear and as elementary as that. 
Just as we are asked to recognize a nation-State of the 
Palestinian people, the Palestinians must be asked to 
recognize the nation-State of the Jewish people. The 
Jewish people are not foreign conquerors in the Land 
of Israel. It is the land of our forefathers. 
 Inscribed on the walls outside this building is the 
great Biblical vision of peace: “Nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation. They shall learn war no more.” 
These words were spoken by the great Jewish prophet 
Isaiah 2,800 years ago as he walked in my country, in 
my city, in the hills of Judea and in the streets of 
Jerusalem.  
 We are not strangers to this land. This is our 
homeland. But as deeply connected as we are to our 
homeland, we also recognize that the Palestinians also 
live there and they want a home of their own. We want 
to live side by side with them — two free peoples 
living in peace, living in prosperity, living in dignity.  
 Peace, prosperity and dignity require one other 
element: we must have security. The Palestinians 
should have all the powers to govern themselves except 
a handful of powers that could endanger Israel. That is 
why the Palestinian State must be effectively 
demilitarized. I say “effectively” because we do not 
want another Gaza, another south Lebanon, another 
Iranian-backed terror base abutting Jerusalem and 
perched on the hills a few kilometres from Tel Aviv. 
 We want peace. I believe that with goodwill and 
with hard work such a peace can be achieved. But it 
requires that all of us roll back the forces of terror led 
by Iran that seek to destroy peace, that seek to 
eliminate Israel and to overthrow the world order.  The 
question facing the international community is whether 
it is prepared to confront those forces, or will it 
accommodate them. 
 Over 70 years ago, Winston Churchill lamented 
what he called the “confirmed unteachability of 
mankind”. By that he meant the unfortunate habit of 
civilized societies to sleep and to slumber until danger 
nearly overtakes them. Churchill bemoaned what he 
called the  
 “want of foresight, unwillingness to act when 
action would be simple and effective, lack of 
clear thinking, confusion of counsel until the 
emergency comes, until self-preservation strikes 
its jarring gong …”. 
 I speak here today in the hope that Churchill’s 
assessment of the “unteachability of mankind” is for 
once proven wrong. I speak here today in the hope that 
 
 
39 09-52320 
 
we can learn from history, that we can prevent danger 
in time. 
 In the spirit of the timeless words spoken to 
Joshua over 3,000 years ago, let us be strong and of 
good courage.  Let us confront this peril, secure our 
future and, God willing, forge an enduring peace for 
generations to come. 
(spoke in Hebrew) 
 May God bless his people with peace; may God  
give strength to his people; may God bless his people 
with peace.To the powers, to the 
voices, to the four winds: I greet you all.
 I have addressed the Assembly in Te Reo Maori, 
the indigenous language of New Zealand, and I bring 
warm Pacific greetings from all New Zealanders. 
 I am deeply honoured to lead New Zealand’s 
delegation to the General Assembly for the first time. 
Like every New Zealand Prime Minister since 1945, I 
stand here today to reaffirm my country’s commitment 
to the United Nations and the United Nations Charter. 
 The founding Members of the United Nations 
gathered in San Francisco in 1945 to create this 
Organization out of the ashes of the most destructive 
war and the most debilitating depression in modern 
history. They believed in the larger freedom of a world 
where collective action might avert common crises. 
They believed in the rule of law, by which all States 
would be held to a universal standard, and in a world 
where all peoples, faiths and cultures could flourish. 
They believed in a future in which every human being 
would be free from want and free from fear. And they 
wanted an international Organization and architecture 
that could deliver those benefits.  
 New Zealand was active among those founding 
Members in San Francisco. And, as a small, 
independent and diverse country in the Pacific, New 
Zealand still has a stake in the United Nations — this 
great meeting place for all States. 
 I have benefited personally from efforts to secure 
those ideals. My family fled persecution in Europe, and 
I was privileged to grow up in a new world where a 
child of immigrants is now accorded the extraordinary 
privilege of leading his country and addressing this 
Assembly on its behalf. 
 We meet at a time of many challenges. With 
130 heads of State and Government assembled here 
this week, the present session of the General Assembly 
represents our greatest opportunity since the 2005 
World Summit to reaffirm our collective resolve. New 
Zealand embraces that opportunity. Today, I will focus 
on some of the most pressing issues demanding 
collective responses from us. 
 The crisis in the global economy continues. We 
must remain resolute in our efforts to stabilize the 
global economy in order to permit a return to 
sustainable growth. New Zealand welcomes the actions 
of the Group of 20 (G-20) over the past year. But, in 
commending those efforts, we call on the G-20 to heed 
 
 
31 09-52470 
 
the voices of the world’s small economies and to 
ensure that they are also heard in global decision-
making. 
 Free and fair trade will be the principal engine for 
driving developing countries out of poverty and 
bringing greater prosperity to all. An essential 
component in our response to the global economic 
crisis must therefore be a balanced and ambitious 
conclusion to the Doha Round of world trade talks. A 
genuinely global agreement that reduces tariffs, 
eliminates export subsidies, reduces domestic subsidies 
and increases market access will see benefits flow to 
all States. At a time when all countries are suffering 
from the brunt of the current economic crisis, further 
delay is inexcusable. 
 As one of the world’s first truly open economies, 
New Zealand has an unwavering commitment to trade 
liberalization and to the pursuit of bilateral, regional 
and global free trade agreements. We support the call 
of the Secretary-General for the immediate suspension 
of price controls and other agricultural trade 
restrictions, in order to reduce soaring food prices and 
help millions cope with the highest food prices in 
30 years. 
 Therefore, I call on all those States and groupings 
that have broken their undertakings and reintroduced 
protectionist measures to reconsider. Those actions are 
as harmful as they are unacceptable. Agriculture, which 
is so important for developing countries in particular, is 
one of the sectors most affected. 
 The escalation of poverty is a result of the 
economic crisis. New Zealand is, naturally, proud of 
the efforts of the United Nations Development 
Programme to strengthen its focus as the largest United 
Nations development agency on poverty and the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.  
 For its part, New Zealand pledges to continue to 
increase its official development assistance, with a 
clear focus on the Pacific Islands region. Aid 
effectiveness is just as important as the quantum of aid. 
That is why, last month, we committed to the Cairns 
Compact, which will strengthen development 
coordination in the Pacific islands. 
 The major focus of the General Assembly this 
year must be on the challenge of climate change. 
Climate change demands innovation and a global 
response. The world cannot afford to contemplate 
failure at Copenhagen. Political leadership is needed, 
and it is on display.  
 At the Summit on climate change this week, the 
leaders of the world’s three biggest economies showed 
their determination both to make Copenhagen a success 
and to take action themselves. All countries must take 
action that reflects our individual circumstances, 
responsibilities and capabilities. 
 For our part, New Zealand is committed to 
securing a durable and meaningful agreement on 
climate change — an agreement that is both 
environmentally effective and economically efficient. I 
have set a target for New Zealand of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 10 to 20 per cent below 
1990 levels by 2020, if there is a comprehensive global 
agreement. That amounts to a per capita drop of 35 to 
42 per cent since 1990. 
 New Zealand is acutely conscious that most of 
our greenhouse gas emissions come from livestock 
methane emissions, which so far no technology can 
reduce. At the same time we are proud of our role as a 
food producer to the world and the contribution we can 
make to assuring food security for the world’s people. 
 Our challenge is to find a way to balance growth 
in agricultural production with the need to reduce 
emissions and reach climate change targets.  
 That is not just a challenge for New Zealand, but 
one for the world. Agricultural emissions make up 
14 per cent of all emissions worldwide. As demand for 
food rises, so will those emissions. Yet so far the only 
known way to achieve emission reductions from 
agriculture is through reductions in output, which is 
not an acceptable response — not for New Zealand, 
and not for a growing world that seeks freedom from 
hunger. 
 A better response to this challenge must be found. 
In my view, the response must draw on the power and 
possibility of science. Just as New Zealand is proud of 
its agricultural producers, so are we proud of our role 
in agricultural research. This research has resulted in 
scientific and technological advances that have 
improved production and fed virtually millions of 
people. 
 But advancing research in the area of emission 
reduction requires a commitment so broad that it is 
beyond the capacity of any one individual country. 
  
 
09-52470 32 
 
That is a challenge that requires collective action, and 
it is collective action that I call for today. 
 New Zealand has developed a proposal for a 
global alliance on the reduction of agricultural 
emissions. This alliance would undertake international 
research and investment into new technologies and 
practices to help reduce agriculture-related emissions 
and would seek to achieve greater coordination of 
existing efforts. 
 Through a global alliance we can find solutions 
faster, make better use of the money that is being spent 
around the world and encourage all countries and 
companies to do more. We have been delighted with 
the interest that our proposal has received so far, and 
we will continue working with others to explore the 
concept. Today, my call to other agricultural producers 
of the world is to rise to this challenge and join New 
Zealand in this research effort.  
 I now want to address some of the security crises 
that we confront. Yesterday I had the honour to observe 
the high-level Security Council meeting on 
disarmament and non-proliferation. As a country with a 
proud record of promoting nuclear disarmament and 
non-proliferation, I was heartened by the expressions 
of support for a world free of nuclear weapons. We 
must all take full advantage of this historic moment to 
advance the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation 
agenda. We owe it to our generation and to those who 
follow us to move our vision for a world free from 
nuclear weapons forward. As a proudly nuclear-free 
nation and a country that has been at the forefront of 
that debate since the 1970s, New Zealand stands ready 
to play its part.  
 We are optimistic about the prospects for 
progress. Last week, New Zealand presided over the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in Vienna, Austria. Preventing the spread of 
nuclear weapons through the implementation of 
safeguards under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
is a fundamental pillar of the Agency’s work. Next year 
sees the quinquennial review conference of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
 New Zealand will actively work with our New 
Agenda Coalition partners for a meaningful outcome at 
that conference to bring us closer to a truly secure 
world.  
 We will also continue to address the humanitarian 
harm caused by conventional weapons. We will work 
for a robust, action-oriented outcome later this year at 
the second review conference of the Ottawa 
Convention on Landmines. 
 Looking back, I am proud of the role that New 
Zealand was able to play in the negotiation of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. The Government 
attaches priority to passing legislation to enable us to 
ratify this very significant treaty. New Zealand also 
continues to play its part in maintaining and promoting 
international peace and security. 
 Peacekeeping remains one of this Organization’s 
most essential tasks and most solemn responsibilities to 
its Members. While United Nations peacekeeping has 
been significantly strengthened since the testing it 
underwent in the 1990s, the demands now being placed 
on it are severe. 
 I want to express my profound gratitude to those 
civilians and military personnel who place their lives at 
risk to support peace and live up to the ideals of the 
Charter of the United Nations. Ensuring that United 
Nations peacekeeping is as effective and responsive as 
possible must therefore remain one of the 
Organization’s most urgent priorities. 
 The United Nations provides the legal mandate — 
and often the operational effectiveness — for our joint 
efforts to achieve and maintain peace and security. New 
Zealand is firmly committed to supporting United 
Nations peacekeeping — both its own operations and 
others that it has mandated, such as those in which we 
are involved in Afghanistan, the Solomon Islands and 
Timor-Leste. 
 All too often, however, the United Nations has 
found itself unable to respond to emerging crises. New 
Zealand therefore strongly supports the concept of 
responsibility to protect. I am pleased at the solid 
foundation that the General Assembly’s recent debate 
on that responsibility has laid for its implementation. 
 New Zealand also strongly supports the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). It is a fundamental 
tenet of our domestic legal systems that wrongdoers 
must be brought to justice. The ICC is the mechanism 
for applying that same principle to persons accused of 
the most serious international crimes. 
 New Zealand takes very seriously its 
responsibilities for creating and maintaining peace and 
 
 
33 09-52470 
 
security in its region and in the world. I am therefore 
pleased to confirm New Zealand’s candidature for the 
United Nations Security Council for 2015-2016 in the 
elections to be held in 2014. In advancing its 
candidature, New Zealand does so as a State committed 
to upholding the international rule of law and to 
providing a strong and principled Pacific voice on 
behalf of small States like ourselves with an interest in 
a fairer and more secure world. 
 We all have a stake in a world where peace and 
the rule of law prevail, where all States are secure and 
can prosper and where all people are guaranteed the 
human rights and fundamental freedoms promised 
them in the Charter.  
 But we also know that solutions to the problems 
we collectively face do not lie with inspirational goals 
and promises that can be — and far too often are — 
quickly and quietly forgotten and ignored. Hard, 
pragmatic decisions must be made. Enforceable 
solutions must be implemented. 
 We know that effective, collective action is in 
every country’s long-term, national interest. That is 
what New Zealand believed in 1945, and I recommit 
now to taking action to live up to the ideals of the 
United Nations Charter, here, in this great Hall, this 
evening.Today, 
speaking from this high rostrum, I would like to 
highlight five topics that are, in my view, important to 
all of us and our common approaches to the 
international agenda. 
 The first is the timing of this meeting and the 
moment that humankind is currently experiencing. This 
session of the General Assembly is taking place at a 
very critical and complex time. It can be said without 
exaggeration that we are living through one of the 
watershed moments of modern history. Besides the 
economic crisis — the first large-scale crisis of the era 
of globalization — global development as a whole 
continues to be threatened by regional and local 
conflicts, terrorism, cross-border crime, food shortages 
and climate change. The impact of the crisis continues 
to be felt by most countries of the world. Although so 
far we have been able, it seems, to avoid the very worst 
scenarios, the question remains: how to overcome the 
huge imbalances and deficits — amounting to trillions 
of dollars — accumulated in the global and national 
economies. 
 Our collective agenda for unification has been 
dictated by life itself, which also dictates the growing 
need for the United Nations as a time-tested 
mechanism for harmonizing the interests of different 
States and peoples. As never before, we are feeling the 
need for informal collective leadership and for an 
increased role for such platforms as the G-8 and the 
more recent G-20, as well as other negotiation and 
mediation forums, and all the more because these 
operate not on a model of opposition, but rather to 
advance the converging interests of their participants. 
 At this morning’s meeting, the President of the 
United States addressed this Assembly, and I would 
like to endorse one of the thoughts he voiced. He stated 
that no single country can or should attempt to 
dominate others, and that is absolutely true. However, 
these agreed approaches need to be implemented in 
some way, including through the United Nations 
system. 
 Another distinctive feature of modern times is the 
increasing role of regional entities, which are growing 
more active on every continent. This trend is entirely 
consistent with the principles of the United Nations. 
Russia, for its part — together with its partners in the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, in the 
framework of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 
and with its fellow BRIC countries Brazil, India and 
China — will continue to bolster the mechanisms of 
regional interaction. These mechanisms facilitate a 
collective response to common threats, while 
mitigating the consequences of the crisis for our 
citizens and increasing the sustainability of our 
national economies. 
 Secondly, I want to touch on the issue of existing 
problems. Allow me to dwell on those that cannot be 
effectively addressed without the participation or 
outside the framework of the United Nations. The first 
task in this regard is to address the imbalance of 
existing mechanisms of global economic governance, 
the inadequacy of their rules of the game, and the 
chasm between the financial markets and the real 
economy. We need to make joint efforts to establish 
financial and economic models that will protect all of 
us from such turmoil in the future. 
 Virtually all countries have seen a drop in output 
and in the standards of living of millions of their 
 
 
17 09-52228 
 
citizens. The crisis has exacerbated social problems, 
painfully tested young people at the very start of their 
lives, and caused significant growth in unemployment 
in all countries. Russia is no exception in this. 
 A painful blow has been delivered to our plans to 
alleviate poverty. A real threat of disruption of the 
Millennium Development Goals has emerged. We must 
do our utmost to prevent such a development. Donor 
assistance to countries in need cannot be postponed 
until some other time. The tasks set out as a priority by 
the international community must absolutely be 
addressed. The arrangements adopted at the G-20 
summits and the United Nations Conference on the 
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on 
Development must be implemented — and they must 
be implemented within the deadlines that we ourselves 
set. 
 The second major task in this context is to 
address the issues of global energy security. Three 
years ago at the Saint Petersburg G-8 summit in 
Russia, the principles for a new legal framework for 
such cooperation were formulated. The goal is to 
harmonize the interests of all participants in the energy 
chain: suppliers, consumers and intermediaries or 
transiters. It was not so long ago that we solidified 
these principles, and we invite all States to engage in 
discussion on them. We believe that such discussions 
should be conducted with the active involvement of 
specialized multilateral institutions, including, of 
course, the agencies of the United Nations family. 
 The third task that Russia deems to be potentially 
critical is the comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations itself. The United Nations must adapt 
itself in a rational way to the new global realities. It 
should strengthen its influence while preserving its 
multinational nature and the integrity of the Charter’s 
key provisions. The most important component of the 
revitalization of the United Nations is reform of the 
Security Council. The time has come to speed up the 
search for a compromise formula for the Security 
Council’s expansion, and of course to increase its 
efficiency. 
 The third issue I want to touch on is 
disarmament. The process of multilateral disarmament 
under United Nations auspices is an extremely 
important task. There are grounds for hope since, as 
members are aware, a number of positive trends have 
emerged in overcoming the protracted crisis. The 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva has adopted its 
programme of work. I should also like to mention the 
Russian-Chinese initiative to develop a treaty to 
prevent the deployment of weapons in outer space, as 
well as our current proposal to universalize the 
Russian-American Treaty on the Elimination of 
Intermediate-range and Shorter-range Missiles. 
 Russia will unswervingly follow the path of 
verifiable and irreversible reductions in nuclear 
weapons as an essential element of a new start in our 
relations with the United States. In Moscow in July this 
year, President Obama and I not only signed a relevant 
document, but also agreed on a mandate for further 
negotiations to elaborate a new, legally binding treaty. 
This treaty should replace the Treaty on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, which 
expires in December. 
 Of special importance here is the relationship 
between strategic offensive and defensive arms. In my 
meeting with President Obama this morning, we 
discussed the recently announced adjustments to the 
United States’ planned development of a missile 
defence system. I should like to state in this highest of 
forums that we view this decision as a constructive step 
in the right direction, which has deservedly received 
numerous expressions of support from the international 
community. Russia is ready to engage in detailed 
discussions with the American side and to undertake 
relevant initiatives in this field in order to reach 
mutually acceptable agreement. 
 Without resolving such problems as missile 
defence and non-nuclear strategic offensive arms, it 
will be simply impossible to achieve real progress in 
the field of nuclear disarmament. I believe that the 
work on this new treaty will be fully consistent with 
relevant provisions of the joint document endorsed by 
the President of the United States and myself at our 
meeting in Moscow. 
 We believe that other nuclear States should join 
the disarmament efforts of Russia and the United 
States. There is no need to wait for further progress in 
the Russian-American disarmament process. We can 
begin forthwith to elaborate acceptable and practical 
arrangements that take into account the differences in 
the size of potentials. In that respect, we could draw on 
international experience in the twentieth century, for 
example the 1921-1922 Washington Conference on 
naval armaments, where participants agreed on the 
  
 
09-52228 18 
 
maximum size of their fleets without insisting on parity 
in absolute terms. If we take the same approach today, 
based on the current status of nuclear arsenals, we 
could send the rest of the world a sure signal that the 
unaccounted numbers will be added to the equation of 
strategic stability. 
 Pursuing nuclear disarmament, strengthening the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and promoting the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy will be at the very heart 
of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). We cherish the hope that it will be successful. 
 The global nuclear security summit scheduled for 
April 2010 will provide a good opportunity for a more 
detailed discussion of these issues. We support that 
initiative. We have also agreed with the United States 
Administration on joint steps for further progress on 
such aspects of nuclear security as the prevention of 
nuclear terrorism, expanding access to the benefits of 
peaceful nuclear energy to all signatories implementing 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons in good faith, and other decisions. We call for 
collective cooperation on these matters. 
 In order to reach a common understanding on 
such important issues, we must engage all nations  
and influential international organizations in the 
aforementioned negotiation processes. The international 
community, it must be said, has at its disposal such 
tried and tested measures for enhancing regional and 
international security as nuclear-weapon-free zones. In 
particular, there is a very pressing need to establish a 
zone in the Middle East free of all types of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery. This is a 
long-standing issue, with respect to which a resolution 
was adopted at the 1995 NPT Review Conference. 
 Russia, as a member of the Quartet of 
international mediators on the Middle East settlement, 
has consistently supported efforts to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime in the Middle East. 
Russia has made specific proposals within the 
framework of the NPT review process to seek mutually 
acceptable ways of implementing earlier decisions on 
this matter. All countries of the region need to take an 
active stance on this issue and demonstrate their 
willingness to achieve that end. 
 We also need to accelerate work towards a 
mechanism to ensure peace and security in North-East 
Asia. Russia has made proposals in this regard to the 
participants in the Six-Party Talks. In the present 
circumstances, this task is more urgent than ever. 
 The fourth topic I wish to address is that of 
regional conflicts and regional security. We intend to 
continue to participate in the search for effective 
options for settling regional conflicts. We are 
convinced that the use of force can only exacerbate 
such situations. That was demonstrated by the reckless 
attempt by the Georgian authorities last year to resolve 
the problems in their relations with South Ossetia by 
military means. 
 At that time, in August 2008, we came very close 
to a situation in which a local armed conflict had the 
potential to grow into a full-scale war. I am certain that 
this is clearly understood by everyone in this Hall 
today. In order to ensure that this should never recur, 
we need clear and effective mechanisms to implement 
the principle of the indivisibility of security. Without 
such a mechanism, we will not be able to move beyond 
the legacy of the past or overcome existing prejudices. 
I wish to stress that irresponsible regimes should not 
have any opportunity whatsoever to foment disputes 
among other countries. 
 The role and place of the modern nation in 
ensuring global security is a topic of the greatest 
relevance today. We have witnessed situations time and 
again in which problems emerging within the confines 
of an individual State have acquired a regional or even 
global character. The incompetence and, very often, 
ineffectiveness of national Government institutions can 
have consequences that are fraught with risks for 
several countries. The prevention of such an outcome 
is of course a very complex and sensitive issue, but one 
upon which we must deliberate together. 
 These issues were the focus of discussions at a 
recent conference held in Russia. The outcome was 
quite clear. What we require in the future is a smart 
foreign policy. The current global crisis is not limited 
to economics; it is also a crisis of ideas. It is the 
accumulation of a critical mass of outdated policies 
and development models. 
 Having developed the initiative to sign a new 
European security treaty, Russia has proposed taking a 
fresh approach to this problem and, above all, 
abandoning outdated policies. We all hope that the cold 
war has been left behind, but the world has not become 
more secure. What we need today are modern solutions 
and clear legal frameworks for implementing existing 
 
 
19 09-52228 
 
political commitments. We do not need declarations, 
appeals or demagogues; what we need are clear legal 
frameworks, including to enshrine the principle under 
international law that one must not seek to ensure one’s 
own security at the expense of the security of others. 
 Our initiative concerns the Euro-Atlantic space. 
However, its key provision on the indivisibility of 
security is a universal principle that is applicable to all 
regions of the world and is fully consistent with the 
letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter. The 
principle of the indivisibility of security should be an 
integral part of current international law. 
 Values are the last issue that I wish to mention 
from this rostrum. The protection of human rights and 
interests and the universal application of commonly 
recognized norms and principles in that area should be 
the basis for strengthening trust and stability in 
international relations. We are all united by values that 
are rooted in morality, religion, customs and traditions. 
I am talking about such fundamental concepts as the 
right to life, tolerance of dissent, responsibility towards 
one’s family, charity and compassion, which are the 
foundation both of daily life and of relations among 
States. 
 However, unfortunately, it is the reality that the 
world is witnessing growing nationalism and numerous 
manifestations of religious intolerance and hatred. That 
is why we believe that establishing a high-level group 
on interfaith dialogue under the Director-General of 
UNESCO is extremely valuable. It is particularly 
relevant on the eve of 2010, which the United Nations 
has declared International Year for the Rapprochement 
of Cultures. 
 To conclude, I cannot fail to mention, as I stand 
here, another topic that is very close to the heart of all 
citizens of our country and all peoples of the world. 
Next year, we are going to celebrate the sixty-fifth 
anniversary of the end of the Second World War. 
Russia put forward a proposal to adopt a relevant 
General Assembly resolution and to hold a special 
session to commemorate all victims of that war in May 
next year. We cannot allow its horrible lessons to be 
forgotten. 
 However, from time to time we see neo-fascist 
organizations raise their heads. Racial, national and 
ethnic crimes are being committed. Attempts are being 
made to whitewash Nazism, to deny the Holocaust and 
to review the decisions of the Nuremberg Tribunal. I 
am convinced that strong and joint resistance to 
manifestations of neo-Nazism and to attempts to revise 
the results of the Second World War enshrined in the 
United Nations Charter should remain a priority task of 
the Organization. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
principal achievements of the international community 
in the twentieth century. This Organization and its 
fruitful activities have become a symbol of the 
twentieth century, and there is simply no alternative to 
these activities. We have no right to forget that the 
United Nations possesses unique international 
legitimacy, and we all must preserve and strengthen 
this shared wealth of the peoples of the world. 
It is my honour to address the 
Assembly for the first time as the forty-fourth 
President of the United States. I come before you 
humbled by the responsibility that the American people 
have placed upon me, mindful of the enormous 
challenges of our moment in history and determined to 
act boldly and collectively on behalf of justice and 
prosperity at home and abroad. 
 I have been in office for just nine months, though 
some days it seems a lot longer. I am well aware of the 
expectations that accompany my presidency around the 
world. Those expectations are not about me. Rather 
they are, I believe, rooted in a discontent with the 
status quo that has allowed us to be increasingly 
defined by our differences and outpaced by our 
problems. But they are also rooted in hope — the hope 
that real change is possible and the hope that America 
will be a leader in bringing about such change. 
 I took office at a time when many around the 
world had come to view America with scepticism and 
distrust. A part of that was due to misperceptions and 
misinformation about my country. Part was due to 
opposition to specific policies and a belief that on 
certain critical issues America had acted unilaterally, 
without regard for the interests of others. That has fed 
an almost reflexive anti-Americanism, which too often 
has served as an excuse for collective inaction. 
 Like all of you, my responsibility is to act in the 
interests of my nation and my people, and I will never 
apologize for defending those interests. But it is my 
deeply held belief that in the year 2009, more than at 
any point in human history, the interests of nations and 
peoples are shared. The religious convictions that we 
hold in our hearts can forge new bonds among people, 
or they can tear us apart. The technology we harness 
can light the path to peace, or forever darken it. The 
energy we use can sustain our planet, or destroy it. 
What happens to the hope of a single child, anywhere, 
can enrich our world, or impoverish it. 
 In this Hall, we come from many places, but we 
share a common future. No longer do we have the 
luxury of indulging our differences to the exclusion of 
the work that we must do together. I have carried this 
message from London to Ankara, from Port-of-Spain to 
Moscow, from Accra to Cairo, and it is what I will 
speak about today. 
 Because the time has come for the world to move 
in a new direction, we must embrace a new era of 
engagement based on mutual interests and mutual 
respect, and our work must begin now. We know the 
future will be forged by deeds, and not simply words. 
Speeches alone will not solve our problems. It will take 
persistent action. 
 So for those who question the character and cause 
of my nation, I ask you to look at the concrete actions 
we have taken in just nine months. 
 On my first day in office I prohibited, without 
exception or equivocation, the use of torture by the 
United States of America. I ordered the prison at 
Guantanamo Bay closed, and we are doing the hard 
work of forging a framework to combat extremism 
within the rule of law. 
 Every nation must know that America will live its 
values, and we will lead by example. We have set a 
clear and focused goal to work with all members of 
this body to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and 
its extremist allies — a network that has killed 
thousands of people of many faiths and nations and has 
plotted to blow up this very building. In Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, we and many nations here are helping 
those Governments to develop the capacity to take the 
lead in this effort, while working to advance 
opportunity and security for their people. 
 In Iraq we are responsibly ending a war. We have 
removed American combat brigades from Iraqi cities 
and set a deadline of next August to remove all our 
combat brigades from Iraqi territory. I have made clear 
that we will help Iraqis make the transition to full 
responsibility for their future and keep our 
commitment to remove all American troops by the end 
of 2011. 
 I have outlined a comprehensive agenda to seek 
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. In 
Moscow, the United States and Russia announced that 
we would pursue substantial reductions in our strategic 
warheads and launchers. In the Conference on 
Disarmament we agreed on a workplan to negotiate an 
end to the production of fissile materials for nuclear 
weapons. And this week, my Secretary of State will 
become the first senior American representative to the 
  
 
09-52179 10 
 
annual members’ conference of the Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty. 
 Upon taking office, I appointed a special envoy 
for Middle East peace, and America has worked 
steadily and aggressively to advance the cause of two 
States — Israel and Palestine — in which peace and 
security take root and the rights of both Israelis and 
Palestinians are respected. 
 To confront climate change we have invested 
$80 billion in clean energy. We have substantially 
increased our fuel efficiency standards. We have 
provided new incentives for conservation, launched an 
energy partnership across the Americas and moved 
from being a bystander to being a leader in 
international climate negotiations. 
 To overcome an economic crisis that touches 
every corner of the world, we worked with the Group 
of 20 nations to forge a coordinated international 
response of over $2 trillion in stimulus to bring the 
global economy back from the brink. We mobilized 
resources that help prevent the crisis from spreading 
further to developing countries, and we joined with 
others to launch a $20 billion global food security 
initiative that will lend a hand to those who need it 
most and help them build their own capacity. 
 We have also re-engaged the United Nations. We 
have paid our bills. We have joined the Human Rights 
Council. We have signed the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. We have fully embraced the 
Millennium Development Goals, and we address our 
priorities here in this institution, for instance through the 
Security Council meeting on nuclear non-proliferation 
and disarmament that I will chair tomorrow and 
through the issues that I will discuss today. 
 That is what we have already done, but it is just a 
beginning. Some of our actions have yielded progress; 
some have laid the groundwork for progress in the 
future. But make no mistake: this cannot solely be 
America’s endeavour. Those who used to chastise 
America for acting alone in the world cannot now 
stand by and wait for America to solve the world’s 
problems alone. We have sought, in word and deed, a 
new era of engagement with the world, and now is the 
time for all of us to take our share of responsibility for 
a global response to global challenges. 
 If we are honest with ourselves, we need to admit 
that we are not living up to that responsibility. 
Consider the course that we are on if we fail to 
confront the status quo: extremists sowing terror in 
pockets of the world, protracted conflicts that grind on 
and on, genocide, mass atrocities, more nations with 
nuclear weapons, melting ice caps and ravaged 
populations, persistent poverty and pandemic disease. 
 I say this not to sow fear, but to state a fact. The 
magnitude of our challenges has yet to be met by the 
measure of our actions. This body was founded on the 
belief that the nations of the world could solve their 
problems together. Franklin Roosevelt, who died 
before he could see his vision for this institution 
become a reality, put it this way: 
 “The structure of world peace cannot be the work 
of one man, or one party, or one nation. It cannot 
be a peace of large nations or of small nations. It 
must be a peace which rests on the cooperative 
effort of the whole world.” 
 The cooperative effort of the whole world — 
those words ring even more true today when it is not 
simply peace, but our very health and prosperity that 
we hold in common. Yet, we also know that this body 
is made up of sovereign States and that, sadly but not 
surprisingly, this body has often become a forum for 
sowing discord instead of forging common ground, a 
venue for playing politics and exploiting grievances 
rather than solving problems. After all, it is easy to 
walk up to this podium and point fingers and stoke 
divisions. Nothing is easier than blaming others for our 
troubles and absolving ourselves of responsibility for 
our choices and our actions. Anybody can do that. 
Responsibility and leadership in the twenty-first 
century demand more. 
 In an era when our destiny is shared, power is no 
longer a zero-sum game. No one nation can or should 
try to dominate another nation. No world order that 
elevates one nation or group of people over another 
will succeed. No balance of power among nations will 
hold. The traditional divisions between nations of the 
South and the North make no sense in an 
interconnected world, nor do alignments of nations 
rooted in the cleavages of a long-gone cold war. 
 The time has come to realize that the old habits 
and the old arguments are irrelevant to the challenges 
faced by our peoples. They leave nations to act in 
opposition to the very goals that they claim to pursue 
and to vote, often in this body, against the interests of 
their own people. They build up walls between us and 
 
 
11 09-52179 
 
the future that our peoples seek, and the time has come 
for those walls to come down. Together we must build 
new coalitions that bridge old divides — coalitions of 
different faiths and creeds, of North and South, East, 
West, black, white and brown. 
 The choice is ours. We can be remembered as the 
generation that chose to drag the arguments of the 
twentieth century into the twenty-first, and that put off 
hard choices, refused to look ahead, and failed to keep 
pace because we defined ourselves by what we were 
against instead of what we were for; or we can be a 
generation that chooses to see the shoreline beyond the 
rough waters ahead, that comes together to serve the 
common interests of human beings, and finally gives 
meaning to the promise imbedded in the name given to 
this institution — the United Nations. That is the future 
America wants — a future of peace and prosperity that 
we can reach only if we recognize that all nations have 
rights. But all nations have responsibilities as well. 
That is the bargain that makes this work. That must be 
the guiding principle of international cooperation. 
 Today, let me put forward four pillars that I 
believe are fundamental to the future that we want for 
our children: non-proliferation and disarmament, the 
promotion of peace and security, the preservation of 
our planet, and a global economy that advances 
opportunity for all people. 
 First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons 
and seek the goal of a world without them. This 
institution was founded at the dawn of the atomic age 
in part because man’s capacity to kill had to be 
contained. For decades, we averted disaster, even under 
the shadow of a super-Power stand-off. But today the 
threat of proliferation is growing in scope and 
complexity. If we fail to act, we will invite nuclear 
arms races in every region and the prospect of wars and 
acts of terror on a scale that we can hardly imagine. 
 A fragile consensus stands in the way of this 
frightening outcome, and that is the basic bargain that 
shapes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT). It says that all nations have the right 
to peaceful nuclear energy, and that nations with 
nuclear weapons have a responsibility to move towards 
disarmament and those without them have the 
responsibility to forsake them. The next 12 months 
could be pivotal in determining whether this compact 
will be strengthened or will slowly dissolve. 
 America intends to keep our end of the bargain. 
We will pursue a new agreement with Russia to 
substantially reduce our strategic warheads and 
launches. We will move forward with ratification of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and work 
with others to bring the Treaty into force, so that 
nuclear testing is permanently prohibited. We will 
complete a nuclear posture review that opens the door 
to deeper cuts and reduces the role of nuclear weapons, 
and we will call upon countries to begin negotiations in 
January on a treaty to end the production of fissile 
material for weapons. 
 I will also host a summit next April that reaffirms 
each nation’s responsibility to secure nuclear material 
on its territory and to help those who cannot, because 
we must never allow a single nuclear device to fall into 
the hands of a violent extremist. And we will work to 
strengthen the institutions and initiatives that combat 
nuclear smuggling and theft. 
 All of this must support efforts to strengthen the 
NPT. Those nations that refuse to live up to their 
obligations must face consequences. Let me be clear: 
This is not about singling out individual nations. It is 
about standing up for the rights of all nations that do 
live up to their responsibilities, because a world in 
which International Atomic Energy Agency inspections 
are avoided and the United Nations demands are 
ignored will leave all people less safe and all nations 
less secure. 
 In their actions to date, the Governments of North 
Korea and Iran threaten to take us down this dangerous 
slope. We respect their rights as members of the 
community of nations. I have said before and I will 
repeat: I am committed to diplomacy that opens a path 
to greater prosperity and more secure peace for both 
nations if they live up to their obligations. But if the 
Governments of Iran and North Korea choose to ignore 
international standards; if they put the pursuit of 
nuclear weapons ahead of regional stability and the 
security and opportunity of their own people; if they 
are oblivious to the dangers of escalating nuclear arms 
races in both East Asia and the Middle East, then they 
must be held accountable. The world must stand 
together to demonstrate that international law is not an 
empty promise and that treaties will be enforced. We 
must insist that the future does not belong to fear. 
 That brings me to the second pillar for our future: 
the pursuit of peace. The United Nations was born of 
  
 
09-52179 12 
 
the belief that the people of the world can live their 
lives, raise their families and resolve their differences 
peacefully. Yet we know that in too many parts of the 
world this ideal remains an abstraction — a distant 
dream. We can either accept that outcome as inevitable 
and tolerate constant and crippling conflict, or we can 
recognize that the yearning for peace is universal and 
reassert our resolve to end conflicts around the world. 
That effort must begin with an unshakeable 
determination that the murder of innocent men, women 
and children will never be tolerated. On this, there can 
be no dispute. 
 The violent extremists who promote conflict by 
distorting faith have discredited and isolated 
themselves. They offer nothing but hatred and 
destruction. In confronting them, America will forge 
lasting partnerships to target terrorists, share 
intelligence, coordinate law enforcement and protect 
our people. We will permit no safe haven for Al-Qaida 
to launch attacks from Afghanistan or any other nation. 
We will stand by our friends on the front lines, as we 
and many nations will do in pledging support for the 
Pakistani people tomorrow. And we will pursue 
positive engagement that builds bridges among faiths 
and new partnerships for opportunity. 
 Our efforts to promote peace, however, cannot be 
limited to defeating violent extremists, for the most 
powerful weapon in our arsenal is the hope of human 
beings — the belief that the future belongs to those 
who would build and not destroy; the confidence that 
conflicts can end and a new day can begin. And that is 
why we will strengthen our support for effective 
peacekeeping, while energizing our efforts to prevent 
conflicts before they take hold.  
 We will pursue a lasting peace in Sudan, through 
support for the people of Darfur and the implementation 
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, so that we 
secure the peace that the Sudanese people deserve. 
 And in countries ravaged by violence, from Haiti to 
Congo to East Timor, we will work with the United 
Nations and other partners to support an enduring peace. 
 I will also continue to seek a just and lasting 
peace between Israel, Palestine and the Arab world. We 
will continue to work on that issue. Yesterday I had a 
constructive meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu 
and President Abbas. We have made some progress. 
Palestinians have strengthened their efforts on security. 
Israelis have facilitated greater freedom of movement 
for the Palestinians. As a result of these efforts on both 
sides, the economy in the West Bank has begun to 
grow. 
 But more progress is needed. We continue to call 
on Palestinians to end incitement against Israel. And 
we continue to emphasize that America does not accept 
the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements. 
 The time has come to re-launch negotiations — 
without preconditions — that address the permanent-
status issues: security for Israelis and Palestinians, 
borders, refugees and Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two 
States living side by side in peace and security: a 
Jewish State of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, 
and a viable, independent Palestinian State with 
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that began 
in 1967 and realizes the potential of the Palestinian 
people. As we pursue this goal, we will also pursue 
peace between Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Syria, 
and a broader peace between Israel and its many 
neighbours. In pursuit of that goal, we will develop 
regional initiatives with multilateral participation, 
alongside bilateral negotiations. 
 Now, I am not naive. I know this will be difficult. 
But all of us — not just the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, but all of us — must decide whether we 
are serious about peace, or whether we will only lend it 
lip-service. To break the old patterns — to break the 
cycle of insecurity and despair — all of us must say 
publicly what we would acknowledge in private. The 
United States does Israel no favours when we fail to 
couple an unwavering commitment to its security with 
an insistence that Israel respect the legitimate claims 
and rights of the Palestinians. And nations within this 
body do the Palestinians no favours when they choose 
vitriolic attacks against Israel over a constructive 
willingness to recognize Israel’s legitimacy and its 
right to exist in peace and security. 
 We must remember that the greatest price of this 
conflict is not paid by us. It is not paid by politicians. 
It is paid by the Israeli girl in Sderot who closes her 
eyes in fear that a rocket will take her life in the middle 
of the night. It is paid by the Palestinian boy in Gaza 
who has no clean water and no country to call his own. 
These are all God’s children. And after all the politics 
and all the posturing, this is about the right of every 
human being to live with dignity and security. That is a 
lesson embedded in the three great faiths that call one 
small slice of Earth the Holy Land. And that is why — 
 
 
13 09-52179 
 
even though there will be setbacks, and false starts, and 
tough days — I will not waiver in my pursuit of peace. 
 Thirdly, we must recognize that in the twenty-
first century there will be no peace unless we take 
responsibility for the preservation of our planet. And I 
thank the Secretary-General for hosting the summit on 
climate change yesterday. 
 The danger posed by climate change cannot be 
denied. Our responsibility to meet it must not be 
deferred. If we continue down our current course, 
every member of this Assembly will see irreversible 
changes within its borders. Our efforts to end conflicts 
will be eclipsed by wars over refugees and resources. 
Development will be devastated by drought and 
famine. Land that human beings have lived on for 
millennia will disappear. Future generations will look 
back and wonder why we refused to act — why we 
failed to pass on an environment that was worthy of 
our inheritance. 
 And that is why the days when America dragged 
its feet on this issue are over. We will move forward 
with investments to transform our energy economy, 
while providing incentives to make clean energy the 
profitable kind of energy. We will press ahead with 
deep cuts in emissions to reach the goals that we set for 
2020, and eventually 2050. We will continue to 
promote renewable energy and efficiency — and share 
new technologies — with countries around the world. 
And we will seize every opportunity for progress to 
address this threat in a cooperative effort with the 
entire world. 
 Those wealthy nations that did so much damage 
to the environment in the twentieth century must 
accept our obligation to lead. But responsibility does 
not end there. While we must acknowledge the need for 
differentiated responses, any effort to curb carbon 
emissions must include the fast-growing carbon 
emitters who can do more to reduce their air pollution 
without inhibiting growth. And any effort that fails 
both to help the poorest nations to adapt to the 
problems that climate change has already wrought and 
to help them travel a path of clean development simply 
will not work. 
 It is hard to change something as fundamental as 
how we use energy. I know that. It is even harder to do 
so in the midst of a global recession. Certainly, it will 
be tempting to sit back and wait for others to move 
first. But we cannot make this journey unless we all 
move forward together. As we head into Copenhagen, 
let us resolve to focus on what each of us can do for 
the sake of our common future. 
 This leads me to the final pillar that must fortify 
our future: a global economy that advances opportunity 
for all people. 
 The world is still recovering from the worst 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. In 
America, we see the engine of growth beginning to 
churn, and yet many still struggle to find a job or pay 
their bills. Across the globe, we find promising signs, 
but little certainty about what lies ahead. And far too 
many people in far too many places live through the 
daily crises that challenge our humanity: the despair of 
an empty stomach; the thirst brought on by dwindling 
water supplies; the injustice of a child dying from a 
treatable disease or a mother losing her life as she 
gives birth. 
 In Pittsburgh, we will work with the world’s 
largest economies to chart a course for growth that is 
balanced and sustained. That means vigilance to ensure 
that we do not let up until our people are back to work. 
That means taking steps to rekindle demand, so that 
global recovery can be sustained. And that means 
setting new rules of the road and strengthening 
regulation for all financial centres, so that we put an 
end to the greed and the excess and the abuse that led 
us into this disaster, and prevent a crisis like this from 
ever happening again. 
 At a time of such interdependence, we have a 
moral and pragmatic interest, however, in broader 
questions of development: the questions of development 
that existed even before this crisis happened. And so 
America will continue our historic effort to help people 
feed themselves. We have set aside $63 billion to carry 
forward the fight against HIV/AIDS, to end deaths 
from tuberculosis and malaria, to eradicate polio and to 
strengthen public health systems. We are joining with 
other countries to contribute H1N1 vaccines to the 
World Health Organization. We will integrate more 
economies into a system of global trade. We will 
support the Millennium Development Goals and 
approach next year’s summit with a global plan to 
make them a reality. And we will set our sights on the 
eradication of extreme poverty in our time. 
 Now is the time for all of us to do our part. 
Growth will not be sustained or shared unless all 
nations embrace their responsibilities. That means that 
  
 
09-52179 14 
 
wealthy nations must open their markets to more goods 
and extend a hand to those with less, while reforming 
international institutions to give more nations a greater 
voice. And developing nations must root out the 
corruption that is an obstacle to progress, for 
opportunity cannot thrive where individuals are 
oppressed and businesses have to pay bribes. That is 
why we will support honest police and independent 
judges, civil society and a vibrant private sector. Our 
goal is simple: a global economy in which growth is 
sustained and opportunity is available to all. 
 Now, the changes that I have spoken about today 
will not be easy to make, and they will not be realized 
simply by leaders like us coming together in forums 
like this, as useful as that may be. For, as in any 
assembly of members, real change can only come 
through the people we represent. That is why we must 
do the hard work to lay the groundwork for progress in 
our own capitals. That is where we will build the 
consensus to end conflicts and to harness technology 
for peaceful purposes, to change the way we use 
energy and to promote growth that can be sustained 
and shared. 
 I believe that the people of the world want this 
future for their children. And that is why we must 
champion those principles that ensure that 
Governments reflect the will of the people. These 
principles cannot be afterthoughts. Democracy and 
human rights are essential to achieving each of the 
goals that I have discussed today, because 
Governments of the people and by the people are more 
likely to act in the broader interests of their own 
people, rather than the narrow interest of those in 
power. 
 The test of our leadership will not be the degree 
to which we feed the fears and old hatreds of our 
people. True leadership will not be measured by the 
ability to muzzle dissent or to intimidate and harass 
political opponents at home. The people of the world 
want change. They will not long tolerate those who are 
on the wrong side of history. 
 This Organization’s Charter commits each of us 
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the 
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal 
rights of men and women”. 
 Among those rights is the freedom to speak your 
mind and worship as you please, the promise of 
equality of the races and the opportunity for women 
and girls to pursue their own potential, and the ability 
of citizens to have a say in how you are governed and 
to have confidence in the administration of justice. For, 
just as no nation should be forced to accept the tyranny 
of another nation, no individual should be forced to 
accept the tyranny of their own people. 
 As an African-American, I will never forget that I 
would not be here today without the steady pursuit of a 
more perfect union in my country. That guides my 
belief that no matter how dark the day may seem, 
transformative change can be forged by those who 
choose to side with justice. And I pledge that America 
will always stand with those who stand up for their 
dignity and their rights — for the student who seeks to 
learn, the voter who demands to be heard, the innocent 
who longs to be free and the oppressed who yearns to 
be equal. 
 Democracy cannot be imposed on any nation 
from the outside. Each society must search for its own 
path, and no path is perfect. Each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its people and in its past 
traditions. And I admit that America has too often been 
selective in its promotion of democracy. But that does 
not weaken our commitment; it only reinforces it. 
There are basic principles that are universal. There are 
certain truths that are self-evident, and the United 
States of America will never waiver in our efforts to 
stand up for the right of people everywhere to 
determine their own destiny. 
 Sixty-five years ago, a weary Franklin Roosevelt 
spoke to the American people in his fourth, and final, 
inaugural address. After years of war, he sought to sum 
up the lessons that could be drawn from the terrible 
suffering and enormous sacrifice that had taken place. 
We have learned, he said, to be citizens of the world, 
members of the human community. The United Nations 
was built by men and women like Roosevelt from 
every corner of the world — from Africa and Asia, 
from Europe to the Americas. These architects of 
international cooperation had an idealism that was 
anything but naive. It was rooted in the hard-earned 
lessons of war, rooted in the wisdom that nations could 
advance their interests by acting together instead of 
splitting apart. 
 Now it falls to us, for this institution will be what 
we make of it. The United Nations does extraordinary 
good around the world, in feeding the hungry, caring 
for the sick and mending places that have been broken. 
 
 
15 09-52179 
 
But it also struggles to enforce its will and to live up to 
the ideals of its founding. I believe that those 
imperfections are not a reason to walk away from this 
institution; they are a calling to redouble our efforts. 
The United Nations can be a place where we either 
bicker about outdated grievances or forge common 
ground; a place where we focus on what drives us apart 
or what brings us together; a place where we indulge 
tyranny or a source of moral authority. In short, the 
United Nations can be an institution that is 
disconnected from what matters in the lives of our 
citizens or it can be an indispensable factor in 
advancing the interests of the people we serve. 
 We have reached a pivotal moment. The United 
States stands ready to begin a new chapter of 
international cooperation, one that recognizes the 
rights and responsibilities of all nations. And so, with 
confidence in our cause and with a commitment to our 
values, we call on all nations to join us in building the 
future that our people so richly deserve.This year marks the twentieth 
anniversary of the adoption, in 1989, of General 
Assembly resolution 44/27 A, on international 
solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa. 
That was one of numerous Assembly resolutions in 
which the nations of the world pledged their support 
for the eradication of apartheid. 
 Within months of the adoption of that important 
resolution, the ban on South African liberation 
movements was lifted. Nelson Mandela and other 
political prisoners were released. The stage was thus 
  
 
09-52228 20 
 
set for the negotiations that would eventually lead to 
the achievement of freedom and democracy in our 
country. 
 The role of the United Nations in the struggle to 
end apartheid is an exceptional example of the 
collective political will of the international community. 
It represented the victory of unity over division and of 
negotiation over confrontation. It represented a clear 
commitment to the promotion of basic human rights. 
As South Africans, we will always be grateful for that 
international solidarity. 
 Since the advent of democracy in 1994, we have 
built a solid, stable democracy, founded on the 
principles of unity, non-sexism, non-racialism and 
democracy. As we continue to build our young nation, 
we are cognizant of the need for a conducive 
international environment. For that reason, we are 
committed to playing our part, with the rest of the 
international community, in taking forward the fight 
against poverty and in responding to the crises that are 
confronting the world today. We must act now, 
together, to halt the degradation of the environment. 
We must act now, together, to prevent the global 
economic crisis from undoing the gains that we have 
achieved over decades. 
 The eradication of poverty must remain central to 
the work of the United Nations. The Organization must 
continue to work harder to unite the world to work to 
alleviate the suffering of the world’s poor and 
marginalized. The global economic meltdown has dealt 
a heavy blow to world efforts to eradicate poverty. But 
it should not diminish our resolve. 
 The United Nations must play a significant role 
in finding solutions to the global economic crisis. The 
crisis should not be an excuse to delay further action 
on the delivery of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Rather, it should urge us to double our efforts to 
achieve greater and faster progress. Developing 
countries did not cause the economic crisis, but they 
are severely affected by it. The crisis has further 
highlighted the urgent need for fundamental reform of 
the Bretton Woods institutions, including their 
mandate, scope, governance and responsiveness. 
 These institutions have been unrepresentative 
since their formation half a century ago. The current 
arrangements are inadequate and unfair. They do not 
reflect the changes that have taken place in the global 
economy. We should ensure that the election of the 
heads of all those institutions is more democratic, and 
opens opportunities to developing countries. The 
emerging and developing countries, including the 
poorest, must have a greater voice and greater 
participation in those institutions. Similarly, if we are 
to eradicate poverty there is an urgent need to conclude 
the Doha Round of trade negotiations in a manner that 
prioritizes development. 
 We continue to work for an African renewal, and 
welcome the ongoing support of the United Nations 
system in addressing the challenges facing the 
continent. Now more than ever, it is necessary for the 
United Nations to ensure that the international 
community collectively implements the commitments 
made to Africa. We have a viable socio-economic 
development blueprint, the New Partnership for 
Africa’s Development, which should be used in 
mobilizing resources for Africa. We appreciate that 
there can be no lasting peace without development, and 
no development without security. 
 Over the past 20 years, Africa has made much 
progress in working to end conflicts and to promote 
democratic practices and institutions. However, some 
pockets of conflict persist. For its part, South Africa 
has been engaged in mediation, conflict prevention and 
peacekeeping on the continent, in, among other places, 
Burundi, Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo. 
 The African Union has the political will to 
resolve conflicts on the continent. However, it lacks 
resources to run effective peacekeeping interventions 
and conflict prevention mechanisms. We appeal for 
support for African peacemaking efforts, and for 
greater cooperation between the United Nations and 
the African Union. In this regard, we call on the 
General Assembly to align itself with resolutions of the 
African Union and the Southern African Development 
Community that do not recognize Governments that 
come into power by force or other unconstitutional 
means. 
 The search for global peace, stability and security 
cannot be separated from the pursuit of justice, 
self-determination, human rights and economic 
development. We need to constantly reaffirm the 
inalienable human rights of all people. We call for the 
full and effective implementation of the outcomes of 
the World Conference against Racism and the 
subsequent Durban Review Conference. It is of 
 
 
21 09-52228 
 
concern that at the close of the first decade of the 
twenty-first century there are still nations that find 
their lands occupied and their peoples oppressed.  
 We are convinced that urgent and concrete steps 
are needed to resolve the situation in Western Sahara. 
 We must work with similar urgency towards the 
achievement, through negotiations, of peaceful 
coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians. This 
must be based on the creation of a viable Palestinian 
State, existing side by side with Israel, within the 1967 
borders, which must be secure and internationally 
recognized. 
 We also call for the lifting of the economic, 
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. 
 We also appreciate the recent pronouncements by 
some nuclear-weapon States on their intention to 
reduce their nuclear arsenals. 
 Let us take up this new momentum and utilize the 
opportunity of the 2010 Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to recommit ourselves to the 
full implementation of obligations under the NPT. We 
should ensure a balance among the objectives of 
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. 
 For Africa, the impact of climate change is 
devastating and will severely undermine development 
and poverty eradication efforts. We need to act now to 
ensure that there is an inclusive, fair and effective 
global agreement on this critical challenge. The 
agreement must recognize that solving the climate 
problem cannot be separated from the struggle to 
eradicate poverty. Developed countries bear the 
greatest responsibility for climate change and its 
impact. We must therefore strike a balance between 
adaptation and mitigation. Our goal should be to 
significantly reduce emissions across the globe without 
constraining development in the countries of the South. 
 Ms. McClean (Barbados), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Developed countries must make ambitious, 
quantified and legally binding emission reduction 
commitments that are in line with science and that 
address their historical responsibilities. At Copenhagen, 
there needs to be agreement on new, additional, 
sustainable and predictable financing for adaptation. 
This should be for programmes that reduce the 
vulnerability of developing countries to the effects of 
climate change. 
 In a world that is increasingly interconnected and 
interdependent, international problems can be resolved 
effectively only through multilateral cooperation. The 
United Nations must continue to be at the centre of 
multilateralism, but it needs to be reformed if it is to 
carry out its mandate effectively, efficiently and 
transparently. 
 We remain committed to the view that no reform 
of the United Nations can be complete without the 
fundamental reform of the Security Council. It must be 
representative of the international community and 
reflect the geopolitical realities of today. If the Security 
Council is not reformed and does not have permanent 
representation for Africa, the legitimacy of the 
Council’s decisions will continue to be questioned. 
South Africa continues to advocate an expansion in 
both the permanent and non-permanent categories of 
membership. 
 Let me express our appreciation to the world for 
the celebration of the inaugural Nelson Mandela Day 
on 18 July this year. Scores of people engaged in a 
minimum of 67 minutes of voluntary action in the 
service of humanity, in honour of our icon, President 
Mandela. The Non-Aligned Movement has joined the 
call for this General Assembly to declare 18 July 
Nelson Mandela Day. This would be in recognition of 
President Mandela’s contribution to the struggle for 
democracy and the cause of humanity, and to promote 
community service across the globe. In this regard, we 
hope that the General Assembly will adopt a consensus 
resolution in support of Nelson Mandela Day. 
 South Africa is privileged to host the 2010 
Fédération Internationale de Football Association 
World Cup in the middle of next year, which will be 
the first time that the tournament has been held on 
African soil. We look forward to hosting the peoples of 
the world, who will enjoy unique African hospitality 
and vibrancy. 
 I wish to take this opportunity to thank the 
outgoing President of the General Assembly for his 
leadership at the sixty-third session of the Assembly. I 
thank the General Assembly and representatives for the 
opportunity to address this esteemed gathering. 
Working together as a global family, we can do more to 
create a better and just world.The 
world today is undergoing major developments, major 
changes and major adjustments. The trend towards 
peace, development and cooperation, which represents 
the call of our times, has grown stronger than ever. As 
the world moves further towards multipolarity and 
economic globalization, multilateralism and democracy 
in international relations have won greater popular 
support, while openness and cooperation for mutual 
benefit and win-win progress have become the shared 
aspirations of the international community. Countries 
have become more interdependent. 
 At the same time, the world remains in the grip of 
the financial crisis, and the prospects for economic 
recovery are still not clear. Worldwide, unemployment 
and poverty are worsening, and development 
imbalances are more acute. Global issues such as 
climate change, food security, energy and resource 
security, and public health security have been thrown 
into sharp relief. Non-traditional security threats, 
including terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, transnational organized crime and 
major communicable diseases, are threatening our 
world. Some long-standing hotspot issues remain 
unresolved, while regional and local conflicts continue 
to flare up. The instability and uncertainties on the 
international landscape pose severe challenges to world 
peace and development. 
 In the face of unprecedented opportunities and 
challenges, we members of the international 
community should commit ourselves to peace, 
development, cooperation, common progress and 
tolerance, and continue our joint endeavour to build a 
harmonious world of enduring peace and common 
prosperity and contribute to the noble cause of the 
peace and development of humankind. 
 First, we should view security in a broader 
perspective and safeguard world peace and stability. 
The security of all countries has never been as closely 
interconnected as it is today. Security is not a zero-sum 
game, and there is no isolated or absolute security. No 
country can be safe and stable in the absence of world 
and regional peace and stability. 
 We should embrace a new security mindset of 
mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination. 
While maintaining our own national security, we 
should also respect the security concerns of other 
countries and advance the common security of 
humankind. We should adhere to the purposes and 
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and 
seek peaceful solutions to regional hotspot issues and 
international disputes. There should be no wilful use or 
threat of force. We should support the United Nations 
in continuing to play an important role in the field of 
international security. We should oppose terrorism, 
separatism and extremism in all their manifestations 
and broaden international security cooperation. 
 China has consistently stood for the complete 
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear 
weapons and for a world without nuclear weapons. We 
call on the international community to take credible 
steps to push forward the nuclear disarmament process, 
eradicate the risks of nuclear weapons proliferation and 
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and related 
international cooperation. 
 Secondly, we should take a more holistic 
approach to development and promote common 
prosperity. Increasing economic globalization has 
linked the development of all countries closely 
together. Without the development and equal 
participation of developing countries, there can be 
neither common prosperity in the world nor a more just 
and equitable international economic order. The 
developing countries now face a deteriorating external 
environment brought about by the international 
financial crisis. Their economies are slowing down, 
and their development endeavours are beset by serious 
difficulties. 
 We believe that common development is an 
important way to redress global development 
imbalances and achieve sustainable development. The 
United Nations should increase its input in 
 
 
9 09-52228 
 
development; advance economic globalization in the 
direction of balanced development, shared benefits and 
win-win progress; and foster an international 
environment conducive to the development of 
developing countries. The international financial 
institutions should use their newly increased resources, 
first and foremost, to help developing countries move 
out of poverty and provide loans to them in a more 
flexible, diverse, convenient and efficient manner. 
Great effort should be made to increase the 
representation and voice of developing countries in the 
process of reforming the international financial system. 
 We should take responsible measures to counter 
the international financial crisis, firmly oppose 
protectionism and actively work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations. Developed countries should open 
their markets to developing countries and reduce or 
exempt tariffs for those countries. They should honour 
their official development assistance and debt relief 
commitments and, in particular, increase assistance to 
the least developed countries, with a focus on tackling 
such issues as hunger, health care and education.  
 For developing countries, self-reliance is 
essential. They should explore development models 
conducive to their development and poverty 
eradication efforts. It is also in their interest to increase 
trade and investment cooperation, open markets to one 
another and step up South-South cooperation. 
 Thirdly, we should pursue cooperation with a 
more open mind and work for mutual benefit and 
common progress. Climate change, food security, 
energy and resource security, and public health security 
are all global challenges, and no country is immune to 
them. The only way for us to meet those challenges and 
ensure harmony and peace is to engage in closer 
international cooperation.  
 Climate change is one of the serious challenges to 
human survival and development, and international 
cooperation is the key to tackling that challenge. We 
should retain the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol 
as the main channel in addressing climate change, 
abide by the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities, adhere to the mandate of the Bali Road 
Map, and work for the success of the Copenhagen 
conference with a view to achieving mutual benefit and 
common progress. 
 Food and energy are vital to the livelihood, 
development and stability of all nations. We should 
increase our input into agriculture, develop advanced 
technologies, curb market speculation, increase food 
assistance and intensify cooperation with regard to 
agriculture and food. We should strengthen mutually 
beneficial cooperation in the area of energy, step up the 
research and development of new and renewable 
energies, put in place a system for the research, 
development and dissemination of advanced energy 
technologies, and diversify the energy supply. 
 The continued spread of influenza A — H1N1 — 
has presented a global public health challenge 
confronting the entire international community. China 
is ready to provide help, within its capacities, to other 
developing countries in the prevention and control of 
influenza A. 
 Fourthly, we should be more tolerant towards one 
another and live together in harmony. Mutual learning 
and tolerance among different civilizations are an 
inexhaustible source of strength for social progress, 
and all countries — large or small, strong or weak, rich 
or poor — are equal. We should acknowledge 
differences in our cultural traditions, social systems 
and values, respect the right of all countries to 
independently choose their own development paths, let 
different civilizations and models of development draw 
on one another’s strengths through competition and 
comparison, and achieve common development by 
seeking common ground while reserving the right to 
differ.  
 The Chinese people will soon celebrate the 
sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China. Sixty years ago, the Chinese people 
won independence and liberation after a prolonged, 
hard struggle and became masters of the new China. 
Today, China’s national strength has grown remarkably 
and the people are better off. 
 China’s development has contributed greatly to 
peace and development in the world, and China’s 
future is more closely interconnected with that of the 
world. A more developed China will make greater 
contributions and bring more opportunities to the 
world. We are committed to the path of peaceful 
development and the win-win strategy of opening up. 
We will develop friendly relations and cooperation 
with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of 
Peaceful Coexistence. China has always been and will 
  
 
09-52228 10 
 
continue to be a positive force for world peace and 
common development. 
 As a responsible and major developing country, 
China has always made common development an 
important aspect of its foreign policy. We have made a 
great effort to provide support and assistance to other 
developing countries. To further assist them, China will 
adopt the following measures. 
 First, we will increase support for other 
developing countries hit hard by the financial crisis, 
honestly implement relevant capital increase and 
financing plans, intensify trade and investment 
cooperation and help increase the capacity of relevant 
countries for risk resistance and sustainable 
development.  
 Secondly, we will continue to implement the 
measures announced at the United Nations High-level 
Event on the Millennium Development Goals to assist 
other developing countries in accelerating development 
and facilitating attainment of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Thirdly, China will follow through on the 
measures to help African countries that were 
announced at the Beijing Summit of the Forum on 
China-Africa Cooperation, increase assistance to 
Africa, reduce or cancel debts for African countries, 
expand trade and investment, provide human resources 
and technological support for African countries in such 
areas as agriculture, health, education and disaster 
preparedness and reduction, and intensify personnel 
training tailored to African needs. 
 Fourthly, China will continue to participate in and 
promote regional monetary and financial cooperation, 
maintain financial and economic stability and promote 
financial cooperation and trade in the region. 
 Let us join hands, share the development 
opportunities, rise above the challenges and make an 
unremitting effort towards building a harmonious 
world of enduring peace and common prosperity.In these tumultuous 
times marked by manifold crises, we are more than 
ever in need of a global Organization that all Members 
make use of and support. We need the United Nations. 
The comprehensive, universal system of the United 
Nations forms the heart of the global system of crisis 
prevention and mitigation. Now more than ever, 
Germany pledges its active and extensive support to 
this world Organization. 
 This past year taught us bitter lessons, and today 
it seems clearer than ever: we must secure the 
sustainability of the economic recovery. That applies 
not only to the financial sector, but also, and in 
particular, to the most vulnerable in the world — the 
poorest of the poor in the developing countries — as 
well as to our environment and the world’s climate. 
 The consultations on a charter for sustainable 
economic activity point in the right direction. The 
United Nations should be actively involved in that 
process. We must turn the crisis into an opportunity for 
development and a truly green recovery. 
 The aftermath of the financial crisis is 
jeopardizing our progress on the path towards 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Therefore, we must do our utmost to avoid any 
setbacks in that regard. Donor States must continue 
their efforts for development, all the more so in times 
of crisis. Germany has continually increased its official 
development assistance contributions in recent years. 
In 2008, my country was the second-largest donor of 
official development assistance. We will also 
significantly increase our contributions to the 
multilateral development banks. 
 All of this underscores one thing: Germany, as 
one of the world’s largest economies, stands by its 
global responsibility. But developing countries must 
also live up to their responsibilities. Responsible 
governance, respect for human rights, environmental 
protection, the fight against epidemics, the 
strengthening of the rights of women — those are the 
challenges that each country has the responsibility to 
meet. 
 Climate change is the pre-eminent challenge of 
the twenty-first century. It threatens our well-being, 
our security and our economic development. It will 
lead to uncontrollable risks and dramatic damage, if we 
do not take resolute action — not in some distant 
future, but right now. 
 I can assure the Assembly: Germany will 
continue to be a leader in climate protection. But we 
will be successful only if we act together. We need an 
inclusive process in which those countries directly 
affected by climate change, such as the small island 
States, can also play a part. The United Nations is the 
only reliable framework for this. I would like to thank 
the Secretary-General for his very timely initiative in 
convening a United Nations summit last week 
addressing this key issue. 
 Disarmament and arms control can help create 
better conditions for global cooperation and increase 
security and stability. We warmly welcome the new 
dynamic in the area of nuclear disarmament. The call 
for a nuclear-weapon-free world enjoys widespread 
support, including that of Germany. We must seize this 
opportunity for progress in all areas of disarmament. 
Germany has underlined that sub-strategic nuclear 
weapons must also be incorporated into the continuing 
process of disarmament. Our clear commitment to 
ridding the world of all nuclear weapons is the best 
way to strengthen the international non-proliferation 
regime. 
 We need a new international consensus at the 
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the 
launching of negotiations in Geneva on a fissile 
material cut-off treaty and the entry into force of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. In order to 
avoid a conflict of objectives between 
non-proliferation and peaceful uses, Germany supports 
multilateral solutions to nuclear-fuel supply and has 
put forward its own proposal on that issue. 
 The international community must not relent in 
its commitment to banning all weapons of mass 
destruction. A model in that respect is the Chemical 
Weapons Convention, which outlaws a whole category 
of weapons of mass destruction. Its implementing 
organization needs strong and dynamic leadership. 
Germany has always had a particular commitment to 
 
 
55 09-52604 
 
the Chemical Weapons Convention, and we stand ready 
to accept greater responsibility in that organization. 
 We view the ongoing nuclear programme in Iran 
with great concern. The belated admittance by Iran 
concerning the construction of a second enrichment 
plant underlines the fact that our concerns are more 
than justified. Even before this latest event, the report 
by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
Director-General El Baradei emphasized the urgency of 
the matter. Unfortunately, the Iranian Government still 
refuses to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to remove 
serious doubts concerning the peaceful character of its 
nuclear programme. We urge Iran to grant an IAEA 
verification team access to the newly disclosed site 
without delay. 
 We sincerely hope that Iran will use the 
opportunity of the upcoming talks between it and the 
E3+3 — the United Kingdom, France and Germany, 
plus the United States, the Russian Federation and 
China — to demonstrate its willingness to engage in 
honest and speedy negotiations. If Iran’s leaders 
continue to stall, the international community will have 
no other choice but to take additional measures to 
emphasize the seriousness of our common concern. 
 Iran has a long and great history. It witnessed the 
origins of civilization. It can become an anchor of 
stability in its region — a respected member of the 
international community. But that involves, in addition 
to a diplomatic resolution of questions regarding its 
nuclear programme, a responsible foreign policy 
towards its neighbours. The key to this is the 
recognition of Israel’s right to exist. 
 Since the escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip 
at the beginning of the year, we have seen some 
encouraging signs of a return to the peace process. The 
resumption of negotiations aimed at the two-State 
solution is still possible. Germany strongly supports 
President Obama’s intensive commitment and regional 
approach. Together with the partners of the European 
Union, we are prepared to support efforts towards 
peace through concrete contributions. What we now 
need, however, are courageous gestures of goodwill on 
all sides to create the conditions for serious talks. 
 The successful holding of elections in June was 
an important milestone towards the continuing 
stabilization of Lebanon. What is now important is that 
a new Government soon be formed. The successful 
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) 
mission remains a crucial contribution to securing the 
ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel, and thus to the 
stabilization of the region. By again assuming 
command of the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force on 
1 September, we further strengthened our commitment 
to UNIFIL. 
 For Afghanistan, 2009 is a pivotal year. The 
presidential elections — the first elections in decades 
that were free and organized by the Afghans 
themselves — determined who will control the fate of 
the country over the next five years. They were an 
impressive sign of the resolve of the people of 
Afghanistan to take part in the political process. 
 Against the backdrop of the difficult security 
situation, the further build-up of Afghan security forces 
assumes even greater importance. We will, therefore, 
continue to increase the number of German police 
instructors in Afghanistan, we will support the further 
build-up of the European Union Police Mission, and 
we will help to advance the training of the Afghan 
army within the framework of the International 
Security Assistance Force. 
 Despite all the criticism, there are also 
encouraging accomplishments, especially in the field 
of economic growth and in the reconstruction of the 
country’s infrastructure. The basic prerequisites for 
Afghanistan’s sustainable development are good 
governance, a resolute fight against corruption and an 
improvement in State services. These are essential if 
the population is to once again nurture hope for the 
future. As one of the largest troop-contributing nations 
and one of the main bilateral donors, Germany will 
continue to play an instrumental role in the 
reconstruction of the country. 
 Following the presidential elections, we are now 
entering a new phase of cooperation between the 
international community and Afghanistan. For that 
reason, Germany, together with the United Kingdom 
and France, has taken the initiative to hold an 
international conference that will set out concrete, 
realistic and measurable goals for the future political 
and economic development of Afghanistan. To that 
end, the Afghanistan Compact, which will expire in 
2010, should be further developed. 
 In 2010, we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary 
of the independence of no fewer than 17 African 
States — a fitting moment to also look to the future. 
Despite the global economic crisis, the overall outlook 
  
 
09-52604 56 
 
for Africa and its people is positive. We must succeed 
in utilizing the continent’s enormous potential in terms 
of people, creativity and resources. It remains our 
challenge to support the development of that potential 
while, at the same time, respecting African ownership. 
 African ownership should by no means be 
equated with a withdrawal from our neighbouring 
continent. On the contrary, it means that we should 
cultivate relations with the States of Africa in a spirit 
of partnership — a partnership in which each side 
introduces its ideas, and in which we work together to 
master the challenges we face, whether locally or 
globally. 
 One major common challenge remains the 
containment of violence and the protection of people in 
conflict areas. Germany will continue its extensive 
engagement in Africa, be it in the area of development 
cooperation, peace and security, business and 
technology, the environmental and energy sector or 
educational and scientific cooperation. This also 
applies to cooperation with the African Union, which 
has been expanding increasingly in recent years. 
 United Nations peacekeeping missions are a 
central pillar of the international security architecture. 
Reform of United Nations peacekeeping is an urgent 
issue, and Germany is ready to actively contribute to 
such reform. 
 It is absolutely essential that the cooperation 
between the United Nations and regional organizations 
be further intensified. The European Union has just 
shown that, with its peacekeeping missions in 
Africa — those in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo and Chad, to name just two examples — it is a 
reliable partner of the United Nations when it comes to 
crisis management. 
 We are facing a multitude of global challenges. 
Today, no country is strong enough to tackle those 
challenges on its own. We need a universal forum for 
joint global action. That is why we need a strong 
United Nations that is capable of taking effective 
action. 
 A long chain of high-level meetings — from the 
2005 High-level Event to the Secretary-General’s 
Summit on Climate Change last week — has 
emphasized how urgent it is to adapt the United 
Nations to the challenges of today’s world, for threats 
have become global. Our responses, however, are still 
not always global, and that is true for the United 
Nations as well. 
 Reforms must start with simple questions. Does a 
particular body effectively fulfil its tasks? Does its 
composition reflect the world of today? Where that is 
not the case, reform must have a clear objective: to 
make the United Nations more effective, more credible 
and more assertive. 
 However, we must not limit reforms to the United 
Nations. If we want to deal effectively with the current 
crisis and effectively prevent future crises, we must 
also reform the international financial institutions. 
Isolated reforms of individual institutions will not get 
us anywhere. Reform of the financial institutions and 
of the United Nations must intermesh as a broader 
reform of global governance — a reform that, more 
than six decades after the founding of today’s world 
order, is long overdue. Germany, incidentally, is 
advocating at a high level the improved representation 
of newly industrialized and developing countries as 
part of the reform of the international financial 
institutions. This is our understanding of global 
governance: fair participation for everybody. 
 In 2000 and 2005, heads of State and Government 
called for reform of the Security Council. They did so 
out of the realization that we can meet the threats of 
today only if the Council reflects the world of today. 
One thing is clear: if the Security Council does not 
reform itself, there is a risk that other bodies will 
attempt to take its place. Such a rivalry would be 
detrimental to us all. Let us therefore attempt, at this 
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, to bring 
about concrete results. 
 Germany has been and remains willing to take 
responsibility. That includes assuming a permanent 
seat on a reformed Security Council. We also underline 
this readiness to take responsibility with our candidacy 
for a non-permanent seat on the Council for the period 
2011-2012. Through our work in the Security Council, 
we want to contribute to the success of the United 
Nations, just as we are already contributing to 
worldwide United Nations missions, to development 
funds, humanitarian aid and the United Nations 
Environment Programme. Now and in the future, we 
will work to find common interests, to overcome 
divisions and to strengthen a global partnership of 
responsibility.In 
speaking to the General Assembly in France’s name 
today, I am well aware that we all have a historic 
responsibility in the current circumstances. 
 In the midst of a financial, economic and social 
crisis that has no precedent in the history of the United 
Nations, and faced with the threat a global ecological 
disaster, we must now invent a new world where the 
follies of yesterday are no longer possible. That is our 
responsibility. Now we all know towards what 
catastrophes our obstinate attempts to solve the 
problems of the twenty-first century with twentieth-
century ideas and instruments may lead us. No one 
among us can claim any longer that he did not know. 
There is a universal awareness that the path that 
the world has taken over the past few decades is a dead 
end. This awareness is born of sorrow, suffering and 
fear. We are politically and morally accountable for the 
suffering on our planet. Tens of millions of men and 
women have lost their jobs and their homes. A billion 
human beings are suffering from hunger, and hundreds 
of millions have no access to water, energy or minimal 
health care. 
 To those hundreds of millions of people, we, the 
heads of State and Government, and no one else, must 
restore hope. Those who are paying the price of the 
crisis had no role in bringing it about. We owe an 
answer to the people who are outraged by the 
behaviour of those in the financial world who led us to 
the brink of chaos and continue to seek to enrich 
themselves indecently. We owe an answer to those who 
are still dying in absurd wars from another age, while 
humankind has so many challenges to face.  
 France’s answer is unambiguous. Things cannot 
go on as they were. We must change. We cannot allow 
it to start all over again, leading to another disaster 
tomorrow. After such a strong disavowal of our usual 
thinking and our deep-rooted prejudices, the task 
before us is precisely the same as that faced by men of 
good will who sought here to build a new political, 
economic and monetary world order after the Second 
World War. The generation that preceded us was equal 
to its responsibilities. The question today is: Will we be 
equal to that same responsibility? 
 The world will change. It cannot be otherwise. 
The only question is: Will the world change because 
we are able to act with wisdom, intelligence and 
courage, or because fresh crises will arise if we are not 
wise enough to take the path of radical change? 
 The truth is that we have already waited too long 
to regulate globalization, fight global warming and 
curb nuclear proliferation. And I should like solemnly 
to tell the leaders of Iranian that they would be making 
a tragic mistake in relying on the passive response of 
the international community in order to pursue their 
military nuclear programme.  
 We have waited too long to re-establish peace in 
the Middle East by giving the Palestinian people the 
State to which they are entitled in the name of law and 
in the name of justice. And we have waited too long to 
guarantee the people of Israel the right to live in 
security, which the tragedies of history have made so 
necessary for them. 
 We know what we need to do now: increase the 
number of permanent and non-permanent members of 
the Security Council. I say in the name of France, it is 
unacceptable that the African continent does not have a 
single permanent member on the Security Council — it 
is unacceptable because it is unjust. It is unacceptable 
that the South American continent, with such a great 
power as Brazil, or India with its population of one 
billion, or Japan or Germany, should be excluded from 
among the permanent members of the Council. It is 
unacceptable, and I say here that the legitimacy of the 
United Nations is riding on this reform. Either the 
United Nations reforms and its legitimacy will grow, or 
  
 
09-52179 46 
 
the reform fails and then decisions will be taken 
outside the United Nations.  
 We must reform the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank; that is indispensable. Voting 
rights need to be more equitably distributed. The 
missions of both the Fund and the Bank need to be 
redefined. To maintain the Fund as the guardian of an 
orthodoxy that has been so severely shaken by the 
crisis would be a tragic mistake.  
 The international system has to be reformed. We 
cannot have a politically multipolar world with a single 
currency. That is not acceptable; it is not possible. We 
have to re-engineer the financial capitalism system. If 
we have a system in which the real price of risk or the 
real price of rare resources is not being paid, that is a 
suicidal system.  
 We need to eliminate tax havens, for we must not 
tolerate places where money derived from speculation, 
crime and fraud is stashed. It is up to us. No one in the 
world would understand if we were to fail to live up to 
this objective.  
 We need to curb the price swings of commodities 
that are subject to excessive speculation, starting with 
oil, since this instability is unsustainable. The countries 
that have commodities must be paid a fair price for 
their resources. We must not accept the speculation that 
destabilizes the world over the costs of commodities. 
 In Copenhagen, we need to commit to 
quantitative targets for greenhouse gas emissions. We 
can no longer put off the moment of choice. We need to 
set up a world environment organization. We need to 
acknowledge the legitimacy of the principle of a 
carbon tax border adjustment mechanism so that 
nobody can profit from environmental dumping.  
 We cannot let the law of trade be the only law. I 
believe in free trade, but there are fundamental 
standards. We are members of the World Health 
Organization. How can we impair the right to health of 
those who have nothing? We are members of the 
International Labour Organization, which has defined 
the fundamental standards in this field. How can we 
accept that those standards be flouted? The right to 
health, the right to a minimum respect for one’s social 
rights and the right to protection of the planet are just 
as important as the right to trade. There is no single 
right that is more important than the others. 
 We cannot ask developing countries and poor 
countries to comply with these standards if we, the 
rich, do not help them in their efforts. We all belong to 
the same human race. We all live on the same planet. 
We are all facing the same challenges.  
 So yes, we need to be able to share our 
technology. France is ready to do so, and so are the 
other wealthy countries of the world. Yes, we will need 
to come up with further resources for development 
assistance and for meeting the ecological challenge 
together. I do not hesitate to say that we will find these 
resources by taxing excessive gains from speculation 
and profits. We do not have to look far for resources; 
they are right there. I would like to appeal to all States, 
to all international organizations, that the 
recommendations made by the commission chaired by 
Joseph Stiglitz be disseminated broadly. Let us make 
no mistake about the way we measure economic 
growth.  
 The task is a huge one, and it is only just 
beginning. That is all the more reason for starting now 
and starting quickly. We have little time remaining. 
Each of us needs to realize what would happen if we 
had to go home and explain to our fellow citizens that 
we have been incapable of reaching an agreement, of 
finding new solutions at a time when they are suffering 
so grievously from the consequences of the crisis. I 
wish to say very clearly that nothing would be worse 
that a mediocre compromise in Pittsburgh and in 
Copenhagen. World opinion and the current 
circumstances demand that we find a real solution to 
the problems and not just to pretend. 
 If we do nothing, the threat of the worst crisis is 
not behind us but ahead of us. We are at one of those 
moments in history when political decisions will have 
a profound and lasting impact on the future. We have 
no choice; we must take risks, since the greatest risk 
today would be to do nothing, to let ourselves be 
carried along by the force of habit, to think that we still 
have time. France has come to tell you that we have no 
more time.  
 I hope that this year, 2009, is when a new world 
order — a more fair, more efficient world order — will 
be established, one that each of us will be comfortable 
with.I stand here to 
reaffirm the Charter of the United Nations, not to tear 
it up. I call on every nation to support its universal 
principles.  
 A year ago, we met on the brink of a global crisis 
and, as national leaders spoke in turn at this rostrum, 
the full scale of the danger was becoming clear — a 
threat not just to jobs, businesses and life savings but, 
with the imminent risk of failure of the world’s 
banking system, the prospect of entire countries failing 
as nations across Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin 
America struggled to access credit. 
 That crisis demanded global action. As never 
before, the fate of every country rested on the actions 
of all. And as the fear of the unthinkable took hold, we 
reached a clear choice: to fail separately or to succeed 
together. 
 At the G-20 meetings in Washington and again in 
London, we made our choice. Governments came 
together to begin the fight back against the global 
recession. We acted in concert, recognizing that 
national interests could be protected only by serving 
the common interest, and that in this new global 
economy, the economy is indivisible and recession 
anywhere can threaten prosperity everywhere. We 
reckoned also that, if growth is to be sustained, it has 
to be shared. Global problems can be mastered only 
through global solutions. 
 So I think that today we can draw strength from 
the unprecedented unity that has defined the past year. 
But we cannot be complacent. For while it may seem 
strange to say so after a time of such intense global 
cooperation, our world is now entering a six-month 
period which may prove even more testing for 
international cooperation together. 
 I believe that we face five urgent challenges that 
demand momentous decisions — decisions that I 
would argue are epoch-making — on climate change, 
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, shared prosperity and 
eradicating poverty. 
 Once again, we are at a point of no return. And 
just as the collapse of the banks focused our minds a 
year ago, so we must grasp this next set of challenges 
immediately. 
 If we do not reach a climate change deal at 
Copenhagen, if we miss this great opportunity to agree 
together to protect our planet, we cannot hope for an 
easy second chance some time in the future. There will 
be no retrospective global agreement to undo the 
  
 
09-52179 52 
 
damage that we have caused. This is the moment now 
to limit and reverse the climate change we are 
inflicting on future generations — not later, not at 
another conference, not in a later decade, after we have 
already lost 10 years to inaction and delay. 
 And if, in Afghanistan, we give way to the 
insurgency and Al-Qaida , other terrorist groups and 
Al-Qaida will return and, from that sanctuary once 
again plot, train for and launch attacks on the rest of 
the world. 
 There can be no chance, either, of a nuclear-free 
world if we allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons and, 
in doing so, set off a new arms race. 
 There can be no global compact for jobs and 
growth if we choke off recovery by failing to act 
together to follow through on the coordinated global 
fiscal expansion we agreed and have now put in place. 
 And if we do not act together to prevent 
avoidable illness, there can be no plan to save 
tomorrow the 12,000 children who are dying in Africa 
today and every day. 
 So I say we do need world agreement on urgent 
challenges. 
 Now let me elaborate first on climate change. 
Despite the promises we have made, the road to a 
successful outcome in Copenhagen is not assured. Why 
is that? It is so because, above all, a robust and long-
term deal on climate change requires money. If the 
poorest and most vulnerable are going to be able to 
adapt; if the emerging economies are going to embark 
on low-carbon development paths; and if the forest 
nations are going to slow and stop deforestation, then I 
know that the richer countries must contribute 
financially. 
 That is why I have proposed a new approach to 
financing our action against climate change. It will 
provide substantially increased additional and 
predictable flows. They will be flows of capital from 
both public and private sectors. They would be worth 
around $100  billion a year by 2020. In the coming 
days, we must make progress. 
 A post-2012 agreement on climate change at 
Copenhagen is the next great test of our global 
cooperation. Each of us has a duty of leadership to 
make sure that it happens. We must build on the 
discussions at Secretary-General Ban’s meeting this 
week. I have said that I will go to Copenhagen to 
conclude the deal because I believe that it is too 
important an agreement — for the global economy, and 
for the future of every nation represented here — 
simply to leave it to chance. So I urge my fellow 
leaders to commit themselves to backing up our official 
negotiators by going to Copenhagen too. 
 I believe that a safer Afghanistan means a safer 
world. But none of us can be safe if we walk away 
from that country or from our common mission and 
resolve. NATO and its partners, from Australia to Japan 
to other countries, must agree new ways to implement 
our strategy. I believe that we must ensure that 
“Afghanization” takes place — that the army, people 
and the people of Afghanistan assume greater 
responsibility for the security of their own country. 
 So, too, must we unite against terror and injustice 
wherever they are to be found in our world. I believe 
that it shames us all that the people of Somalia and the 
Sudan are still subject to the most terrible of violence; 
that Israel and Palestine have still not found a way to 
live side by side in security and peace; and that, for the 
people of Burma, their elected leader is subjected to a 
show trial and decades of imprisonment. There is more 
that we can do and more that we must do. And we must 
carry forward our efforts to make a coherent, strategic 
and more effective approach to peacekeeping and 
peacebuilding around the world. 
 Once there were five nuclear-armed Powers. Now 
there are nine. The real and present danger is that more 
will soon follow. And the risk is not just State 
aggression, but the acquisition of nuclear weapons by 
terrorists. So we must accept that we are at a moment 
of danger when decades of preventing proliferation 
could be overturned by a damaging rise in 
proliferation. If we are serious about the ambition of a 
nuclear-free world, we will need statesmanship, not 
brinksmanship. 
 Tomorrow’s Security Council resolution will be 
vital, in my view, as we move forward towards next 
year’s global nuclear security summit in April and the 
Review Conference in May. Our proposal is a grand 
global bargain between nuclear-weapon and  
non-nuclear-weapon States. There are three elements to 
it, where careful and sober international leadership is 
essential and in which Britain will play its part: the 
responsibilities of non-nuclear States, the rights of  
 
 
53 09-52179 
 
non-nuclear States and, of course, the responsibilities 
of nuclear weapon States. 
 First, let there be no ambiguity: Iran and North 
Korea must now know that the world will be even 
tougher on proliferation. We are ready to consider 
further sanctions. Britain will insist in future that the 
onus on non-nuclear States is that in the years ahead it 
is for them to prove that they are not developing 
nuclear weapons. 
 Secondly, Britain will offer civil nuclear power to 
non-nuclear States who are ready to renounce any 
plans for nuclear weapons, helping non-nuclear States 
acquire what President Eisenhower so memorably 
called “atoms for peace”. With others, we will be 
prepared to sponsor a uranium bank outside those 
countries to help them access civil nuclear power. And 
Britain is ready to launch a new nuclear centre of 
excellence to help develop an economic low-carbon 
proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel cycle. 
 My third point is that all nuclear-weapon States 
must reciprocally play their part in reducing nuclear 
weapons as part of an agreement by non-nuclear States 
to renounce them. This is exactly what the  
Non-Proliferation Treaty intended, and in line with 
maintaining our nuclear deterrent I have asked our 
National Security Committee to report to me on the 
potential future reduction of our nuclear weapon 
submarines from four to three. 
 While economic cooperation has stabilized the 
international banking system and forged the foundation 
for the resumption of economic growth, recovery is 
neither entrenched nor irreversible. The great lesson of 
the past year is that only the bold and global action that 
we took prevented a recession becoming a depression. 
We have delivered a coordinated monetary and fiscal 
response that the International Labour Organization 
estimates has saved 7 million to 11 million jobs across 
the world. 
 So at Pittsburgh, when the Group of 20 (G-20) 
meets tomorrow, we must cement a global compact for 
jobs and growth — a compact to bring unemployment 
down and bring rising prosperity across the globe. We 
must maximize the impact of the stimulus measures we 
have agreed. There must be proper planning of exit 
strategies together to make sure the recovery does not 
falter. We do not and must not turn off the life support 
for our economy prematurely. We must also facilitate 
agreement setting clear objectives on how each of us 
can contribute to worldwide growth in the future, and 
we must ensure that such future growth is balanced and 
sustainable. 
 I believe we need stronger economic cooperation 
now as we navigate the uncertainties of recovery. I 
therefore propose we launch the compact by agreeing 
that we are committed to high levels of growth on a 
sustainable and balanced basis. This must be backed up 
by comprehensive reform of the financial sector. It 
must include international principles on bonuses. We 
must strengthen our targeting of tax havens. From next 
month, real sanctions must be meted out against those 
jurisdictions that fail to meet global standards. 
 The voice of Africa will have to be heard and 
heeded to bring recovery in areas devastated by the 
events of the past year and to assure that for all 
developing countries, inside and outside Africa, we do 
not put the Millennium Development Goals beyond 
reach as a result of a wider failure of global 
responsibility. 
 In London, the G-20 agreed on measures worth 
$50 billion for poor countries to help them weather the 
crisis. Because of London, the International Monetary 
Fund can lend $8 billion instead of $2 billion over this 
year and next. This is already helping Kenya and 
Tanzania to increase Government spending in response 
to the crisis. 
 Amid all these challenges, we must remember a 
fundamental promise we made 10 years ago. And this 
is my fifth and final imperative: to achieve a vision for 
2015 that we are in danger of betraying, because on 
present trends it will not take five years — as we 
pledged — and not even 50 years; it will take more 
than 100 years to deliver on some of our Millennium 
Development Goals. And 100 years is too long for the 
peoples of our countries to wait for the justice that has 
been promised.  
 As President Obama has said, we need a global 
plan to make the Millennium Development Goals a 
reality. The unyielding, grinding, soul-destroying, so 
often lethal poverty I saw in Africa and other 
developing countries has convinced me that unless 
empowerment through trade justice is matched by 
empowerment through free education and free health 
care, then this generation in sub-Saharan Africa will 
not have the opportunity they deserve to rise out of 
poverty and will never be fully free. 
  
 
09-52179 54 
 
 I believe the greatest of injustice demands the 
boldest of actions. Today at this United Nations 
General Assembly, we will see history being made with 
the beginnings of universal free health care in Africa 
and Asia as Burundi, Sierra Leone, Malawi, Nepal, 
Liberia and Ghana all make major announcements, 
which I applaud, that extend free health care and 
abolish user fees. As a result of those actions, more 
than 10 million additional people in Africa and Asia 
will now have access to free health services — 
10 million people who will now for the first time get 
the treatment they need without being turned away or 
fearing how they will pay. I urge you all to match the 
leadership of these countries with your own support, 
and I commit the United Kingdom to giving that 
support. 
 Let us remember how in 1945, as the United 
Nations was being created, countries faced a 
multiplicity of challenges but summoned up the energy 
and vision not just to rebuild from the ruin and rubble 
of a war, but to establish a new international order for 
shared security and progress. I believe that these same 
principles must now inspire new and better, more 
representative and more effective ways of cooperating 
globally together. 
 And as we learn from the experience of turning 
common purpose into common action in this our 
shared global society, so we must forge a progressive 
multilateralism for this era, one that depends upon us 
finding within ourselves and together the qualities of 
moral courage and leadership that for our time and for 
our generation can make this world anew. I believe that 
if we take the right decisions and work together, we are 
in the business of creating for the first time in human 
history a truly global society. It is a name to be wished 
for and an aim to be fought for by all of us.I offer my congratulations 
to Mr. Treki on his assumption of the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. My 
delegation assures him of our fullest cooperation 
during his stewardship of this Assembly, which 
embodies the hopes, aspirations and shared vision of 
peace and development of all the peoples of our planet. 
 When this session of the General Assembly ends 
next year, the United Nations will have completed 
65 years of existence. These past decades have seen the 
world change in fundamental ways. Connectivity 
defines our global condition, and the challenges that 
we collectively face are truly global. The resolution of 
these challenges, as we are aware, requires global 
approaches and solutions. What may happen in one 
part of the world has an impact on other regions. In the 
context of these rapidly emerging changes and their 
deep and diverse effects, we must consider more 
deeply whether the United Nations and other global 
governance structures are geared to effectively meeting 
the challenges that confront us all. 
 It is of concern that, even after more than six 
decades of existence, our international governance 
structures are neither inclusive nor participatory. 
Consequently, these structures and institutions have not 
kept pace or evolved with the changed nature, intensity 
and depth of contemporary global issues. The question 
is therefore: Are these institutions able to address these 
challenges adequately or satisfactorily? The reform and 
restructuring of the global governance architecture are 
the critical needs of our times, and the voices of the 
developing world, including those of the small island 
nations and Africa, are of principal and core relevance 
if we are to have truly participatory and global 
responses to global challenges. 
  
 
09-52592 28 
 
 One need not look very far to identify these 
challenges. The current economic and financial 
turmoil, which did not begin in the developing world, 
has affected developing countries the most. Growth has 
slowed, with recession overtaking many countries. The 
international response to this challenge must consist 
not only of the measures that have been taken to 
stimulate economies, but also, more importantly, of 
finding ways to restructure the current international 
governance system, which has failed to respond to the 
virulence of the financial and economic crisis. 
 To gloss over this structural deficit of the current 
global financial and economic architecture would 
imperil the future of a vast majority of the peoples of 
this world and presage greater difficulties in the future. 
In the face of the current economic and financial crisis, 
hard-won gains in alleviating poverty, hunger, illiteracy 
and disease are being reversed. The achievements of 
the Millennium Development Goals are seriously 
threatened. Policies of protectionism under such 
already adverse circumstances will exacerbate the 
serious situation that many countries face. 
 It is imperative that the United Nations act in 
concert to coherently overcome these challenges. India, 
which is actively engaged in the Group of 20 and other 
processes, has always stressed that developing 
countries must receive priority in any global response 
to the crisis. The United Nations Conference on the 
Financial and Economic Crisis held in June was 
opportune and provided a useful platform for 
collectively seeking ways and means to respond to the 
crisis. We now look forward to early implementation 
during the course of this General Assembly of the 
follow-up measures agreed on at the Conference. 
 At the centre stage of multilateralism and 
international cooperation is the United Nations. This 
Organization is a platform on which the world meets to 
express views and undertake commitments on global 
issues of mutual concern on an equal footing. It is no 
wonder, then, that the Charter of the United Nations 
begins with the inspiring words “We the peoples of the 
United Nations”. Inclusiveness and collective action in 
all aspects of the work of the Organization are at the 
heart of its Charter. This vision must be our lodestar, 
the guiding principle of all we undertake. India is 
committed to working with Member States to make the 
United Nations more relevant and attuned to 
contemporary realities.  
 Reforming the United Nations is a matter of the 
highest priority. Four years after the 2005 World 
Summit, there has not been much progress even as 
newer and more global crises and problems have 
emerged. We should not let slowness of action weaken 
the Organization in the face of such challenges. Rather, 
we must work in concert to make it more robust and 
capable of effective response. 
 Reform in the three essentials of the Charter — 
peace and security, development and human rights — 
requires our collective attention. The General 
Assembly must be revitalized in full measure, and its 
role as the anvil of global deliberation must be 
strengthened. The Economic and Social Council must 
become the fulcrum of development. It must be 
accepted that the Security Council must be 
strengthened and made more representative by 
expanding its permanent and non-permanent 
membership. Ongoing intergovernmental negotiations 
during the past six months have unambiguously 
established that an overwhelming majority of Member 
States share the perspective that an expansion in both 
categories of Security Council membership is needed. 
 Climate change is one of the most important 
global challenges that we face today. Developing 
countries bear a disproportionate share of its adverse 
effects, even though they are not responsible for it. 
Cognizant of the serious threat that climate change 
poses, India is engaged in the ongoing negotiations 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), including at the upcoming 
Copenhagen Conference. India will work for an 
outcome that recognizes the development imperatives 
of developing countries and is rooted in the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities. 
 We also must move away from concentrating on 
mitigation only and ensure that there is a focus on 
adaptation, which is critical for developing countries. 
We are hosting a high-level global conference on 
“Climate Change: Technology Development and 
Transfer” on 22 and 23 October 2009, in cooperation 
with the United Nations. The objective of the 
conference is to help formulate a road map for 
technology in the context of climate change mitigation 
and adaptation to support the UNFCCC process. 
 Developing countries must be supported 
financially, technologically and with capacity-building 
 
 
29 09-52592 
 
resources so that they can cope with the immense 
challenges of adaptation. Special efforts are required to 
develop programmes that address the critical needs of 
small island States and of the most vulnerable 
countries. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
central imperatives for India. To that end, accelerated 
economic growth and energy security are critical 
drivers. In pursuing our development goals, India has 
been successful in significantly reducing its energy 
intensity. India will continue to pursue that path. 
 India is aware that the continuing volatility in the 
fossil-fuel markets, together with the threat of climate 
change, makes the development of all renewable and 
clean energy sources — including nuclear energy — 
crucial. In that context, international civil-nuclear 
cooperation is important. 
 India has also taken several independent 
initiatives to address the issue of climate change. We 
have put in place a comprehensive policy and 
legislative framework, as well as a national action plan 
on climate change with eight separate national 
missions. An unprecedented afforestation campaign has 
been launched with a doubling of the forestry budget 
this year to $1.3 billion, and this increase is going to be 
sustained every year. The Prime Minister’s Council has 
approved national missions for enhanced energy 
efficiency and solar energy, setting ambitious goals. 
We are supporting and facilitating major research to 
assess various aspects related to climate change. 
 India attaches the highest priority to the goal of 
nuclear disarmament and has an impeccable 
non-proliferation record. We welcome the renewed 
global debate on achieving a world free of nuclear 
weapons. That corresponds with India’s long-standing 
and consistent advocacy of nuclear disarmament as one 
of the highest priorities of the international community. 
We have put forward a number of proposals on nuclear 
disarmament at the United Nations, including a 
working paper in 2006 proposing elements to fashion a 
new consensus on disarmament and non-proliferation. 
 Last year, at the sixty-third session of the General 
Assembly, consistent with India’s long-standing 
commitment as articulated in the Rajiv Gandhi Action 
Plan in 1988, India reiterated its proposal that a nuclear 
weapons convention be convened to ban the 
production, development, stockpiling and use of 
nuclear weapons and to provide for their complete 
elimination within a time frame. The international 
nuclear order cannot be discriminatory. Further, States 
must fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken. 
Once more, with feeling and with commitment, India 
reiterates that proposal. 
 We will continue to engage with key countries to 
intensify this debate in the hope that greater 
international understanding will lend itself to a firm 
commitment to action on nuclear disarmament. It was 
in that spirit that we supported the adoption of a 
programme of work, including on a fissile material cut-
off treaty (FMCT), at the Conference on Disarmament 
in May this year. It is consistent with India’s position 
to work with others at the Conference on Disarmament 
towards the conclusion of a non-discriminatory, 
multilaterally negotiated and internationally verifiable 
FMCT, provided it corresponds with India’s national 
security interests. We remain committed to a voluntary, 
unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing.  
 India stands committed to the safeguarding of 
international peace and security. Over the past five 
decades, we have contributed more than 
100,000 peacekeepers and have suffered a high number 
of casualties during this time. Strengthening the 
normative basis for peacekeeping operations and 
giving major troop-contributing countries a greater say 
will serve to make peacekeeping more effective. 
 Peace, security, stability and the welfare of our 
neighbourhood are vital for India. There is a new 
beginning in Sri Lanka; in Nepal, strengthening the 
peace process is in our collective interest; and in 
Afghanistan, the international community must remain 
intensively engaged and support its development 
efforts and the maintenance of peace and stability. 
India is committed to establishing good-neighbourly 
relations and resolving all outstanding issues with 
Pakistan through peaceful dialogue. 
 The barbaric terrorist attack on the innocent 
people of Mumbai on 26 November 2008 reminded us 
of the daily and malignant menace that terrorism poses 
to all countries. There can be no justification 
whatsoever for such mindless terrorist acts. It is our 
collective responsibility and duty to work together to 
ensure that terrorists and the organizers, perpetrators 
and supporters of such crimes are brought to justice. 
 In order to strengthen the international legal 
framework of the fight against terrorism, India has 
proposed a comprehensive convention on international 
  
 
09-52592 30 
 
terrorism. Discussions on the draft have gone on for far 
too long. It is time that the convention be finally 
adopted. India earnestly calls upon all countries to 
make serious efforts in the next few weeks to arrive at 
a consensus on the text. 
 In conclusion, I wish to reiterate India’s steadfast 
commitment to the work of the United Nations. 
Speaking to this Assembly 41 years ago, Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi said:  
  “The United Nations is the trustee of the 
world’s peace and represents the hopes of 
mankind. Its very existence gives a feeling of 
assurance that the justice of true causes can be 
brought fearlessly before the world. This 
Assembly and the agencies of the United Nations 
should, in all that they do, sustain those hopes 
and promote the causes of peace.” (A/PV.1693, 
para. 150)  
The truth and conviction of these words are more 
meaningful today than ever before.Nearly 62 years ago, the 
United Nations recognized the right of the Jews, an 
ancient people 3,500 years old, to a State of their own 
in their ancestral homeland. I stand here today as the 
Prime Minister of Israel, the Jewish State, and I speak 
to the Assembly on behalf of my country and my 
people. 
 The United Nations was founded after the 
carnage of the Second World War and the horrors of 
the Holocaust. It was charged with preventing the 
reoccurrence of such horrendous events. Nothing has 
undermined that mission, nothing has impeded it more, 
than the systematic assault on the truth. Yesterday, the 
President of Iran stood at this very rostrum spewing his 
latest anti-Semitic rants. Just a few days earlier, he 
again claimed that the Holocaust was a lie. 
 Last month, I went to a villa in a suburb of Berlin 
called Wannsee. There, on 20 January 1942, after a 
hearty meal, senior Nazi officials met and decided to 
exterminate my people. They left detailed minutes of 
that meeting that have been preserved for posterity by 
successive German Governments. I have here a copy of 
the minutes of the meeting of senior Nazi officials 
instructing the Nazi Government exactly how to carry 
out the extermination of the Jewish people. Is that 
protocol a lie? Are the German Government and all 
German Governments lying? 
 The day before I was in Wannsee, in Berlin I was 
given the original construction plans for the 
Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. I now hold in 
my hand the Auschwitz-Birkenau plans. They contain 
the signature of Heinrich Himmler, Hitler’s deputy, 
himself. Are those plans for the Auschwitz-Birkenau 
concentration camp, where 1 million Jews were 
murdered, a lie too? In June, President Obama visited 
another concentration camp, one of many — the 
 
 
09-52320 36 
 
Buchenwald concentration camp. Did President Obama 
pay tribute to a lie? 
 And what of the Auschwitz survivors, whose 
arms still bear the tattooed numbers branded on them 
by the Nazis? Are those tattoos a lie, too? One third of 
all Jews perished in the great conflagration of the 
Holocaust. Nearly every Jewish family, including my 
own, was affected. My wife’s grandparents, her 
father’s two sisters and three brothers, and all the 
aunts, uncles and cousins were murdered by the Nazis. 
Is that a lie?   
 Yesterday, the man who calls the Holocaust a lie 
spoke from this rostrum. I commend those who refused 
to come and those who left in protest. They stood up 
for moral clarity and brought honour to their countries. 
But to those who gave that denier of the Holocaust a 
hearing, I say on behalf of my people, the Jewish 
people, and of decent people everywhere: Have they no 
shame? Have they no decency? A mere six decades 
after the Holocaust, they give legitimacy to a man who 
denies the murder of 6 million Jews, while promising 
to wipe out the State of Israel, the State of the Jews. 
 That is a disgrace. It is a mockery of the Charter 
of the United Nations. Perhaps some representatives 
think that that man and his odious regime threaten only 
the Jews. If they believe that, they are wrong — dead 
wrong. History has shown us time and again that what 
starts with attacks on the Jews eventually ends up 
engulfing many, many others.  
 For this Iranian regime is fuelled by an extreme 
fundamentalism that burst onto the world scene three 
decades ago after lying dormant for centuries. In the 
past 30 years, that fanaticism has swept across the 
globe with a murderous violence that knows no bounds 
and with a cold-blooded impartiality in the choice of 
its victims. It has callously slaughtered Muslims, 
Christians, Jews, Hindus and many others. The 
adherents of that unforgiving creed, although it is 
comprised of different offshoots, seek to return 
humanity to medieval times. Wherever they can, they 
impose a backward, regimented society where women, 
minorities, gays or anyone else deemed not to be a true 
believer is brutally subjugated.  
 The struggle against that fanaticism does not pit 
faith against faith, or civilization against civilization. It 
pits civilization against barbarism, the twenty-first 
century against the ninth, and those who sanctify life 
against those who glorify death. The primitivism of the 
ninth century ought to be no match for the progress of 
the twenty-first. The allure of freedom, the power of 
technology and the reach of communications should 
surely win the day. Ultimately, the past cannot triumph 
over the future, and our future offers all nations 
magnificent bounties of hope because the pace of 
progress is growing, and growing exponentially.  
 It took us centuries to get from the printing press 
to the telephone, decades to get from the telephone to 
the personal computer, and only a few years to get 
from the personal computer to the Internet. What 
seemed impossible a few years ago is already outdated, 
and we can scarcely fathom the changes that are yet to 
come. We will crack the genetic code. We will cure the 
incurable. We will lengthen our lives. We will find a 
cheap alternative to fossil fuel, and we will clean up 
the planet.    
 I am proud that my country, Israel, is at the 
forefront of many of those advances in science and 
technology, medicine and biology, agriculture and 
water, and energy and the environment. Those 
innovations in my country and in many others offer 
humanity a sunlit future of unimagined promise. 
 However, if the most primitive fanaticism can 
acquire the most deadly weapons, the march of history 
could be reversed for a time and, like the belated 
victory over the Nazis, the forces of progress and 
freedom prevail only after a horrific toll of blood and 
fortune has been exacted from mankind. That is why 
the greatest threat facing the world today is the 
marriage between religious fundamentalism and the 
weapons of mass destruction.  
 The most urgent challenge facing this body today 
is to prevent the tyrants of Tehran from acquiring 
nuclear weapons. Are the Members of the United 
Nations up to that challenge? Will the international 
community confront a despotism that terrorizes its own 
people as they bravely stand up for freedom? Will it 
take action against the dictators who stole an election 
in broad daylight and then gunned down Iranian 
protesters, who died on the sidewalks and in the streets 
choking in their own blood? Will the international 
community thwart the world’s most pernicious sponsor 
and practitioner of terrorism? Above all, will the 
international community stop the terrorist regime of 
Iran from developing atomic weapons and thereby 
endangering the peace of the entire world? 
 
 
37 09-52320 
 
 The people of Iran are courageously standing up 
to this regime. People of goodwill around the world 
stand with them, as do the thousands who have been 
protesting outside this Hall throughout the week. Will 
the United Nations stand with them? 
 The jury is still out on the United Nations. Recent 
signs are not encouraging. Rather than condemning the 
terrorists and their Iranian patrons, some here in the 
United Nations have condemned their victims. This is 
exactly what a recent United Nations report on Gaza 
did, falsely equating the terrorists with those they 
targeted. 
 For eight long years, Hamas fired rockets from 
Gaza on nearby Israeli cities and citizens — thousands 
of missiles and mortars hailing down from the sky on 
schools, homes, shopping centres and bus stops. Year 
after year, as these missiles were deliberately fired on 
our civilians, not one single United Nations resolution 
was passed condemning those criminal attacks. We 
heard nothing — absolutely nothing — from the 
Human Rights Council of the United Nations, a 
misnamed institution if ever there was one. 
 In 2005, hoping to advance peace, Israel 
unilaterally withdrew from every inch of Gaza. It was 
very painful. We dismantled 21 settlements, really 
bedroom communities and farms. We uprooted over 
8,000 Israelis; we just yanked them out of their homes. 
We did this because many in Israel believed that it 
would win peace. Well, we did not get peace. Instead 
we got an Iranian-backed terror base 50 miles from 
Tel Aviv. But life in the Israeli towns and cities 
immediately adjacent to Gaza became nothing less than 
a nightmare. The Hamas rocket attacks not only 
continued after we left, they actually increased 
dramatically. They increased tenfold. And again, the 
United Nations was silent — absolutely silent. 
 Well, after eight years of this unremitting assault, 
Israel was finally forced to respond. But how should 
we have responded? There is only one example in 
history of thousands of rockets being fired on a 
country’s civilian population. This happened when the 
Nazis rocketed British cities during the Second World 
War. During that war, the Allies levelled German cities, 
causing hundreds of thousands of casualties. I am not 
passing judgement; I am stating a fact, a fact that is the 
product of the decisions of great and honourable 
men — the leaders of Britain and the United States — 
fighting an evil force in the Second World War. 
 It is also a fact that Israel chose to respond 
differently. Faced with an enemy committing a double 
war crime — firing on civilians while hiding behind 
civilians — Israel sought to conduct surgical strikes 
against the rocket-launchers themselves. That was no 
easy task because the terrorists were firing their 
missiles from homes and schools, using mosques as 
weapons depots and missile caches, and ferreting 
explosives in ambulances. 
 Israel, by contrast, tried to minimize casualties by 
urging Palestinian civilians to vacate the targeted 
areas. We dropped countless flyers over their homes. 
We sent thousands and thousands of text messages to 
the Palestinian residents. We made thousands and 
thousands of cellular phone calls urging them to 
vacate, to leave. Never has a country gone to such 
extraordinary lengths to remove the enemy’s civilian 
population from harm’s way.  
 Yet faced with an absolutely clear-cut case of 
aggressor and victim, who do you think the United 
Nations Human Rights Council decided to condemn? 
Israel. A democracy legitimately defending itself 
against terror is morally hanged, drawn and quartered, 
and given an unfair trial to boot. By these twisted 
standards, the Human Rights Council would have 
dragged Roosevelt and Churchill to the dock as war 
criminals. What a perversion of truth! What a 
perversion of justice! 
 The delegates to the United Nations and the 
Governments that they represent have a decision to 
make. Will they accept this farce? Because if they do, 
the United Nations would revert to its darkest days, 
when the worst violators of human rights sat in 
judgement against the law-abiding democracies, when 
Zionism was equated with racism and when an 
automatic majority could be mustered to declare that 
the Earth is flat. If you had to choose a date when the 
United Nations began its descent, almost a freefall, and 
lost the respect of many thoughtful people in the 
international community, it was the day in 1975 it 
decided to equate Zionism with racism. 
 Now this body has a choice to make. If it does 
not reject this biased report, it would vitiate itself, it 
would recommence the process of vitiating its own 
relevance and importance. But it would also do 
something else. It would send the message to terrorists 
everywhere that terrorism pays: all you have to do is 
 
 
09-52320 38 
 
launch your attacks from densely populated areas, and 
you will win immunity. 
 A third point: in condemning Israel, this body 
would also deal a mortal blow to peace. Let me explain 
why. When Israel left Gaza, many hoped that the 
missile attacks would stop. Others believed that, even 
if they did not stop, at the very least Israel, in having 
made this extraordinary gesture for peace, would have 
international legitimacy to exercise its right of self-
defence if peace failed. What legitimacy? What self-
defence? 
 The same United Nations that cheered Israel as it 
left Gaza and promised to back our right of self-
defence now accuses us — my people, my country — 
of being war criminals? And for what? For acting 
responsibly in self-defence? For acting in a way that 
any country would act, with a restraint unmatched by 
many? What a travesty! 
 Israel justly defended itself against terror. This 
biased and unjust report provides a clear-cut test for all 
Governments. Will the Assembly stand with Israel or 
will it stand with the terrorists? We must know the 
answer to that question now. Now, not later. Because if 
Israel is again asked to take more risks for peace, we 
must know today that the Assembly will stand with us 
tomorrow. Only if we have the confidence that we can 
defend ourselves can we take further risks for peace. 
 Make no mistake: all of Israel wants peace. Any 
time an Arab leader genuinely wanted peace with us, 
we made peace. We made peace with Egypt led by 
Anwar Sadat. We made peace with Jordan led by King 
Hussein. And if the Palestinians truly want peace, my 
Government and I, and my people, will make peace. 
But we want a genuine peace, a defensible peace, a 
permanent peace.  
 In 1947, this body voted to establish two States 
for two peoples — a Jewish State and an Arab State. 
The Jews accepted that resolution. The Arabs rejected 
it and invaded the embryonic Jewish State with the 
hopes of annihilating it. 
 We ask the Palestinians to finally do what they 
have refused to do for 62 years: say yes to a Jewish 
State. It is as simple, as clear and as elementary as that. 
Just as we are asked to recognize a nation-State of the 
Palestinian people, the Palestinians must be asked to 
recognize the nation-State of the Jewish people. The 
Jewish people are not foreign conquerors in the Land 
of Israel. It is the land of our forefathers. 
 Inscribed on the walls outside this building is the 
great Biblical vision of peace: “Nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation. They shall learn war no more.” 
These words were spoken by the great Jewish prophet 
Isaiah 2,800 years ago as he walked in my country, in 
my city, in the hills of Judea and in the streets of 
Jerusalem.  
 We are not strangers to this land. This is our 
homeland. But as deeply connected as we are to our 
homeland, we also recognize that the Palestinians also 
live there and they want a home of their own. We want 
to live side by side with them — two free peoples 
living in peace, living in prosperity, living in dignity.  
 Peace, prosperity and dignity require one other 
element: we must have security. The Palestinians 
should have all the powers to govern themselves except 
a handful of powers that could endanger Israel. That is 
why the Palestinian State must be effectively 
demilitarized. I say “effectively” because we do not 
want another Gaza, another south Lebanon, another 
Iranian-backed terror base abutting Jerusalem and 
perched on the hills a few kilometres from Tel Aviv. 
 We want peace. I believe that with goodwill and 
with hard work such a peace can be achieved. But it 
requires that all of us roll back the forces of terror led 
by Iran that seek to destroy peace, that seek to 
eliminate Israel and to overthrow the world order.  The 
question facing the international community is whether 
it is prepared to confront those forces, or will it 
accommodate them. 
 Over 70 years ago, Winston Churchill lamented 
what he called the “confirmed unteachability of 
mankind”. By that he meant the unfortunate habit of 
civilized societies to sleep and to slumber until danger 
nearly overtakes them. Churchill bemoaned what he 
called the  
 “want of foresight, unwillingness to act when 
action would be simple and effective, lack of 
clear thinking, confusion of counsel until the 
emergency comes, until self-preservation strikes 
its jarring gong …”. 
 I speak here today in the hope that Churchill’s 
assessment of the “unteachability of mankind” is for 
once proven wrong. I speak here today in the hope that 
 
 
39 09-52320 
 
we can learn from history, that we can prevent danger 
in time. 
 In the spirit of the timeless words spoken to 
Joshua over 3,000 years ago, let us be strong and of 
good courage.  Let us confront this peril, secure our 
future and, God willing, forge an enduring peace for 
generations to come. 
(spoke in Hebrew) 
 May God bless his people with peace; may God  
give strength to his people; may God bless his people 
with peace.To the powers, to the 
voices, to the four winds: I greet you all.
 I have addressed the Assembly in Te Reo Maori, 
the indigenous language of New Zealand, and I bring 
warm Pacific greetings from all New Zealanders. 
 I am deeply honoured to lead New Zealand’s 
delegation to the General Assembly for the first time. 
Like every New Zealand Prime Minister since 1945, I 
stand here today to reaffirm my country’s commitment 
to the United Nations and the United Nations Charter. 
 The founding Members of the United Nations 
gathered in San Francisco in 1945 to create this 
Organization out of the ashes of the most destructive 
war and the most debilitating depression in modern 
history. They believed in the larger freedom of a world 
where collective action might avert common crises. 
They believed in the rule of law, by which all States 
would be held to a universal standard, and in a world 
where all peoples, faiths and cultures could flourish. 
They believed in a future in which every human being 
would be free from want and free from fear. And they 
wanted an international Organization and architecture 
that could deliver those benefits.  
 New Zealand was active among those founding 
Members in San Francisco. And, as a small, 
independent and diverse country in the Pacific, New 
Zealand still has a stake in the United Nations — this 
great meeting place for all States. 
 I have benefited personally from efforts to secure 
those ideals. My family fled persecution in Europe, and 
I was privileged to grow up in a new world where a 
child of immigrants is now accorded the extraordinary 
privilege of leading his country and addressing this 
Assembly on its behalf. 
 We meet at a time of many challenges. With 
130 heads of State and Government assembled here 
this week, the present session of the General Assembly 
represents our greatest opportunity since the 2005 
World Summit to reaffirm our collective resolve. New 
Zealand embraces that opportunity. Today, I will focus 
on some of the most pressing issues demanding 
collective responses from us. 
 The crisis in the global economy continues. We 
must remain resolute in our efforts to stabilize the 
global economy in order to permit a return to 
sustainable growth. New Zealand welcomes the actions 
of the Group of 20 (G-20) over the past year. But, in 
commending those efforts, we call on the G-20 to heed 
 
 
31 09-52470 
 
the voices of the world’s small economies and to 
ensure that they are also heard in global decision-
making. 
 Free and fair trade will be the principal engine for 
driving developing countries out of poverty and 
bringing greater prosperity to all. An essential 
component in our response to the global economic 
crisis must therefore be a balanced and ambitious 
conclusion to the Doha Round of world trade talks. A 
genuinely global agreement that reduces tariffs, 
eliminates export subsidies, reduces domestic subsidies 
and increases market access will see benefits flow to 
all States. At a time when all countries are suffering 
from the brunt of the current economic crisis, further 
delay is inexcusable. 
 As one of the world’s first truly open economies, 
New Zealand has an unwavering commitment to trade 
liberalization and to the pursuit of bilateral, regional 
and global free trade agreements. We support the call 
of the Secretary-General for the immediate suspension 
of price controls and other agricultural trade 
restrictions, in order to reduce soaring food prices and 
help millions cope with the highest food prices in 
30 years. 
 Therefore, I call on all those States and groupings 
that have broken their undertakings and reintroduced 
protectionist measures to reconsider. Those actions are 
as harmful as they are unacceptable. Agriculture, which 
is so important for developing countries in particular, is 
one of the sectors most affected. 
 The escalation of poverty is a result of the 
economic crisis. New Zealand is, naturally, proud of 
the efforts of the United Nations Development 
Programme to strengthen its focus as the largest United 
Nations development agency on poverty and the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.  
 For its part, New Zealand pledges to continue to 
increase its official development assistance, with a 
clear focus on the Pacific Islands region. Aid 
effectiveness is just as important as the quantum of aid. 
That is why, last month, we committed to the Cairns 
Compact, which will strengthen development 
coordination in the Pacific islands. 
 The major focus of the General Assembly this 
year must be on the challenge of climate change. 
Climate change demands innovation and a global 
response. The world cannot afford to contemplate 
failure at Copenhagen. Political leadership is needed, 
and it is on display.  
 At the Summit on climate change this week, the 
leaders of the world’s three biggest economies showed 
their determination both to make Copenhagen a success 
and to take action themselves. All countries must take 
action that reflects our individual circumstances, 
responsibilities and capabilities. 
 For our part, New Zealand is committed to 
securing a durable and meaningful agreement on 
climate change — an agreement that is both 
environmentally effective and economically efficient. I 
have set a target for New Zealand of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 10 to 20 per cent below 
1990 levels by 2020, if there is a comprehensive global 
agreement. That amounts to a per capita drop of 35 to 
42 per cent since 1990. 
 New Zealand is acutely conscious that most of 
our greenhouse gas emissions come from livestock 
methane emissions, which so far no technology can 
reduce. At the same time we are proud of our role as a 
food producer to the world and the contribution we can 
make to assuring food security for the world’s people. 
 Our challenge is to find a way to balance growth 
in agricultural production with the need to reduce 
emissions and reach climate change targets.  
 That is not just a challenge for New Zealand, but 
one for the world. Agricultural emissions make up 
14 per cent of all emissions worldwide. As demand for 
food rises, so will those emissions. Yet so far the only 
known way to achieve emission reductions from 
agriculture is through reductions in output, which is 
not an acceptable response — not for New Zealand, 
and not for a growing world that seeks freedom from 
hunger. 
 A better response to this challenge must be found. 
In my view, the response must draw on the power and 
possibility of science. Just as New Zealand is proud of 
its agricultural producers, so are we proud of our role 
in agricultural research. This research has resulted in 
scientific and technological advances that have 
improved production and fed virtually millions of 
people. 
 But advancing research in the area of emission 
reduction requires a commitment so broad that it is 
beyond the capacity of any one individual country. 
  
 
09-52470 32 
 
That is a challenge that requires collective action, and 
it is collective action that I call for today. 
 New Zealand has developed a proposal for a 
global alliance on the reduction of agricultural 
emissions. This alliance would undertake international 
research and investment into new technologies and 
practices to help reduce agriculture-related emissions 
and would seek to achieve greater coordination of 
existing efforts. 
 Through a global alliance we can find solutions 
faster, make better use of the money that is being spent 
around the world and encourage all countries and 
companies to do more. We have been delighted with 
the interest that our proposal has received so far, and 
we will continue working with others to explore the 
concept. Today, my call to other agricultural producers 
of the world is to rise to this challenge and join New 
Zealand in this research effort.  
 I now want to address some of the security crises 
that we confront. Yesterday I had the honour to observe 
the high-level Security Council meeting on 
disarmament and non-proliferation. As a country with a 
proud record of promoting nuclear disarmament and 
non-proliferation, I was heartened by the expressions 
of support for a world free of nuclear weapons. We 
must all take full advantage of this historic moment to 
advance the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation 
agenda. We owe it to our generation and to those who 
follow us to move our vision for a world free from 
nuclear weapons forward. As a proudly nuclear-free 
nation and a country that has been at the forefront of 
that debate since the 1970s, New Zealand stands ready 
to play its part.  
 We are optimistic about the prospects for 
progress. Last week, New Zealand presided over the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in Vienna, Austria. Preventing the spread of 
nuclear weapons through the implementation of 
safeguards under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
is a fundamental pillar of the Agency’s work. Next year 
sees the quinquennial review conference of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
 New Zealand will actively work with our New 
Agenda Coalition partners for a meaningful outcome at 
that conference to bring us closer to a truly secure 
world.  
 We will also continue to address the humanitarian 
harm caused by conventional weapons. We will work 
for a robust, action-oriented outcome later this year at 
the second review conference of the Ottawa 
Convention on Landmines. 
 Looking back, I am proud of the role that New 
Zealand was able to play in the negotiation of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. The Government 
attaches priority to passing legislation to enable us to 
ratify this very significant treaty. New Zealand also 
continues to play its part in maintaining and promoting 
international peace and security. 
 Peacekeeping remains one of this Organization’s 
most essential tasks and most solemn responsibilities to 
its Members. While United Nations peacekeeping has 
been significantly strengthened since the testing it 
underwent in the 1990s, the demands now being placed 
on it are severe. 
 I want to express my profound gratitude to those 
civilians and military personnel who place their lives at 
risk to support peace and live up to the ideals of the 
Charter of the United Nations. Ensuring that United 
Nations peacekeeping is as effective and responsive as 
possible must therefore remain one of the 
Organization’s most urgent priorities. 
 The United Nations provides the legal mandate — 
and often the operational effectiveness — for our joint 
efforts to achieve and maintain peace and security. New 
Zealand is firmly committed to supporting United 
Nations peacekeeping — both its own operations and 
others that it has mandated, such as those in which we 
are involved in Afghanistan, the Solomon Islands and 
Timor-Leste. 
 All too often, however, the United Nations has 
found itself unable to respond to emerging crises. New 
Zealand therefore strongly supports the concept of 
responsibility to protect. I am pleased at the solid 
foundation that the General Assembly’s recent debate 
on that responsibility has laid for its implementation. 
 New Zealand also strongly supports the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). It is a fundamental 
tenet of our domestic legal systems that wrongdoers 
must be brought to justice. The ICC is the mechanism 
for applying that same principle to persons accused of 
the most serious international crimes. 
 New Zealand takes very seriously its 
responsibilities for creating and maintaining peace and 
 
 
33 09-52470 
 
security in its region and in the world. I am therefore 
pleased to confirm New Zealand’s candidature for the 
United Nations Security Council for 2015-2016 in the 
elections to be held in 2014. In advancing its 
candidature, New Zealand does so as a State committed 
to upholding the international rule of law and to 
providing a strong and principled Pacific voice on 
behalf of small States like ourselves with an interest in 
a fairer and more secure world. 
 We all have a stake in a world where peace and 
the rule of law prevail, where all States are secure and 
can prosper and where all people are guaranteed the 
human rights and fundamental freedoms promised 
them in the Charter.  
 But we also know that solutions to the problems 
we collectively face do not lie with inspirational goals 
and promises that can be — and far too often are — 
quickly and quietly forgotten and ignored. Hard, 
pragmatic decisions must be made. Enforceable 
solutions must be implemented. 
 We know that effective, collective action is in 
every country’s long-term, national interest. That is 
what New Zealand believed in 1945, and I recommit 
now to taking action to live up to the ideals of the 
United Nations Charter, here, in this great Hall, this 
evening.Today, 
speaking from this high rostrum, I would like to 
highlight five topics that are, in my view, important to 
all of us and our common approaches to the 
international agenda. 
 The first is the timing of this meeting and the 
moment that humankind is currently experiencing. This 
session of the General Assembly is taking place at a 
very critical and complex time. It can be said without 
exaggeration that we are living through one of the 
watershed moments of modern history. Besides the 
economic crisis — the first large-scale crisis of the era 
of globalization — global development as a whole 
continues to be threatened by regional and local 
conflicts, terrorism, cross-border crime, food shortages 
and climate change. The impact of the crisis continues 
to be felt by most countries of the world. Although so 
far we have been able, it seems, to avoid the very worst 
scenarios, the question remains: how to overcome the 
huge imbalances and deficits — amounting to trillions 
of dollars — accumulated in the global and national 
economies. 
 Our collective agenda for unification has been 
dictated by life itself, which also dictates the growing 
need for the United Nations as a time-tested 
mechanism for harmonizing the interests of different 
States and peoples. As never before, we are feeling the 
need for informal collective leadership and for an 
increased role for such platforms as the G-8 and the 
more recent G-20, as well as other negotiation and 
mediation forums, and all the more because these 
operate not on a model of opposition, but rather to 
advance the converging interests of their participants. 
 At this morning’s meeting, the President of the 
United States addressed this Assembly, and I would 
like to endorse one of the thoughts he voiced. He stated 
that no single country can or should attempt to 
dominate others, and that is absolutely true. However, 
these agreed approaches need to be implemented in 
some way, including through the United Nations 
system. 
 Another distinctive feature of modern times is the 
increasing role of regional entities, which are growing 
more active on every continent. This trend is entirely 
consistent with the principles of the United Nations. 
Russia, for its part — together with its partners in the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, in the 
framework of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 
and with its fellow BRIC countries Brazil, India and 
China — will continue to bolster the mechanisms of 
regional interaction. These mechanisms facilitate a 
collective response to common threats, while 
mitigating the consequences of the crisis for our 
citizens and increasing the sustainability of our 
national economies. 
 Secondly, I want to touch on the issue of existing 
problems. Allow me to dwell on those that cannot be 
effectively addressed without the participation or 
outside the framework of the United Nations. The first 
task in this regard is to address the imbalance of 
existing mechanisms of global economic governance, 
the inadequacy of their rules of the game, and the 
chasm between the financial markets and the real 
economy. We need to make joint efforts to establish 
financial and economic models that will protect all of 
us from such turmoil in the future. 
 Virtually all countries have seen a drop in output 
and in the standards of living of millions of their 
 
 
17 09-52228 
 
citizens. The crisis has exacerbated social problems, 
painfully tested young people at the very start of their 
lives, and caused significant growth in unemployment 
in all countries. Russia is no exception in this. 
 A painful blow has been delivered to our plans to 
alleviate poverty. A real threat of disruption of the 
Millennium Development Goals has emerged. We must 
do our utmost to prevent such a development. Donor 
assistance to countries in need cannot be postponed 
until some other time. The tasks set out as a priority by 
the international community must absolutely be 
addressed. The arrangements adopted at the G-20 
summits and the United Nations Conference on the 
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on 
Development must be implemented — and they must 
be implemented within the deadlines that we ourselves 
set. 
 The second major task in this context is to 
address the issues of global energy security. Three 
years ago at the Saint Petersburg G-8 summit in 
Russia, the principles for a new legal framework for 
such cooperation were formulated. The goal is to 
harmonize the interests of all participants in the energy 
chain: suppliers, consumers and intermediaries or 
transiters. It was not so long ago that we solidified 
these principles, and we invite all States to engage in 
discussion on them. We believe that such discussions 
should be conducted with the active involvement of 
specialized multilateral institutions, including, of 
course, the agencies of the United Nations family. 
 The third task that Russia deems to be potentially 
critical is the comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations itself. The United Nations must adapt 
itself in a rational way to the new global realities. It 
should strengthen its influence while preserving its 
multinational nature and the integrity of the Charter’s 
key provisions. The most important component of the 
revitalization of the United Nations is reform of the 
Security Council. The time has come to speed up the 
search for a compromise formula for the Security 
Council’s expansion, and of course to increase its 
efficiency. 
 The third issue I want to touch on is 
disarmament. The process of multilateral disarmament 
under United Nations auspices is an extremely 
important task. There are grounds for hope since, as 
members are aware, a number of positive trends have 
emerged in overcoming the protracted crisis. The 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva has adopted its 
programme of work. I should also like to mention the 
Russian-Chinese initiative to develop a treaty to 
prevent the deployment of weapons in outer space, as 
well as our current proposal to universalize the 
Russian-American Treaty on the Elimination of 
Intermediate-range and Shorter-range Missiles. 
 Russia will unswervingly follow the path of 
verifiable and irreversible reductions in nuclear 
weapons as an essential element of a new start in our 
relations with the United States. In Moscow in July this 
year, President Obama and I not only signed a relevant 
document, but also agreed on a mandate for further 
negotiations to elaborate a new, legally binding treaty. 
This treaty should replace the Treaty on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, which 
expires in December. 
 Of special importance here is the relationship 
between strategic offensive and defensive arms. In my 
meeting with President Obama this morning, we 
discussed the recently announced adjustments to the 
United States’ planned development of a missile 
defence system. I should like to state in this highest of 
forums that we view this decision as a constructive step 
in the right direction, which has deservedly received 
numerous expressions of support from the international 
community. Russia is ready to engage in detailed 
discussions with the American side and to undertake 
relevant initiatives in this field in order to reach 
mutually acceptable agreement. 
 Without resolving such problems as missile 
defence and non-nuclear strategic offensive arms, it 
will be simply impossible to achieve real progress in 
the field of nuclear disarmament. I believe that the 
work on this new treaty will be fully consistent with 
relevant provisions of the joint document endorsed by 
the President of the United States and myself at our 
meeting in Moscow. 
 We believe that other nuclear States should join 
the disarmament efforts of Russia and the United 
States. There is no need to wait for further progress in 
the Russian-American disarmament process. We can 
begin forthwith to elaborate acceptable and practical 
arrangements that take into account the differences in 
the size of potentials. In that respect, we could draw on 
international experience in the twentieth century, for 
example the 1921-1922 Washington Conference on 
naval armaments, where participants agreed on the 
  
 
09-52228 18 
 
maximum size of their fleets without insisting on parity 
in absolute terms. If we take the same approach today, 
based on the current status of nuclear arsenals, we 
could send the rest of the world a sure signal that the 
unaccounted numbers will be added to the equation of 
strategic stability. 
 Pursuing nuclear disarmament, strengthening the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and promoting the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy will be at the very heart 
of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). We cherish the hope that it will be successful. 
 The global nuclear security summit scheduled for 
April 2010 will provide a good opportunity for a more 
detailed discussion of these issues. We support that 
initiative. We have also agreed with the United States 
Administration on joint steps for further progress on 
such aspects of nuclear security as the prevention of 
nuclear terrorism, expanding access to the benefits of 
peaceful nuclear energy to all signatories implementing 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons in good faith, and other decisions. We call for 
collective cooperation on these matters. 
 In order to reach a common understanding on 
such important issues, we must engage all nations  
and influential international organizations in the 
aforementioned negotiation processes. The international 
community, it must be said, has at its disposal such 
tried and tested measures for enhancing regional and 
international security as nuclear-weapon-free zones. In 
particular, there is a very pressing need to establish a 
zone in the Middle East free of all types of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery. This is a 
long-standing issue, with respect to which a resolution 
was adopted at the 1995 NPT Review Conference. 
 Russia, as a member of the Quartet of 
international mediators on the Middle East settlement, 
has consistently supported efforts to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime in the Middle East. 
Russia has made specific proposals within the 
framework of the NPT review process to seek mutually 
acceptable ways of implementing earlier decisions on 
this matter. All countries of the region need to take an 
active stance on this issue and demonstrate their 
willingness to achieve that end. 
 We also need to accelerate work towards a 
mechanism to ensure peace and security in North-East 
Asia. Russia has made proposals in this regard to the 
participants in the Six-Party Talks. In the present 
circumstances, this task is more urgent than ever. 
 The fourth topic I wish to address is that of 
regional conflicts and regional security. We intend to 
continue to participate in the search for effective 
options for settling regional conflicts. We are 
convinced that the use of force can only exacerbate 
such situations. That was demonstrated by the reckless 
attempt by the Georgian authorities last year to resolve 
the problems in their relations with South Ossetia by 
military means. 
 At that time, in August 2008, we came very close 
to a situation in which a local armed conflict had the 
potential to grow into a full-scale war. I am certain that 
this is clearly understood by everyone in this Hall 
today. In order to ensure that this should never recur, 
we need clear and effective mechanisms to implement 
the principle of the indivisibility of security. Without 
such a mechanism, we will not be able to move beyond 
the legacy of the past or overcome existing prejudices. 
I wish to stress that irresponsible regimes should not 
have any opportunity whatsoever to foment disputes 
among other countries. 
 The role and place of the modern nation in 
ensuring global security is a topic of the greatest 
relevance today. We have witnessed situations time and 
again in which problems emerging within the confines 
of an individual State have acquired a regional or even 
global character. The incompetence and, very often, 
ineffectiveness of national Government institutions can 
have consequences that are fraught with risks for 
several countries. The prevention of such an outcome 
is of course a very complex and sensitive issue, but one 
upon which we must deliberate together. 
 These issues were the focus of discussions at a 
recent conference held in Russia. The outcome was 
quite clear. What we require in the future is a smart 
foreign policy. The current global crisis is not limited 
to economics; it is also a crisis of ideas. It is the 
accumulation of a critical mass of outdated policies 
and development models. 
 Having developed the initiative to sign a new 
European security treaty, Russia has proposed taking a 
fresh approach to this problem and, above all, 
abandoning outdated policies. We all hope that the cold 
war has been left behind, but the world has not become 
more secure. What we need today are modern solutions 
and clear legal frameworks for implementing existing 
 
 
19 09-52228 
 
political commitments. We do not need declarations, 
appeals or demagogues; what we need are clear legal 
frameworks, including to enshrine the principle under 
international law that one must not seek to ensure one’s 
own security at the expense of the security of others. 
 Our initiative concerns the Euro-Atlantic space. 
However, its key provision on the indivisibility of 
security is a universal principle that is applicable to all 
regions of the world and is fully consistent with the 
letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter. The 
principle of the indivisibility of security should be an 
integral part of current international law. 
 Values are the last issue that I wish to mention 
from this rostrum. The protection of human rights and 
interests and the universal application of commonly 
recognized norms and principles in that area should be 
the basis for strengthening trust and stability in 
international relations. We are all united by values that 
are rooted in morality, religion, customs and traditions. 
I am talking about such fundamental concepts as the 
right to life, tolerance of dissent, responsibility towards 
one’s family, charity and compassion, which are the 
foundation both of daily life and of relations among 
States. 
 However, unfortunately, it is the reality that the 
world is witnessing growing nationalism and numerous 
manifestations of religious intolerance and hatred. That 
is why we believe that establishing a high-level group 
on interfaith dialogue under the Director-General of 
UNESCO is extremely valuable. It is particularly 
relevant on the eve of 2010, which the United Nations 
has declared International Year for the Rapprochement 
of Cultures. 
 To conclude, I cannot fail to mention, as I stand 
here, another topic that is very close to the heart of all 
citizens of our country and all peoples of the world. 
Next year, we are going to celebrate the sixty-fifth 
anniversary of the end of the Second World War. 
Russia put forward a proposal to adopt a relevant 
General Assembly resolution and to hold a special 
session to commemorate all victims of that war in May 
next year. We cannot allow its horrible lessons to be 
forgotten. 
 However, from time to time we see neo-fascist 
organizations raise their heads. Racial, national and 
ethnic crimes are being committed. Attempts are being 
made to whitewash Nazism, to deny the Holocaust and 
to review the decisions of the Nuremberg Tribunal. I 
am convinced that strong and joint resistance to 
manifestations of neo-Nazism and to attempts to revise 
the results of the Second World War enshrined in the 
United Nations Charter should remain a priority task of 
the Organization. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
principal achievements of the international community 
in the twentieth century. This Organization and its 
fruitful activities have become a symbol of the 
twentieth century, and there is simply no alternative to 
these activities. We have no right to forget that the 
United Nations possesses unique international 
legitimacy, and we all must preserve and strengthen 
this shared wealth of the peoples of the world. 
It is my honour to address the 
Assembly for the first time as the forty-fourth 
President of the United States. I come before you 
humbled by the responsibility that the American people 
have placed upon me, mindful of the enormous 
challenges of our moment in history and determined to 
act boldly and collectively on behalf of justice and 
prosperity at home and abroad. 
 I have been in office for just nine months, though 
some days it seems a lot longer. I am well aware of the 
expectations that accompany my presidency around the 
world. Those expectations are not about me. Rather 
they are, I believe, rooted in a discontent with the 
status quo that has allowed us to be increasingly 
defined by our differences and outpaced by our 
problems. But they are also rooted in hope — the hope 
that real change is possible and the hope that America 
will be a leader in bringing about such change. 
 I took office at a time when many around the 
world had come to view America with scepticism and 
distrust. A part of that was due to misperceptions and 
misinformation about my country. Part was due to 
opposition to specific policies and a belief that on 
certain critical issues America had acted unilaterally, 
without regard for the interests of others. That has fed 
an almost reflexive anti-Americanism, which too often 
has served as an excuse for collective inaction. 
 Like all of you, my responsibility is to act in the 
interests of my nation and my people, and I will never 
apologize for defending those interests. But it is my 
deeply held belief that in the year 2009, more than at 
any point in human history, the interests of nations and 
peoples are shared. The religious convictions that we 
hold in our hearts can forge new bonds among people, 
or they can tear us apart. The technology we harness 
can light the path to peace, or forever darken it. The 
energy we use can sustain our planet, or destroy it. 
What happens to the hope of a single child, anywhere, 
can enrich our world, or impoverish it. 
 In this Hall, we come from many places, but we 
share a common future. No longer do we have the 
luxury of indulging our differences to the exclusion of 
the work that we must do together. I have carried this 
message from London to Ankara, from Port-of-Spain to 
Moscow, from Accra to Cairo, and it is what I will 
speak about today. 
 Because the time has come for the world to move 
in a new direction, we must embrace a new era of 
engagement based on mutual interests and mutual 
respect, and our work must begin now. We know the 
future will be forged by deeds, and not simply words. 
Speeches alone will not solve our problems. It will take 
persistent action. 
 So for those who question the character and cause 
of my nation, I ask you to look at the concrete actions 
we have taken in just nine months. 
 On my first day in office I prohibited, without 
exception or equivocation, the use of torture by the 
United States of America. I ordered the prison at 
Guantanamo Bay closed, and we are doing the hard 
work of forging a framework to combat extremism 
within the rule of law. 
 Every nation must know that America will live its 
values, and we will lead by example. We have set a 
clear and focused goal to work with all members of 
this body to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and 
its extremist allies — a network that has killed 
thousands of people of many faiths and nations and has 
plotted to blow up this very building. In Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, we and many nations here are helping 
those Governments to develop the capacity to take the 
lead in this effort, while working to advance 
opportunity and security for their people. 
 In Iraq we are responsibly ending a war. We have 
removed American combat brigades from Iraqi cities 
and set a deadline of next August to remove all our 
combat brigades from Iraqi territory. I have made clear 
that we will help Iraqis make the transition to full 
responsibility for their future and keep our 
commitment to remove all American troops by the end 
of 2011. 
 I have outlined a comprehensive agenda to seek 
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. In 
Moscow, the United States and Russia announced that 
we would pursue substantial reductions in our strategic 
warheads and launchers. In the Conference on 
Disarmament we agreed on a workplan to negotiate an 
end to the production of fissile materials for nuclear 
weapons. And this week, my Secretary of State will 
become the first senior American representative to the 
  
 
09-52179 10 
 
annual members’ conference of the Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty. 
 Upon taking office, I appointed a special envoy 
for Middle East peace, and America has worked 
steadily and aggressively to advance the cause of two 
States — Israel and Palestine — in which peace and 
security take root and the rights of both Israelis and 
Palestinians are respected. 
 To confront climate change we have invested 
$80 billion in clean energy. We have substantially 
increased our fuel efficiency standards. We have 
provided new incentives for conservation, launched an 
energy partnership across the Americas and moved 
from being a bystander to being a leader in 
international climate negotiations. 
 To overcome an economic crisis that touches 
every corner of the world, we worked with the Group 
of 20 nations to forge a coordinated international 
response of over $2 trillion in stimulus to bring the 
global economy back from the brink. We mobilized 
resources that help prevent the crisis from spreading 
further to developing countries, and we joined with 
others to launch a $20 billion global food security 
initiative that will lend a hand to those who need it 
most and help them build their own capacity. 
 We have also re-engaged the United Nations. We 
have paid our bills. We have joined the Human Rights 
Council. We have signed the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. We have fully embraced the 
Millennium Development Goals, and we address our 
priorities here in this institution, for instance through the 
Security Council meeting on nuclear non-proliferation 
and disarmament that I will chair tomorrow and 
through the issues that I will discuss today. 
 That is what we have already done, but it is just a 
beginning. Some of our actions have yielded progress; 
some have laid the groundwork for progress in the 
future. But make no mistake: this cannot solely be 
America’s endeavour. Those who used to chastise 
America for acting alone in the world cannot now 
stand by and wait for America to solve the world’s 
problems alone. We have sought, in word and deed, a 
new era of engagement with the world, and now is the 
time for all of us to take our share of responsibility for 
a global response to global challenges. 
 If we are honest with ourselves, we need to admit 
that we are not living up to that responsibility. 
Consider the course that we are on if we fail to 
confront the status quo: extremists sowing terror in 
pockets of the world, protracted conflicts that grind on 
and on, genocide, mass atrocities, more nations with 
nuclear weapons, melting ice caps and ravaged 
populations, persistent poverty and pandemic disease. 
 I say this not to sow fear, but to state a fact. The 
magnitude of our challenges has yet to be met by the 
measure of our actions. This body was founded on the 
belief that the nations of the world could solve their 
problems together. Franklin Roosevelt, who died 
before he could see his vision for this institution 
become a reality, put it this way: 
 “The structure of world peace cannot be the work 
of one man, or one party, or one nation. It cannot 
be a peace of large nations or of small nations. It 
must be a peace which rests on the cooperative 
effort of the whole world.” 
 The cooperative effort of the whole world — 
those words ring even more true today when it is not 
simply peace, but our very health and prosperity that 
we hold in common. Yet, we also know that this body 
is made up of sovereign States and that, sadly but not 
surprisingly, this body has often become a forum for 
sowing discord instead of forging common ground, a 
venue for playing politics and exploiting grievances 
rather than solving problems. After all, it is easy to 
walk up to this podium and point fingers and stoke 
divisions. Nothing is easier than blaming others for our 
troubles and absolving ourselves of responsibility for 
our choices and our actions. Anybody can do that. 
Responsibility and leadership in the twenty-first 
century demand more. 
 In an era when our destiny is shared, power is no 
longer a zero-sum game. No one nation can or should 
try to dominate another nation. No world order that 
elevates one nation or group of people over another 
will succeed. No balance of power among nations will 
hold. The traditional divisions between nations of the 
South and the North make no sense in an 
interconnected world, nor do alignments of nations 
rooted in the cleavages of a long-gone cold war. 
 The time has come to realize that the old habits 
and the old arguments are irrelevant to the challenges 
faced by our peoples. They leave nations to act in 
opposition to the very goals that they claim to pursue 
and to vote, often in this body, against the interests of 
their own people. They build up walls between us and 
 
 
11 09-52179 
 
the future that our peoples seek, and the time has come 
for those walls to come down. Together we must build 
new coalitions that bridge old divides — coalitions of 
different faiths and creeds, of North and South, East, 
West, black, white and brown. 
 The choice is ours. We can be remembered as the 
generation that chose to drag the arguments of the 
twentieth century into the twenty-first, and that put off 
hard choices, refused to look ahead, and failed to keep 
pace because we defined ourselves by what we were 
against instead of what we were for; or we can be a 
generation that chooses to see the shoreline beyond the 
rough waters ahead, that comes together to serve the 
common interests of human beings, and finally gives 
meaning to the promise imbedded in the name given to 
this institution — the United Nations. That is the future 
America wants — a future of peace and prosperity that 
we can reach only if we recognize that all nations have 
rights. But all nations have responsibilities as well. 
That is the bargain that makes this work. That must be 
the guiding principle of international cooperation. 
 Today, let me put forward four pillars that I 
believe are fundamental to the future that we want for 
our children: non-proliferation and disarmament, the 
promotion of peace and security, the preservation of 
our planet, and a global economy that advances 
opportunity for all people. 
 First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons 
and seek the goal of a world without them. This 
institution was founded at the dawn of the atomic age 
in part because man’s capacity to kill had to be 
contained. For decades, we averted disaster, even under 
the shadow of a super-Power stand-off. But today the 
threat of proliferation is growing in scope and 
complexity. If we fail to act, we will invite nuclear 
arms races in every region and the prospect of wars and 
acts of terror on a scale that we can hardly imagine. 
 A fragile consensus stands in the way of this 
frightening outcome, and that is the basic bargain that 
shapes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT). It says that all nations have the right 
to peaceful nuclear energy, and that nations with 
nuclear weapons have a responsibility to move towards 
disarmament and those without them have the 
responsibility to forsake them. The next 12 months 
could be pivotal in determining whether this compact 
will be strengthened or will slowly dissolve. 
 America intends to keep our end of the bargain. 
We will pursue a new agreement with Russia to 
substantially reduce our strategic warheads and 
launches. We will move forward with ratification of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and work 
with others to bring the Treaty into force, so that 
nuclear testing is permanently prohibited. We will 
complete a nuclear posture review that opens the door 
to deeper cuts and reduces the role of nuclear weapons, 
and we will call upon countries to begin negotiations in 
January on a treaty to end the production of fissile 
material for weapons. 
 I will also host a summit next April that reaffirms 
each nation’s responsibility to secure nuclear material 
on its territory and to help those who cannot, because 
we must never allow a single nuclear device to fall into 
the hands of a violent extremist. And we will work to 
strengthen the institutions and initiatives that combat 
nuclear smuggling and theft. 
 All of this must support efforts to strengthen the 
NPT. Those nations that refuse to live up to their 
obligations must face consequences. Let me be clear: 
This is not about singling out individual nations. It is 
about standing up for the rights of all nations that do 
live up to their responsibilities, because a world in 
which International Atomic Energy Agency inspections 
are avoided and the United Nations demands are 
ignored will leave all people less safe and all nations 
less secure. 
 In their actions to date, the Governments of North 
Korea and Iran threaten to take us down this dangerous 
slope. We respect their rights as members of the 
community of nations. I have said before and I will 
repeat: I am committed to diplomacy that opens a path 
to greater prosperity and more secure peace for both 
nations if they live up to their obligations. But if the 
Governments of Iran and North Korea choose to ignore 
international standards; if they put the pursuit of 
nuclear weapons ahead of regional stability and the 
security and opportunity of their own people; if they 
are oblivious to the dangers of escalating nuclear arms 
races in both East Asia and the Middle East, then they 
must be held accountable. The world must stand 
together to demonstrate that international law is not an 
empty promise and that treaties will be enforced. We 
must insist that the future does not belong to fear. 
 That brings me to the second pillar for our future: 
the pursuit of peace. The United Nations was born of 
  
 
09-52179 12 
 
the belief that the people of the world can live their 
lives, raise their families and resolve their differences 
peacefully. Yet we know that in too many parts of the 
world this ideal remains an abstraction — a distant 
dream. We can either accept that outcome as inevitable 
and tolerate constant and crippling conflict, or we can 
recognize that the yearning for peace is universal and 
reassert our resolve to end conflicts around the world. 
That effort must begin with an unshakeable 
determination that the murder of innocent men, women 
and children will never be tolerated. On this, there can 
be no dispute. 
 The violent extremists who promote conflict by 
distorting faith have discredited and isolated 
themselves. They offer nothing but hatred and 
destruction. In confronting them, America will forge 
lasting partnerships to target terrorists, share 
intelligence, coordinate law enforcement and protect 
our people. We will permit no safe haven for Al-Qaida 
to launch attacks from Afghanistan or any other nation. 
We will stand by our friends on the front lines, as we 
and many nations will do in pledging support for the 
Pakistani people tomorrow. And we will pursue 
positive engagement that builds bridges among faiths 
and new partnerships for opportunity. 
 Our efforts to promote peace, however, cannot be 
limited to defeating violent extremists, for the most 
powerful weapon in our arsenal is the hope of human 
beings — the belief that the future belongs to those 
who would build and not destroy; the confidence that 
conflicts can end and a new day can begin. And that is 
why we will strengthen our support for effective 
peacekeeping, while energizing our efforts to prevent 
conflicts before they take hold.  
 We will pursue a lasting peace in Sudan, through 
support for the people of Darfur and the implementation 
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, so that we 
secure the peace that the Sudanese people deserve. 
 And in countries ravaged by violence, from Haiti to 
Congo to East Timor, we will work with the United 
Nations and other partners to support an enduring peace. 
 I will also continue to seek a just and lasting 
peace between Israel, Palestine and the Arab world. We 
will continue to work on that issue. Yesterday I had a 
constructive meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu 
and President Abbas. We have made some progress. 
Palestinians have strengthened their efforts on security. 
Israelis have facilitated greater freedom of movement 
for the Palestinians. As a result of these efforts on both 
sides, the economy in the West Bank has begun to 
grow. 
 But more progress is needed. We continue to call 
on Palestinians to end incitement against Israel. And 
we continue to emphasize that America does not accept 
the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements. 
 The time has come to re-launch negotiations — 
without preconditions — that address the permanent-
status issues: security for Israelis and Palestinians, 
borders, refugees and Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two 
States living side by side in peace and security: a 
Jewish State of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, 
and a viable, independent Palestinian State with 
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that began 
in 1967 and realizes the potential of the Palestinian 
people. As we pursue this goal, we will also pursue 
peace between Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Syria, 
and a broader peace between Israel and its many 
neighbours. In pursuit of that goal, we will develop 
regional initiatives with multilateral participation, 
alongside bilateral negotiations. 
 Now, I am not naive. I know this will be difficult. 
But all of us — not just the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, but all of us — must decide whether we 
are serious about peace, or whether we will only lend it 
lip-service. To break the old patterns — to break the 
cycle of insecurity and despair — all of us must say 
publicly what we would acknowledge in private. The 
United States does Israel no favours when we fail to 
couple an unwavering commitment to its security with 
an insistence that Israel respect the legitimate claims 
and rights of the Palestinians. And nations within this 
body do the Palestinians no favours when they choose 
vitriolic attacks against Israel over a constructive 
willingness to recognize Israel’s legitimacy and its 
right to exist in peace and security. 
 We must remember that the greatest price of this 
conflict is not paid by us. It is not paid by politicians. 
It is paid by the Israeli girl in Sderot who closes her 
eyes in fear that a rocket will take her life in the middle 
of the night. It is paid by the Palestinian boy in Gaza 
who has no clean water and no country to call his own. 
These are all God’s children. And after all the politics 
and all the posturing, this is about the right of every 
human being to live with dignity and security. That is a 
lesson embedded in the three great faiths that call one 
small slice of Earth the Holy Land. And that is why — 
 
 
13 09-52179 
 
even though there will be setbacks, and false starts, and 
tough days — I will not waiver in my pursuit of peace. 
 Thirdly, we must recognize that in the twenty-
first century there will be no peace unless we take 
responsibility for the preservation of our planet. And I 
thank the Secretary-General for hosting the summit on 
climate change yesterday. 
 The danger posed by climate change cannot be 
denied. Our responsibility to meet it must not be 
deferred. If we continue down our current course, 
every member of this Assembly will see irreversible 
changes within its borders. Our efforts to end conflicts 
will be eclipsed by wars over refugees and resources. 
Development will be devastated by drought and 
famine. Land that human beings have lived on for 
millennia will disappear. Future generations will look 
back and wonder why we refused to act — why we 
failed to pass on an environment that was worthy of 
our inheritance. 
 And that is why the days when America dragged 
its feet on this issue are over. We will move forward 
with investments to transform our energy economy, 
while providing incentives to make clean energy the 
profitable kind of energy. We will press ahead with 
deep cuts in emissions to reach the goals that we set for 
2020, and eventually 2050. We will continue to 
promote renewable energy and efficiency — and share 
new technologies — with countries around the world. 
And we will seize every opportunity for progress to 
address this threat in a cooperative effort with the 
entire world. 
 Those wealthy nations that did so much damage 
to the environment in the twentieth century must 
accept our obligation to lead. But responsibility does 
not end there. While we must acknowledge the need for 
differentiated responses, any effort to curb carbon 
emissions must include the fast-growing carbon 
emitters who can do more to reduce their air pollution 
without inhibiting growth. And any effort that fails 
both to help the poorest nations to adapt to the 
problems that climate change has already wrought and 
to help them travel a path of clean development simply 
will not work. 
 It is hard to change something as fundamental as 
how we use energy. I know that. It is even harder to do 
so in the midst of a global recession. Certainly, it will 
be tempting to sit back and wait for others to move 
first. But we cannot make this journey unless we all 
move forward together. As we head into Copenhagen, 
let us resolve to focus on what each of us can do for 
the sake of our common future. 
 This leads me to the final pillar that must fortify 
our future: a global economy that advances opportunity 
for all people. 
 The world is still recovering from the worst 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. In 
America, we see the engine of growth beginning to 
churn, and yet many still struggle to find a job or pay 
their bills. Across the globe, we find promising signs, 
but little certainty about what lies ahead. And far too 
many people in far too many places live through the 
daily crises that challenge our humanity: the despair of 
an empty stomach; the thirst brought on by dwindling 
water supplies; the injustice of a child dying from a 
treatable disease or a mother losing her life as she 
gives birth. 
 In Pittsburgh, we will work with the world’s 
largest economies to chart a course for growth that is 
balanced and sustained. That means vigilance to ensure 
that we do not let up until our people are back to work. 
That means taking steps to rekindle demand, so that 
global recovery can be sustained. And that means 
setting new rules of the road and strengthening 
regulation for all financial centres, so that we put an 
end to the greed and the excess and the abuse that led 
us into this disaster, and prevent a crisis like this from 
ever happening again. 
 At a time of such interdependence, we have a 
moral and pragmatic interest, however, in broader 
questions of development: the questions of development 
that existed even before this crisis happened. And so 
America will continue our historic effort to help people 
feed themselves. We have set aside $63 billion to carry 
forward the fight against HIV/AIDS, to end deaths 
from tuberculosis and malaria, to eradicate polio and to 
strengthen public health systems. We are joining with 
other countries to contribute H1N1 vaccines to the 
World Health Organization. We will integrate more 
economies into a system of global trade. We will 
support the Millennium Development Goals and 
approach next year’s summit with a global plan to 
make them a reality. And we will set our sights on the 
eradication of extreme poverty in our time. 
 Now is the time for all of us to do our part. 
Growth will not be sustained or shared unless all 
nations embrace their responsibilities. That means that 
  
 
09-52179 14 
 
wealthy nations must open their markets to more goods 
and extend a hand to those with less, while reforming 
international institutions to give more nations a greater 
voice. And developing nations must root out the 
corruption that is an obstacle to progress, for 
opportunity cannot thrive where individuals are 
oppressed and businesses have to pay bribes. That is 
why we will support honest police and independent 
judges, civil society and a vibrant private sector. Our 
goal is simple: a global economy in which growth is 
sustained and opportunity is available to all. 
 Now, the changes that I have spoken about today 
will not be easy to make, and they will not be realized 
simply by leaders like us coming together in forums 
like this, as useful as that may be. For, as in any 
assembly of members, real change can only come 
through the people we represent. That is why we must 
do the hard work to lay the groundwork for progress in 
our own capitals. That is where we will build the 
consensus to end conflicts and to harness technology 
for peaceful purposes, to change the way we use 
energy and to promote growth that can be sustained 
and shared. 
 I believe that the people of the world want this 
future for their children. And that is why we must 
champion those principles that ensure that 
Governments reflect the will of the people. These 
principles cannot be afterthoughts. Democracy and 
human rights are essential to achieving each of the 
goals that I have discussed today, because 
Governments of the people and by the people are more 
likely to act in the broader interests of their own 
people, rather than the narrow interest of those in 
power. 
 The test of our leadership will not be the degree 
to which we feed the fears and old hatreds of our 
people. True leadership will not be measured by the 
ability to muzzle dissent or to intimidate and harass 
political opponents at home. The people of the world 
want change. They will not long tolerate those who are 
on the wrong side of history. 
 This Organization’s Charter commits each of us 
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the 
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal 
rights of men and women”. 
 Among those rights is the freedom to speak your 
mind and worship as you please, the promise of 
equality of the races and the opportunity for women 
and girls to pursue their own potential, and the ability 
of citizens to have a say in how you are governed and 
to have confidence in the administration of justice. For, 
just as no nation should be forced to accept the tyranny 
of another nation, no individual should be forced to 
accept the tyranny of their own people. 
 As an African-American, I will never forget that I 
would not be here today without the steady pursuit of a 
more perfect union in my country. That guides my 
belief that no matter how dark the day may seem, 
transformative change can be forged by those who 
choose to side with justice. And I pledge that America 
will always stand with those who stand up for their 
dignity and their rights — for the student who seeks to 
learn, the voter who demands to be heard, the innocent 
who longs to be free and the oppressed who yearns to 
be equal. 
 Democracy cannot be imposed on any nation 
from the outside. Each society must search for its own 
path, and no path is perfect. Each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its people and in its past 
traditions. And I admit that America has too often been 
selective in its promotion of democracy. But that does 
not weaken our commitment; it only reinforces it. 
There are basic principles that are universal. There are 
certain truths that are self-evident, and the United 
States of America will never waiver in our efforts to 
stand up for the right of people everywhere to 
determine their own destiny. 
 Sixty-five years ago, a weary Franklin Roosevelt 
spoke to the American people in his fourth, and final, 
inaugural address. After years of war, he sought to sum 
up the lessons that could be drawn from the terrible 
suffering and enormous sacrifice that had taken place. 
We have learned, he said, to be citizens of the world, 
members of the human community. The United Nations 
was built by men and women like Roosevelt from 
every corner of the world — from Africa and Asia, 
from Europe to the Americas. These architects of 
international cooperation had an idealism that was 
anything but naive. It was rooted in the hard-earned 
lessons of war, rooted in the wisdom that nations could 
advance their interests by acting together instead of 
splitting apart. 
 Now it falls to us, for this institution will be what 
we make of it. The United Nations does extraordinary 
good around the world, in feeding the hungry, caring 
for the sick and mending places that have been broken. 
 
 
15 09-52179 
 
But it also struggles to enforce its will and to live up to 
the ideals of its founding. I believe that those 
imperfections are not a reason to walk away from this 
institution; they are a calling to redouble our efforts. 
The United Nations can be a place where we either 
bicker about outdated grievances or forge common 
ground; a place where we focus on what drives us apart 
or what brings us together; a place where we indulge 
tyranny or a source of moral authority. In short, the 
United Nations can be an institution that is 
disconnected from what matters in the lives of our 
citizens or it can be an indispensable factor in 
advancing the interests of the people we serve. 
 We have reached a pivotal moment. The United 
States stands ready to begin a new chapter of 
international cooperation, one that recognizes the 
rights and responsibilities of all nations. And so, with 
confidence in our cause and with a commitment to our 
values, we call on all nations to join us in building the 
future that our people so richly deserve.This year marks the twentieth 
anniversary of the adoption, in 1989, of General 
Assembly resolution 44/27 A, on international 
solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa. 
That was one of numerous Assembly resolutions in 
which the nations of the world pledged their support 
for the eradication of apartheid. 
 Within months of the adoption of that important 
resolution, the ban on South African liberation 
movements was lifted. Nelson Mandela and other 
political prisoners were released. The stage was thus 
  
 
09-52228 20 
 
set for the negotiations that would eventually lead to 
the achievement of freedom and democracy in our 
country. 
 The role of the United Nations in the struggle to 
end apartheid is an exceptional example of the 
collective political will of the international community. 
It represented the victory of unity over division and of 
negotiation over confrontation. It represented a clear 
commitment to the promotion of basic human rights. 
As South Africans, we will always be grateful for that 
international solidarity. 
 Since the advent of democracy in 1994, we have 
built a solid, stable democracy, founded on the 
principles of unity, non-sexism, non-racialism and 
democracy. As we continue to build our young nation, 
we are cognizant of the need for a conducive 
international environment. For that reason, we are 
committed to playing our part, with the rest of the 
international community, in taking forward the fight 
against poverty and in responding to the crises that are 
confronting the world today. We must act now, 
together, to halt the degradation of the environment. 
We must act now, together, to prevent the global 
economic crisis from undoing the gains that we have 
achieved over decades. 
 The eradication of poverty must remain central to 
the work of the United Nations. The Organization must 
continue to work harder to unite the world to work to 
alleviate the suffering of the world’s poor and 
marginalized. The global economic meltdown has dealt 
a heavy blow to world efforts to eradicate poverty. But 
it should not diminish our resolve. 
 The United Nations must play a significant role 
in finding solutions to the global economic crisis. The 
crisis should not be an excuse to delay further action 
on the delivery of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Rather, it should urge us to double our efforts to 
achieve greater and faster progress. Developing 
countries did not cause the economic crisis, but they 
are severely affected by it. The crisis has further 
highlighted the urgent need for fundamental reform of 
the Bretton Woods institutions, including their 
mandate, scope, governance and responsiveness. 
 These institutions have been unrepresentative 
since their formation half a century ago. The current 
arrangements are inadequate and unfair. They do not 
reflect the changes that have taken place in the global 
economy. We should ensure that the election of the 
heads of all those institutions is more democratic, and 
opens opportunities to developing countries. The 
emerging and developing countries, including the 
poorest, must have a greater voice and greater 
participation in those institutions. Similarly, if we are 
to eradicate poverty there is an urgent need to conclude 
the Doha Round of trade negotiations in a manner that 
prioritizes development. 
 We continue to work for an African renewal, and 
welcome the ongoing support of the United Nations 
system in addressing the challenges facing the 
continent. Now more than ever, it is necessary for the 
United Nations to ensure that the international 
community collectively implements the commitments 
made to Africa. We have a viable socio-economic 
development blueprint, the New Partnership for 
Africa’s Development, which should be used in 
mobilizing resources for Africa. We appreciate that 
there can be no lasting peace without development, and 
no development without security. 
 Over the past 20 years, Africa has made much 
progress in working to end conflicts and to promote 
democratic practices and institutions. However, some 
pockets of conflict persist. For its part, South Africa 
has been engaged in mediation, conflict prevention and 
peacekeeping on the continent, in, among other places, 
Burundi, Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo. 
 The African Union has the political will to 
resolve conflicts on the continent. However, it lacks 
resources to run effective peacekeeping interventions 
and conflict prevention mechanisms. We appeal for 
support for African peacemaking efforts, and for 
greater cooperation between the United Nations and 
the African Union. In this regard, we call on the 
General Assembly to align itself with resolutions of the 
African Union and the Southern African Development 
Community that do not recognize Governments that 
come into power by force or other unconstitutional 
means. 
 The search for global peace, stability and security 
cannot be separated from the pursuit of justice, 
self-determination, human rights and economic 
development. We need to constantly reaffirm the 
inalienable human rights of all people. We call for the 
full and effective implementation of the outcomes of 
the World Conference against Racism and the 
subsequent Durban Review Conference. It is of 
 
 
21 09-52228 
 
concern that at the close of the first decade of the 
twenty-first century there are still nations that find 
their lands occupied and their peoples oppressed.  
 We are convinced that urgent and concrete steps 
are needed to resolve the situation in Western Sahara. 
 We must work with similar urgency towards the 
achievement, through negotiations, of peaceful 
coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians. This 
must be based on the creation of a viable Palestinian 
State, existing side by side with Israel, within the 1967 
borders, which must be secure and internationally 
recognized. 
 We also call for the lifting of the economic, 
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. 
 We also appreciate the recent pronouncements by 
some nuclear-weapon States on their intention to 
reduce their nuclear arsenals. 
 Let us take up this new momentum and utilize the 
opportunity of the 2010 Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to recommit ourselves to the 
full implementation of obligations under the NPT. We 
should ensure a balance among the objectives of 
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. 
 For Africa, the impact of climate change is 
devastating and will severely undermine development 
and poverty eradication efforts. We need to act now to 
ensure that there is an inclusive, fair and effective 
global agreement on this critical challenge. The 
agreement must recognize that solving the climate 
problem cannot be separated from the struggle to 
eradicate poverty. Developed countries bear the 
greatest responsibility for climate change and its 
impact. We must therefore strike a balance between 
adaptation and mitigation. Our goal should be to 
significantly reduce emissions across the globe without 
constraining development in the countries of the South. 
 Ms. McClean (Barbados), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Developed countries must make ambitious, 
quantified and legally binding emission reduction 
commitments that are in line with science and that 
address their historical responsibilities. At Copenhagen, 
there needs to be agreement on new, additional, 
sustainable and predictable financing for adaptation. 
This should be for programmes that reduce the 
vulnerability of developing countries to the effects of 
climate change. 
 In a world that is increasingly interconnected and 
interdependent, international problems can be resolved 
effectively only through multilateral cooperation. The 
United Nations must continue to be at the centre of 
multilateralism, but it needs to be reformed if it is to 
carry out its mandate effectively, efficiently and 
transparently. 
 We remain committed to the view that no reform 
of the United Nations can be complete without the 
fundamental reform of the Security Council. It must be 
representative of the international community and 
reflect the geopolitical realities of today. If the Security 
Council is not reformed and does not have permanent 
representation for Africa, the legitimacy of the 
Council’s decisions will continue to be questioned. 
South Africa continues to advocate an expansion in 
both the permanent and non-permanent categories of 
membership. 
 Let me express our appreciation to the world for 
the celebration of the inaugural Nelson Mandela Day 
on 18 July this year. Scores of people engaged in a 
minimum of 67 minutes of voluntary action in the 
service of humanity, in honour of our icon, President 
Mandela. The Non-Aligned Movement has joined the 
call for this General Assembly to declare 18 July 
Nelson Mandela Day. This would be in recognition of 
President Mandela’s contribution to the struggle for 
democracy and the cause of humanity, and to promote 
community service across the globe. In this regard, we 
hope that the General Assembly will adopt a consensus 
resolution in support of Nelson Mandela Day. 
 South Africa is privileged to host the 2010 
Fédération Internationale de Football Association 
World Cup in the middle of next year, which will be 
the first time that the tournament has been held on 
African soil. We look forward to hosting the peoples of 
the world, who will enjoy unique African hospitality 
and vibrancy. 
 I wish to take this opportunity to thank the 
outgoing President of the General Assembly for his 
leadership at the sixty-third session of the Assembly. I 
thank the General Assembly and representatives for the 
opportunity to address this esteemed gathering. 
Working together as a global family, we can do more to 
create a better and just world.The 
world today is undergoing major developments, major 
changes and major adjustments. The trend towards 
peace, development and cooperation, which represents 
the call of our times, has grown stronger than ever. As 
the world moves further towards multipolarity and 
economic globalization, multilateralism and democracy 
in international relations have won greater popular 
support, while openness and cooperation for mutual 
benefit and win-win progress have become the shared 
aspirations of the international community. Countries 
have become more interdependent. 
 At the same time, the world remains in the grip of 
the financial crisis, and the prospects for economic 
recovery are still not clear. Worldwide, unemployment 
and poverty are worsening, and development 
imbalances are more acute. Global issues such as 
climate change, food security, energy and resource 
security, and public health security have been thrown 
into sharp relief. Non-traditional security threats, 
including terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, transnational organized crime and 
major communicable diseases, are threatening our 
world. Some long-standing hotspot issues remain 
unresolved, while regional and local conflicts continue 
to flare up. The instability and uncertainties on the 
international landscape pose severe challenges to world 
peace and development. 
 In the face of unprecedented opportunities and 
challenges, we members of the international 
community should commit ourselves to peace, 
development, cooperation, common progress and 
tolerance, and continue our joint endeavour to build a 
harmonious world of enduring peace and common 
prosperity and contribute to the noble cause of the 
peace and development of humankind. 
 First, we should view security in a broader 
perspective and safeguard world peace and stability. 
The security of all countries has never been as closely 
interconnected as it is today. Security is not a zero-sum 
game, and there is no isolated or absolute security. No 
country can be safe and stable in the absence of world 
and regional peace and stability. 
 We should embrace a new security mindset of 
mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and coordination. 
While maintaining our own national security, we 
should also respect the security concerns of other 
countries and advance the common security of 
humankind. We should adhere to the purposes and 
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and 
seek peaceful solutions to regional hotspot issues and 
international disputes. There should be no wilful use or 
threat of force. We should support the United Nations 
in continuing to play an important role in the field of 
international security. We should oppose terrorism, 
separatism and extremism in all their manifestations 
and broaden international security cooperation. 
 China has consistently stood for the complete 
prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear 
weapons and for a world without nuclear weapons. We 
call on the international community to take credible 
steps to push forward the nuclear disarmament process, 
eradicate the risks of nuclear weapons proliferation and 
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and related 
international cooperation. 
 Secondly, we should take a more holistic 
approach to development and promote common 
prosperity. Increasing economic globalization has 
linked the development of all countries closely 
together. Without the development and equal 
participation of developing countries, there can be 
neither common prosperity in the world nor a more just 
and equitable international economic order. The 
developing countries now face a deteriorating external 
environment brought about by the international 
financial crisis. Their economies are slowing down, 
and their development endeavours are beset by serious 
difficulties. 
 We believe that common development is an 
important way to redress global development 
imbalances and achieve sustainable development. The 
United Nations should increase its input in 
 
 
9 09-52228 
 
development; advance economic globalization in the 
direction of balanced development, shared benefits and 
win-win progress; and foster an international 
environment conducive to the development of 
developing countries. The international financial 
institutions should use their newly increased resources, 
first and foremost, to help developing countries move 
out of poverty and provide loans to them in a more 
flexible, diverse, convenient and efficient manner. 
Great effort should be made to increase the 
representation and voice of developing countries in the 
process of reforming the international financial system. 
 We should take responsible measures to counter 
the international financial crisis, firmly oppose 
protectionism and actively work for an early, 
comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Doha 
Round negotiations. Developed countries should open 
their markets to developing countries and reduce or 
exempt tariffs for those countries. They should honour 
their official development assistance and debt relief 
commitments and, in particular, increase assistance to 
the least developed countries, with a focus on tackling 
such issues as hunger, health care and education.  
 For developing countries, self-reliance is 
essential. They should explore development models 
conducive to their development and poverty 
eradication efforts. It is also in their interest to increase 
trade and investment cooperation, open markets to one 
another and step up South-South cooperation. 
 Thirdly, we should pursue cooperation with a 
more open mind and work for mutual benefit and 
common progress. Climate change, food security, 
energy and resource security, and public health security 
are all global challenges, and no country is immune to 
them. The only way for us to meet those challenges and 
ensure harmony and peace is to engage in closer 
international cooperation.  
 Climate change is one of the serious challenges to 
human survival and development, and international 
cooperation is the key to tackling that challenge. We 
should retain the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol 
as the main channel in addressing climate change, 
abide by the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities, adhere to the mandate of the Bali Road 
Map, and work for the success of the Copenhagen 
conference with a view to achieving mutual benefit and 
common progress. 
 Food and energy are vital to the livelihood, 
development and stability of all nations. We should 
increase our input into agriculture, develop advanced 
technologies, curb market speculation, increase food 
assistance and intensify cooperation with regard to 
agriculture and food. We should strengthen mutually 
beneficial cooperation in the area of energy, step up the 
research and development of new and renewable 
energies, put in place a system for the research, 
development and dissemination of advanced energy 
technologies, and diversify the energy supply. 
 The continued spread of influenza A — H1N1 — 
has presented a global public health challenge 
confronting the entire international community. China 
is ready to provide help, within its capacities, to other 
developing countries in the prevention and control of 
influenza A. 
 Fourthly, we should be more tolerant towards one 
another and live together in harmony. Mutual learning 
and tolerance among different civilizations are an 
inexhaustible source of strength for social progress, 
and all countries — large or small, strong or weak, rich 
or poor — are equal. We should acknowledge 
differences in our cultural traditions, social systems 
and values, respect the right of all countries to 
independently choose their own development paths, let 
different civilizations and models of development draw 
on one another’s strengths through competition and 
comparison, and achieve common development by 
seeking common ground while reserving the right to 
differ.  
 The Chinese people will soon celebrate the 
sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China. Sixty years ago, the Chinese people 
won independence and liberation after a prolonged, 
hard struggle and became masters of the new China. 
Today, China’s national strength has grown remarkably 
and the people are better off. 
 China’s development has contributed greatly to 
peace and development in the world, and China’s 
future is more closely interconnected with that of the 
world. A more developed China will make greater 
contributions and bring more opportunities to the 
world. We are committed to the path of peaceful 
development and the win-win strategy of opening up. 
We will develop friendly relations and cooperation 
with all countries on the basis of the Five Principles of 
Peaceful Coexistence. China has always been and will 
  
 
09-52228 10 
 
continue to be a positive force for world peace and 
common development. 
 As a responsible and major developing country, 
China has always made common development an 
important aspect of its foreign policy. We have made a 
great effort to provide support and assistance to other 
developing countries. To further assist them, China will 
adopt the following measures. 
 First, we will increase support for other 
developing countries hit hard by the financial crisis, 
honestly implement relevant capital increase and 
financing plans, intensify trade and investment 
cooperation and help increase the capacity of relevant 
countries for risk resistance and sustainable 
development.  
 Secondly, we will continue to implement the 
measures announced at the United Nations High-level 
Event on the Millennium Development Goals to assist 
other developing countries in accelerating development 
and facilitating attainment of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). 
 Thirdly, China will follow through on the 
measures to help African countries that were 
announced at the Beijing Summit of the Forum on 
China-Africa Cooperation, increase assistance to 
Africa, reduce or cancel debts for African countries, 
expand trade and investment, provide human resources 
and technological support for African countries in such 
areas as agriculture, health, education and disaster 
preparedness and reduction, and intensify personnel 
training tailored to African needs. 
 Fourthly, China will continue to participate in and 
promote regional monetary and financial cooperation, 
maintain financial and economic stability and promote 
financial cooperation and trade in the region. 
 Let us join hands, share the development 
opportunities, rise above the challenges and make an 
unremitting effort towards building a harmonious 
world of enduring peace and common prosperity.In these tumultuous 
times marked by manifold crises, we are more than 
ever in need of a global Organization that all Members 
make use of and support. We need the United Nations. 
The comprehensive, universal system of the United 
Nations forms the heart of the global system of crisis 
prevention and mitigation. Now more than ever, 
Germany pledges its active and extensive support to 
this world Organization. 
 This past year taught us bitter lessons, and today 
it seems clearer than ever: we must secure the 
sustainability of the economic recovery. That applies 
not only to the financial sector, but also, and in 
particular, to the most vulnerable in the world — the 
poorest of the poor in the developing countries — as 
well as to our environment and the world’s climate. 
 The consultations on a charter for sustainable 
economic activity point in the right direction. The 
United Nations should be actively involved in that 
process. We must turn the crisis into an opportunity for 
development and a truly green recovery. 
 The aftermath of the financial crisis is 
jeopardizing our progress on the path towards 
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 
Therefore, we must do our utmost to avoid any 
setbacks in that regard. Donor States must continue 
their efforts for development, all the more so in times 
of crisis. Germany has continually increased its official 
development assistance contributions in recent years. 
In 2008, my country was the second-largest donor of 
official development assistance. We will also 
significantly increase our contributions to the 
multilateral development banks. 
 All of this underscores one thing: Germany, as 
one of the world’s largest economies, stands by its 
global responsibility. But developing countries must 
also live up to their responsibilities. Responsible 
governance, respect for human rights, environmental 
protection, the fight against epidemics, the 
strengthening of the rights of women — those are the 
challenges that each country has the responsibility to 
meet. 
 Climate change is the pre-eminent challenge of 
the twenty-first century. It threatens our well-being, 
our security and our economic development. It will 
lead to uncontrollable risks and dramatic damage, if we 
do not take resolute action — not in some distant 
future, but right now. 
 I can assure the Assembly: Germany will 
continue to be a leader in climate protection. But we 
will be successful only if we act together. We need an 
inclusive process in which those countries directly 
affected by climate change, such as the small island 
States, can also play a part. The United Nations is the 
only reliable framework for this. I would like to thank 
the Secretary-General for his very timely initiative in 
convening a United Nations summit last week 
addressing this key issue. 
 Disarmament and arms control can help create 
better conditions for global cooperation and increase 
security and stability. We warmly welcome the new 
dynamic in the area of nuclear disarmament. The call 
for a nuclear-weapon-free world enjoys widespread 
support, including that of Germany. We must seize this 
opportunity for progress in all areas of disarmament. 
Germany has underlined that sub-strategic nuclear 
weapons must also be incorporated into the continuing 
process of disarmament. Our clear commitment to 
ridding the world of all nuclear weapons is the best 
way to strengthen the international non-proliferation 
regime. 
 We need a new international consensus at the 
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the 
launching of negotiations in Geneva on a fissile 
material cut-off treaty and the entry into force of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. In order to 
avoid a conflict of objectives between 
non-proliferation and peaceful uses, Germany supports 
multilateral solutions to nuclear-fuel supply and has 
put forward its own proposal on that issue. 
 The international community must not relent in 
its commitment to banning all weapons of mass 
destruction. A model in that respect is the Chemical 
Weapons Convention, which outlaws a whole category 
of weapons of mass destruction. Its implementing 
organization needs strong and dynamic leadership. 
Germany has always had a particular commitment to 
 
 
55 09-52604 
 
the Chemical Weapons Convention, and we stand ready 
to accept greater responsibility in that organization. 
 We view the ongoing nuclear programme in Iran 
with great concern. The belated admittance by Iran 
concerning the construction of a second enrichment 
plant underlines the fact that our concerns are more 
than justified. Even before this latest event, the report 
by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
Director-General El Baradei emphasized the urgency of 
the matter. Unfortunately, the Iranian Government still 
refuses to cooperate fully with the IAEA and to remove 
serious doubts concerning the peaceful character of its 
nuclear programme. We urge Iran to grant an IAEA 
verification team access to the newly disclosed site 
without delay. 
 We sincerely hope that Iran will use the 
opportunity of the upcoming talks between it and the 
E3+3 — the United Kingdom, France and Germany, 
plus the United States, the Russian Federation and 
China — to demonstrate its willingness to engage in 
honest and speedy negotiations. If Iran’s leaders 
continue to stall, the international community will have 
no other choice but to take additional measures to 
emphasize the seriousness of our common concern. 
 Iran has a long and great history. It witnessed the 
origins of civilization. It can become an anchor of 
stability in its region — a respected member of the 
international community. But that involves, in addition 
to a diplomatic resolution of questions regarding its 
nuclear programme, a responsible foreign policy 
towards its neighbours. The key to this is the 
recognition of Israel’s right to exist. 
 Since the escalation of violence in the Gaza Strip 
at the beginning of the year, we have seen some 
encouraging signs of a return to the peace process. The 
resumption of negotiations aimed at the two-State 
solution is still possible. Germany strongly supports 
President Obama’s intensive commitment and regional 
approach. Together with the partners of the European 
Union, we are prepared to support efforts towards 
peace through concrete contributions. What we now 
need, however, are courageous gestures of goodwill on 
all sides to create the conditions for serious talks. 
 The successful holding of elections in June was 
an important milestone towards the continuing 
stabilization of Lebanon. What is now important is that 
a new Government soon be formed. The successful 
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) 
mission remains a crucial contribution to securing the 
ceasefire between Lebanon and Israel, and thus to the 
stabilization of the region. By again assuming 
command of the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force on 
1 September, we further strengthened our commitment 
to UNIFIL. 
 For Afghanistan, 2009 is a pivotal year. The 
presidential elections — the first elections in decades 
that were free and organized by the Afghans 
themselves — determined who will control the fate of 
the country over the next five years. They were an 
impressive sign of the resolve of the people of 
Afghanistan to take part in the political process. 
 Against the backdrop of the difficult security 
situation, the further build-up of Afghan security forces 
assumes even greater importance. We will, therefore, 
continue to increase the number of German police 
instructors in Afghanistan, we will support the further 
build-up of the European Union Police Mission, and 
we will help to advance the training of the Afghan 
army within the framework of the International 
Security Assistance Force. 
 Despite all the criticism, there are also 
encouraging accomplishments, especially in the field 
of economic growth and in the reconstruction of the 
country’s infrastructure. The basic prerequisites for 
Afghanistan’s sustainable development are good 
governance, a resolute fight against corruption and an 
improvement in State services. These are essential if 
the population is to once again nurture hope for the 
future. As one of the largest troop-contributing nations 
and one of the main bilateral donors, Germany will 
continue to play an instrumental role in the 
reconstruction of the country. 
 Following the presidential elections, we are now 
entering a new phase of cooperation between the 
international community and Afghanistan. For that 
reason, Germany, together with the United Kingdom 
and France, has taken the initiative to hold an 
international conference that will set out concrete, 
realistic and measurable goals for the future political 
and economic development of Afghanistan. To that 
end, the Afghanistan Compact, which will expire in 
2010, should be further developed. 
 In 2010, we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary 
of the independence of no fewer than 17 African 
States — a fitting moment to also look to the future. 
Despite the global economic crisis, the overall outlook 
  
 
09-52604 56 
 
for Africa and its people is positive. We must succeed 
in utilizing the continent’s enormous potential in terms 
of people, creativity and resources. It remains our 
challenge to support the development of that potential 
while, at the same time, respecting African ownership. 
 African ownership should by no means be 
equated with a withdrawal from our neighbouring 
continent. On the contrary, it means that we should 
cultivate relations with the States of Africa in a spirit 
of partnership — a partnership in which each side 
introduces its ideas, and in which we work together to 
master the challenges we face, whether locally or 
globally. 
 One major common challenge remains the 
containment of violence and the protection of people in 
conflict areas. Germany will continue its extensive 
engagement in Africa, be it in the area of development 
cooperation, peace and security, business and 
technology, the environmental and energy sector or 
educational and scientific cooperation. This also 
applies to cooperation with the African Union, which 
has been expanding increasingly in recent years. 
 United Nations peacekeeping missions are a 
central pillar of the international security architecture. 
Reform of United Nations peacekeeping is an urgent 
issue, and Germany is ready to actively contribute to 
such reform. 
 It is absolutely essential that the cooperation 
between the United Nations and regional organizations 
be further intensified. The European Union has just 
shown that, with its peacekeeping missions in 
Africa — those in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo and Chad, to name just two examples — it is a 
reliable partner of the United Nations when it comes to 
crisis management. 
 We are facing a multitude of global challenges. 
Today, no country is strong enough to tackle those 
challenges on its own. We need a universal forum for 
joint global action. That is why we need a strong 
United Nations that is capable of taking effective 
action. 
 A long chain of high-level meetings — from the 
2005 High-level Event to the Secretary-General’s 
Summit on Climate Change last week — has 
emphasized how urgent it is to adapt the United 
Nations to the challenges of today’s world, for threats 
have become global. Our responses, however, are still 
not always global, and that is true for the United 
Nations as well. 
 Reforms must start with simple questions. Does a 
particular body effectively fulfil its tasks? Does its 
composition reflect the world of today? Where that is 
not the case, reform must have a clear objective: to 
make the United Nations more effective, more credible 
and more assertive. 
 However, we must not limit reforms to the United 
Nations. If we want to deal effectively with the current 
crisis and effectively prevent future crises, we must 
also reform the international financial institutions. 
Isolated reforms of individual institutions will not get 
us anywhere. Reform of the financial institutions and 
of the United Nations must intermesh as a broader 
reform of global governance — a reform that, more 
than six decades after the founding of today’s world 
order, is long overdue. Germany, incidentally, is 
advocating at a high level the improved representation 
of newly industrialized and developing countries as 
part of the reform of the international financial 
institutions. This is our understanding of global 
governance: fair participation for everybody. 
 In 2000 and 2005, heads of State and Government 
called for reform of the Security Council. They did so 
out of the realization that we can meet the threats of 
today only if the Council reflects the world of today. 
One thing is clear: if the Security Council does not 
reform itself, there is a risk that other bodies will 
attempt to take its place. Such a rivalry would be 
detrimental to us all. Let us therefore attempt, at this 
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, to bring 
about concrete results. 
 Germany has been and remains willing to take 
responsibility. That includes assuming a permanent 
seat on a reformed Security Council. We also underline 
this readiness to take responsibility with our candidacy 
for a non-permanent seat on the Council for the period 
2011-2012. Through our work in the Security Council, 
we want to contribute to the success of the United 
Nations, just as we are already contributing to 
worldwide United Nations missions, to development 
funds, humanitarian aid and the United Nations 
Environment Programme. Now and in the future, we 
will work to find common interests, to overcome 
divisions and to strengthen a global partnership of 
responsibility.In 
speaking to the General Assembly in France’s name 
today, I am well aware that we all have a historic 
responsibility in the current circumstances. 
 In the midst of a financial, economic and social 
crisis that has no precedent in the history of the United 
Nations, and faced with the threat a global ecological 
disaster, we must now invent a new world where the 
follies of yesterday are no longer possible. That is our 
responsibility. Now we all know towards what 
catastrophes our obstinate attempts to solve the 
problems of the twenty-first century with twentieth-
century ideas and instruments may lead us. No one 
among us can claim any longer that he did not know. 
There is a universal awareness that the path that 
the world has taken over the past few decades is a dead 
end. This awareness is born of sorrow, suffering and 
fear. We are politically and morally accountable for the 
suffering on our planet. Tens of millions of men and 
women have lost their jobs and their homes. A billion 
human beings are suffering from hunger, and hundreds 
of millions have no access to water, energy or minimal 
health care. 
 To those hundreds of millions of people, we, the 
heads of State and Government, and no one else, must 
restore hope. Those who are paying the price of the 
crisis had no role in bringing it about. We owe an 
answer to the people who are outraged by the 
behaviour of those in the financial world who led us to 
the brink of chaos and continue to seek to enrich 
themselves indecently. We owe an answer to those who 
are still dying in absurd wars from another age, while 
humankind has so many challenges to face.  
 France’s answer is unambiguous. Things cannot 
go on as they were. We must change. We cannot allow 
it to start all over again, leading to another disaster 
tomorrow. After such a strong disavowal of our usual 
thinking and our deep-rooted prejudices, the task 
before us is precisely the same as that faced by men of 
good will who sought here to build a new political, 
economic and monetary world order after the Second 
World War. The generation that preceded us was equal 
to its responsibilities. The question today is: Will we be 
equal to that same responsibility? 
 The world will change. It cannot be otherwise. 
The only question is: Will the world change because 
we are able to act with wisdom, intelligence and 
courage, or because fresh crises will arise if we are not 
wise enough to take the path of radical change? 
 The truth is that we have already waited too long 
to regulate globalization, fight global warming and 
curb nuclear proliferation. And I should like solemnly 
to tell the leaders of Iranian that they would be making 
a tragic mistake in relying on the passive response of 
the international community in order to pursue their 
military nuclear programme.  
 We have waited too long to re-establish peace in 
the Middle East by giving the Palestinian people the 
State to which they are entitled in the name of law and 
in the name of justice. And we have waited too long to 
guarantee the people of Israel the right to live in 
security, which the tragedies of history have made so 
necessary for them. 
 We know what we need to do now: increase the 
number of permanent and non-permanent members of 
the Security Council. I say in the name of France, it is 
unacceptable that the African continent does not have a 
single permanent member on the Security Council — it 
is unacceptable because it is unjust. It is unacceptable 
that the South American continent, with such a great 
power as Brazil, or India with its population of one 
billion, or Japan or Germany, should be excluded from 
among the permanent members of the Council. It is 
unacceptable, and I say here that the legitimacy of the 
United Nations is riding on this reform. Either the 
United Nations reforms and its legitimacy will grow, or 
  
 
09-52179 46 
 
the reform fails and then decisions will be taken 
outside the United Nations.  
 We must reform the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank; that is indispensable. Voting 
rights need to be more equitably distributed. The 
missions of both the Fund and the Bank need to be 
redefined. To maintain the Fund as the guardian of an 
orthodoxy that has been so severely shaken by the 
crisis would be a tragic mistake.  
 The international system has to be reformed. We 
cannot have a politically multipolar world with a single 
currency. That is not acceptable; it is not possible. We 
have to re-engineer the financial capitalism system. If 
we have a system in which the real price of risk or the 
real price of rare resources is not being paid, that is a 
suicidal system.  
 We need to eliminate tax havens, for we must not 
tolerate places where money derived from speculation, 
crime and fraud is stashed. It is up to us. No one in the 
world would understand if we were to fail to live up to 
this objective.  
 We need to curb the price swings of commodities 
that are subject to excessive speculation, starting with 
oil, since this instability is unsustainable. The countries 
that have commodities must be paid a fair price for 
their resources. We must not accept the speculation that 
destabilizes the world over the costs of commodities. 
 In Copenhagen, we need to commit to 
quantitative targets for greenhouse gas emissions. We 
can no longer put off the moment of choice. We need to 
set up a world environment organization. We need to 
acknowledge the legitimacy of the principle of a 
carbon tax border adjustment mechanism so that 
nobody can profit from environmental dumping.  
 We cannot let the law of trade be the only law. I 
believe in free trade, but there are fundamental 
standards. We are members of the World Health 
Organization. How can we impair the right to health of 
those who have nothing? We are members of the 
International Labour Organization, which has defined 
the fundamental standards in this field. How can we 
accept that those standards be flouted? The right to 
health, the right to a minimum respect for one’s social 
rights and the right to protection of the planet are just 
as important as the right to trade. There is no single 
right that is more important than the others. 
 We cannot ask developing countries and poor 
countries to comply with these standards if we, the 
rich, do not help them in their efforts. We all belong to 
the same human race. We all live on the same planet. 
We are all facing the same challenges.  
 So yes, we need to be able to share our 
technology. France is ready to do so, and so are the 
other wealthy countries of the world. Yes, we will need 
to come up with further resources for development 
assistance and for meeting the ecological challenge 
together. I do not hesitate to say that we will find these 
resources by taxing excessive gains from speculation 
and profits. We do not have to look far for resources; 
they are right there. I would like to appeal to all States, 
to all international organizations, that the 
recommendations made by the commission chaired by 
Joseph Stiglitz be disseminated broadly. Let us make 
no mistake about the way we measure economic 
growth.  
 The task is a huge one, and it is only just 
beginning. That is all the more reason for starting now 
and starting quickly. We have little time remaining. 
Each of us needs to realize what would happen if we 
had to go home and explain to our fellow citizens that 
we have been incapable of reaching an agreement, of 
finding new solutions at a time when they are suffering 
so grievously from the consequences of the crisis. I 
wish to say very clearly that nothing would be worse 
that a mediocre compromise in Pittsburgh and in 
Copenhagen. World opinion and the current 
circumstances demand that we find a real solution to 
the problems and not just to pretend. 
 If we do nothing, the threat of the worst crisis is 
not behind us but ahead of us. We are at one of those 
moments in history when political decisions will have 
a profound and lasting impact on the future. We have 
no choice; we must take risks, since the greatest risk 
today would be to do nothing, to let ourselves be 
carried along by the force of habit, to think that we still 
have time. France has come to tell you that we have no 
more time.  
 I hope that this year, 2009, is when a new world 
order — a more fair, more efficient world order — will 
be established, one that each of us will be comfortable 
with.I stand here to 
reaffirm the Charter of the United Nations, not to tear 
it up. I call on every nation to support its universal 
principles.  
 A year ago, we met on the brink of a global crisis 
and, as national leaders spoke in turn at this rostrum, 
the full scale of the danger was becoming clear — a 
threat not just to jobs, businesses and life savings but, 
with the imminent risk of failure of the world’s 
banking system, the prospect of entire countries failing 
as nations across Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin 
America struggled to access credit. 
 That crisis demanded global action. As never 
before, the fate of every country rested on the actions 
of all. And as the fear of the unthinkable took hold, we 
reached a clear choice: to fail separately or to succeed 
together. 
 At the G-20 meetings in Washington and again in 
London, we made our choice. Governments came 
together to begin the fight back against the global 
recession. We acted in concert, recognizing that 
national interests could be protected only by serving 
the common interest, and that in this new global 
economy, the economy is indivisible and recession 
anywhere can threaten prosperity everywhere. We 
reckoned also that, if growth is to be sustained, it has 
to be shared. Global problems can be mastered only 
through global solutions. 
 So I think that today we can draw strength from 
the unprecedented unity that has defined the past year. 
But we cannot be complacent. For while it may seem 
strange to say so after a time of such intense global 
cooperation, our world is now entering a six-month 
period which may prove even more testing for 
international cooperation together. 
 I believe that we face five urgent challenges that 
demand momentous decisions — decisions that I 
would argue are epoch-making — on climate change, 
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, shared prosperity and 
eradicating poverty. 
 Once again, we are at a point of no return. And 
just as the collapse of the banks focused our minds a 
year ago, so we must grasp this next set of challenges 
immediately. 
 If we do not reach a climate change deal at 
Copenhagen, if we miss this great opportunity to agree 
together to protect our planet, we cannot hope for an 
easy second chance some time in the future. There will 
be no retrospective global agreement to undo the 
  
 
09-52179 52 
 
damage that we have caused. This is the moment now 
to limit and reverse the climate change we are 
inflicting on future generations — not later, not at 
another conference, not in a later decade, after we have 
already lost 10 years to inaction and delay. 
 And if, in Afghanistan, we give way to the 
insurgency and Al-Qaida , other terrorist groups and 
Al-Qaida will return and, from that sanctuary once 
again plot, train for and launch attacks on the rest of 
the world. 
 There can be no chance, either, of a nuclear-free 
world if we allow Iran to develop nuclear weapons and, 
in doing so, set off a new arms race. 
 There can be no global compact for jobs and 
growth if we choke off recovery by failing to act 
together to follow through on the coordinated global 
fiscal expansion we agreed and have now put in place. 
 And if we do not act together to prevent 
avoidable illness, there can be no plan to save 
tomorrow the 12,000 children who are dying in Africa 
today and every day. 
 So I say we do need world agreement on urgent 
challenges. 
 Now let me elaborate first on climate change. 
Despite the promises we have made, the road to a 
successful outcome in Copenhagen is not assured. Why 
is that? It is so because, above all, a robust and long-
term deal on climate change requires money. If the 
poorest and most vulnerable are going to be able to 
adapt; if the emerging economies are going to embark 
on low-carbon development paths; and if the forest 
nations are going to slow and stop deforestation, then I 
know that the richer countries must contribute 
financially. 
 That is why I have proposed a new approach to 
financing our action against climate change. It will 
provide substantially increased additional and 
predictable flows. They will be flows of capital from 
both public and private sectors. They would be worth 
around $100  billion a year by 2020. In the coming 
days, we must make progress. 
 A post-2012 agreement on climate change at 
Copenhagen is the next great test of our global 
cooperation. Each of us has a duty of leadership to 
make sure that it happens. We must build on the 
discussions at Secretary-General Ban’s meeting this 
week. I have said that I will go to Copenhagen to 
conclude the deal because I believe that it is too 
important an agreement — for the global economy, and 
for the future of every nation represented here — 
simply to leave it to chance. So I urge my fellow 
leaders to commit themselves to backing up our official 
negotiators by going to Copenhagen too. 
 I believe that a safer Afghanistan means a safer 
world. But none of us can be safe if we walk away 
from that country or from our common mission and 
resolve. NATO and its partners, from Australia to Japan 
to other countries, must agree new ways to implement 
our strategy. I believe that we must ensure that 
“Afghanization” takes place — that the army, people 
and the people of Afghanistan assume greater 
responsibility for the security of their own country. 
 So, too, must we unite against terror and injustice 
wherever they are to be found in our world. I believe 
that it shames us all that the people of Somalia and the 
Sudan are still subject to the most terrible of violence; 
that Israel and Palestine have still not found a way to 
live side by side in security and peace; and that, for the 
people of Burma, their elected leader is subjected to a 
show trial and decades of imprisonment. There is more 
that we can do and more that we must do. And we must 
carry forward our efforts to make a coherent, strategic 
and more effective approach to peacekeeping and 
peacebuilding around the world. 
 Once there were five nuclear-armed Powers. Now 
there are nine. The real and present danger is that more 
will soon follow. And the risk is not just State 
aggression, but the acquisition of nuclear weapons by 
terrorists. So we must accept that we are at a moment 
of danger when decades of preventing proliferation 
could be overturned by a damaging rise in 
proliferation. If we are serious about the ambition of a 
nuclear-free world, we will need statesmanship, not 
brinksmanship. 
 Tomorrow’s Security Council resolution will be 
vital, in my view, as we move forward towards next 
year’s global nuclear security summit in April and the 
Review Conference in May. Our proposal is a grand 
global bargain between nuclear-weapon and  
non-nuclear-weapon States. There are three elements to 
it, where careful and sober international leadership is 
essential and in which Britain will play its part: the 
responsibilities of non-nuclear States, the rights of  
 
 
53 09-52179 
 
non-nuclear States and, of course, the responsibilities 
of nuclear weapon States. 
 First, let there be no ambiguity: Iran and North 
Korea must now know that the world will be even 
tougher on proliferation. We are ready to consider 
further sanctions. Britain will insist in future that the 
onus on non-nuclear States is that in the years ahead it 
is for them to prove that they are not developing 
nuclear weapons. 
 Secondly, Britain will offer civil nuclear power to 
non-nuclear States who are ready to renounce any 
plans for nuclear weapons, helping non-nuclear States 
acquire what President Eisenhower so memorably 
called “atoms for peace”. With others, we will be 
prepared to sponsor a uranium bank outside those 
countries to help them access civil nuclear power. And 
Britain is ready to launch a new nuclear centre of 
excellence to help develop an economic low-carbon 
proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel cycle. 
 My third point is that all nuclear-weapon States 
must reciprocally play their part in reducing nuclear 
weapons as part of an agreement by non-nuclear States 
to renounce them. This is exactly what the  
Non-Proliferation Treaty intended, and in line with 
maintaining our nuclear deterrent I have asked our 
National Security Committee to report to me on the 
potential future reduction of our nuclear weapon 
submarines from four to three. 
 While economic cooperation has stabilized the 
international banking system and forged the foundation 
for the resumption of economic growth, recovery is 
neither entrenched nor irreversible. The great lesson of 
the past year is that only the bold and global action that 
we took prevented a recession becoming a depression. 
We have delivered a coordinated monetary and fiscal 
response that the International Labour Organization 
estimates has saved 7 million to 11 million jobs across 
the world. 
 So at Pittsburgh, when the Group of 20 (G-20) 
meets tomorrow, we must cement a global compact for 
jobs and growth — a compact to bring unemployment 
down and bring rising prosperity across the globe. We 
must maximize the impact of the stimulus measures we 
have agreed. There must be proper planning of exit 
strategies together to make sure the recovery does not 
falter. We do not and must not turn off the life support 
for our economy prematurely. We must also facilitate 
agreement setting clear objectives on how each of us 
can contribute to worldwide growth in the future, and 
we must ensure that such future growth is balanced and 
sustainable. 
 I believe we need stronger economic cooperation 
now as we navigate the uncertainties of recovery. I 
therefore propose we launch the compact by agreeing 
that we are committed to high levels of growth on a 
sustainable and balanced basis. This must be backed up 
by comprehensive reform of the financial sector. It 
must include international principles on bonuses. We 
must strengthen our targeting of tax havens. From next 
month, real sanctions must be meted out against those 
jurisdictions that fail to meet global standards. 
 The voice of Africa will have to be heard and 
heeded to bring recovery in areas devastated by the 
events of the past year and to assure that for all 
developing countries, inside and outside Africa, we do 
not put the Millennium Development Goals beyond 
reach as a result of a wider failure of global 
responsibility. 
 In London, the G-20 agreed on measures worth 
$50 billion for poor countries to help them weather the 
crisis. Because of London, the International Monetary 
Fund can lend $8 billion instead of $2 billion over this 
year and next. This is already helping Kenya and 
Tanzania to increase Government spending in response 
to the crisis. 
 Amid all these challenges, we must remember a 
fundamental promise we made 10 years ago. And this 
is my fifth and final imperative: to achieve a vision for 
2015 that we are in danger of betraying, because on 
present trends it will not take five years — as we 
pledged — and not even 50 years; it will take more 
than 100 years to deliver on some of our Millennium 
Development Goals. And 100 years is too long for the 
peoples of our countries to wait for the justice that has 
been promised.  
 As President Obama has said, we need a global 
plan to make the Millennium Development Goals a 
reality. The unyielding, grinding, soul-destroying, so 
often lethal poverty I saw in Africa and other 
developing countries has convinced me that unless 
empowerment through trade justice is matched by 
empowerment through free education and free health 
care, then this generation in sub-Saharan Africa will 
not have the opportunity they deserve to rise out of 
poverty and will never be fully free. 
  
 
09-52179 54 
 
 I believe the greatest of injustice demands the 
boldest of actions. Today at this United Nations 
General Assembly, we will see history being made with 
the beginnings of universal free health care in Africa 
and Asia as Burundi, Sierra Leone, Malawi, Nepal, 
Liberia and Ghana all make major announcements, 
which I applaud, that extend free health care and 
abolish user fees. As a result of those actions, more 
than 10 million additional people in Africa and Asia 
will now have access to free health services — 
10 million people who will now for the first time get 
the treatment they need without being turned away or 
fearing how they will pay. I urge you all to match the 
leadership of these countries with your own support, 
and I commit the United Kingdom to giving that 
support. 
 Let us remember how in 1945, as the United 
Nations was being created, countries faced a 
multiplicity of challenges but summoned up the energy 
and vision not just to rebuild from the ruin and rubble 
of a war, but to establish a new international order for 
shared security and progress. I believe that these same 
principles must now inspire new and better, more 
representative and more effective ways of cooperating 
globally together. 
 And as we learn from the experience of turning 
common purpose into common action in this our 
shared global society, so we must forge a progressive 
multilateralism for this era, one that depends upon us 
finding within ourselves and together the qualities of 
moral courage and leadership that for our time and for 
our generation can make this world anew. I believe that 
if we take the right decisions and work together, we are 
in the business of creating for the first time in human 
history a truly global society. It is a name to be wished 
for and an aim to be fought for by all of us.I offer my congratulations 
to Mr. Treki on his assumption of the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session. My 
delegation assures him of our fullest cooperation 
during his stewardship of this Assembly, which 
embodies the hopes, aspirations and shared vision of 
peace and development of all the peoples of our planet. 
 When this session of the General Assembly ends 
next year, the United Nations will have completed 
65 years of existence. These past decades have seen the 
world change in fundamental ways. Connectivity 
defines our global condition, and the challenges that 
we collectively face are truly global. The resolution of 
these challenges, as we are aware, requires global 
approaches and solutions. What may happen in one 
part of the world has an impact on other regions. In the 
context of these rapidly emerging changes and their 
deep and diverse effects, we must consider more 
deeply whether the United Nations and other global 
governance structures are geared to effectively meeting 
the challenges that confront us all. 
 It is of concern that, even after more than six 
decades of existence, our international governance 
structures are neither inclusive nor participatory. 
Consequently, these structures and institutions have not 
kept pace or evolved with the changed nature, intensity 
and depth of contemporary global issues. The question 
is therefore: Are these institutions able to address these 
challenges adequately or satisfactorily? The reform and 
restructuring of the global governance architecture are 
the critical needs of our times, and the voices of the 
developing world, including those of the small island 
nations and Africa, are of principal and core relevance 
if we are to have truly participatory and global 
responses to global challenges. 
  
 
09-52592 28 
 
 One need not look very far to identify these 
challenges. The current economic and financial 
turmoil, which did not begin in the developing world, 
has affected developing countries the most. Growth has 
slowed, with recession overtaking many countries. The 
international response to this challenge must consist 
not only of the measures that have been taken to 
stimulate economies, but also, more importantly, of 
finding ways to restructure the current international 
governance system, which has failed to respond to the 
virulence of the financial and economic crisis. 
 To gloss over this structural deficit of the current 
global financial and economic architecture would 
imperil the future of a vast majority of the peoples of 
this world and presage greater difficulties in the future. 
In the face of the current economic and financial crisis, 
hard-won gains in alleviating poverty, hunger, illiteracy 
and disease are being reversed. The achievements of 
the Millennium Development Goals are seriously 
threatened. Policies of protectionism under such 
already adverse circumstances will exacerbate the 
serious situation that many countries face. 
 It is imperative that the United Nations act in 
concert to coherently overcome these challenges. India, 
which is actively engaged in the Group of 20 and other 
processes, has always stressed that developing 
countries must receive priority in any global response 
to the crisis. The United Nations Conference on the 
Financial and Economic Crisis held in June was 
opportune and provided a useful platform for 
collectively seeking ways and means to respond to the 
crisis. We now look forward to early implementation 
during the course of this General Assembly of the 
follow-up measures agreed on at the Conference. 
 At the centre stage of multilateralism and 
international cooperation is the United Nations. This 
Organization is a platform on which the world meets to 
express views and undertake commitments on global 
issues of mutual concern on an equal footing. It is no 
wonder, then, that the Charter of the United Nations 
begins with the inspiring words “We the peoples of the 
United Nations”. Inclusiveness and collective action in 
all aspects of the work of the Organization are at the 
heart of its Charter. This vision must be our lodestar, 
the guiding principle of all we undertake. India is 
committed to working with Member States to make the 
United Nations more relevant and attuned to 
contemporary realities.  
 Reforming the United Nations is a matter of the 
highest priority. Four years after the 2005 World 
Summit, there has not been much progress even as 
newer and more global crises and problems have 
emerged. We should not let slowness of action weaken 
the Organization in the face of such challenges. Rather, 
we must work in concert to make it more robust and 
capable of effective response. 
 Reform in the three essentials of the Charter — 
peace and security, development and human rights — 
requires our collective attention. The General 
Assembly must be revitalized in full measure, and its 
role as the anvil of global deliberation must be 
strengthened. The Economic and Social Council must 
become the fulcrum of development. It must be 
accepted that the Security Council must be 
strengthened and made more representative by 
expanding its permanent and non-permanent 
membership. Ongoing intergovernmental negotiations 
during the past six months have unambiguously 
established that an overwhelming majority of Member 
States share the perspective that an expansion in both 
categories of Security Council membership is needed. 
 Climate change is one of the most important 
global challenges that we face today. Developing 
countries bear a disproportionate share of its adverse 
effects, even though they are not responsible for it. 
Cognizant of the serious threat that climate change 
poses, India is engaged in the ongoing negotiations 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), including at the upcoming 
Copenhagen Conference. India will work for an 
outcome that recognizes the development imperatives 
of developing countries and is rooted in the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities. 
 We also must move away from concentrating on 
mitigation only and ensure that there is a focus on 
adaptation, which is critical for developing countries. 
We are hosting a high-level global conference on 
“Climate Change: Technology Development and 
Transfer” on 22 and 23 October 2009, in cooperation 
with the United Nations. The objective of the 
conference is to help formulate a road map for 
technology in the context of climate change mitigation 
and adaptation to support the UNFCCC process. 
 Developing countries must be supported 
financially, technologically and with capacity-building 
 
 
29 09-52592 
 
resources so that they can cope with the immense 
challenges of adaptation. Special efforts are required to 
develop programmes that address the critical needs of 
small island States and of the most vulnerable 
countries. 
 Poverty alleviation and livelihood security are 
central imperatives for India. To that end, accelerated 
economic growth and energy security are critical 
drivers. In pursuing our development goals, India has 
been successful in significantly reducing its energy 
intensity. India will continue to pursue that path. 
 India is aware that the continuing volatility in the 
fossil-fuel markets, together with the threat of climate 
change, makes the development of all renewable and 
clean energy sources — including nuclear energy — 
crucial. In that context, international civil-nuclear 
cooperation is important. 
 India has also taken several independent 
initiatives to address the issue of climate change. We 
have put in place a comprehensive policy and 
legislative framework, as well as a national action plan 
on climate change with eight separate national 
missions. An unprecedented afforestation campaign has 
been launched with a doubling of the forestry budget 
this year to $1.3 billion, and this increase is going to be 
sustained every year. The Prime Minister’s Council has 
approved national missions for enhanced energy 
efficiency and solar energy, setting ambitious goals. 
We are supporting and facilitating major research to 
assess various aspects related to climate change. 
 India attaches the highest priority to the goal of 
nuclear disarmament and has an impeccable 
non-proliferation record. We welcome the renewed 
global debate on achieving a world free of nuclear 
weapons. That corresponds with India’s long-standing 
and consistent advocacy of nuclear disarmament as one 
of the highest priorities of the international community. 
We have put forward a number of proposals on nuclear 
disarmament at the United Nations, including a 
working paper in 2006 proposing elements to fashion a 
new consensus on disarmament and non-proliferation. 
 Last year, at the sixty-third session of the General 
Assembly, consistent with India’s long-standing 
commitment as articulated in the Rajiv Gandhi Action 
Plan in 1988, India reiterated its proposal that a nuclear 
weapons convention be convened to ban the 
production, development, stockpiling and use of 
nuclear weapons and to provide for their complete 
elimination within a time frame. The international 
nuclear order cannot be discriminatory. Further, States 
must fulfil the obligations that they have undertaken. 
Once more, with feeling and with commitment, India 
reiterates that proposal. 
 We will continue to engage with key countries to 
intensify this debate in the hope that greater 
international understanding will lend itself to a firm 
commitment to action on nuclear disarmament. It was 
in that spirit that we supported the adoption of a 
programme of work, including on a fissile material cut-
off treaty (FMCT), at the Conference on Disarmament 
in May this year. It is consistent with India’s position 
to work with others at the Conference on Disarmament 
towards the conclusion of a non-discriminatory, 
multilaterally negotiated and internationally verifiable 
FMCT, provided it corresponds with India’s national 
security interests. We remain committed to a voluntary, 
unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing.  
 India stands committed to the safeguarding of 
international peace and security. Over the past five 
decades, we have contributed more than 
100,000 peacekeepers and have suffered a high number 
of casualties during this time. Strengthening the 
normative basis for peacekeeping operations and 
giving major troop-contributing countries a greater say 
will serve to make peacekeeping more effective. 
 Peace, security, stability and the welfare of our 
neighbourhood are vital for India. There is a new 
beginning in Sri Lanka; in Nepal, strengthening the 
peace process is in our collective interest; and in 
Afghanistan, the international community must remain 
intensively engaged and support its development 
efforts and the maintenance of peace and stability. 
India is committed to establishing good-neighbourly 
relations and resolving all outstanding issues with 
Pakistan through peaceful dialogue. 
 The barbaric terrorist attack on the innocent 
people of Mumbai on 26 November 2008 reminded us 
of the daily and malignant menace that terrorism poses 
to all countries. There can be no justification 
whatsoever for such mindless terrorist acts. It is our 
collective responsibility and duty to work together to 
ensure that terrorists and the organizers, perpetrators 
and supporters of such crimes are brought to justice. 
 In order to strengthen the international legal 
framework of the fight against terrorism, India has 
proposed a comprehensive convention on international 
  
 
09-52592 30 
 
terrorism. Discussions on the draft have gone on for far 
too long. It is time that the convention be finally 
adopted. India earnestly calls upon all countries to 
make serious efforts in the next few weeks to arrive at 
a consensus on the text. 
 In conclusion, I wish to reiterate India’s steadfast 
commitment to the work of the United Nations. 
Speaking to this Assembly 41 years ago, Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi said:  
  “The United Nations is the trustee of the 
world’s peace and represents the hopes of 
mankind. Its very existence gives a feeling of 
assurance that the justice of true causes can be 
brought fearlessly before the world. This 
Assembly and the agencies of the United Nations 
should, in all that they do, sustain those hopes 
and promote the causes of peace.” (A/PV.1693, 
para. 150)  
The truth and conviction of these words are more 
meaningful today than ever before.Nearly 62 years ago, the 
United Nations recognized the right of the Jews, an 
ancient people 3,500 years old, to a State of their own 
in their ancestral homeland. I stand here today as the 
Prime Minister of Israel, the Jewish State, and I speak 
to the Assembly on behalf of my country and my 
people. 
 The United Nations was founded after the 
carnage of the Second World War and the horrors of 
the Holocaust. It was charged with preventing the 
reoccurrence of such horrendous events. Nothing has 
undermined that mission, nothing has impeded it more, 
than the systematic assault on the truth. Yesterday, the 
President of Iran stood at this very rostrum spewing his 
latest anti-Semitic rants. Just a few days earlier, he 
again claimed that the Holocaust was a lie. 
 Last month, I went to a villa in a suburb of Berlin 
called Wannsee. There, on 20 January 1942, after a 
hearty meal, senior Nazi officials met and decided to 
exterminate my people. They left detailed minutes of 
that meeting that have been preserved for posterity by 
successive German Governments. I have here a copy of 
the minutes of the meeting of senior Nazi officials 
instructing the Nazi Government exactly how to carry 
out the extermination of the Jewish people. Is that 
protocol a lie? Are the German Government and all 
German Governments lying? 
 The day before I was in Wannsee, in Berlin I was 
given the original construction plans for the 
Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. I now hold in 
my hand the Auschwitz-Birkenau plans. They contain 
the signature of Heinrich Himmler, Hitler’s deputy, 
himself. Are those plans for the Auschwitz-Birkenau 
concentration camp, where 1 million Jews were 
murdered, a lie too? In June, President Obama visited 
another concentration camp, one of many — the 
 
 
09-52320 36 
 
Buchenwald concentration camp. Did President Obama 
pay tribute to a lie? 
 And what of the Auschwitz survivors, whose 
arms still bear the tattooed numbers branded on them 
by the Nazis? Are those tattoos a lie, too? One third of 
all Jews perished in the great conflagration of the 
Holocaust. Nearly every Jewish family, including my 
own, was affected. My wife’s grandparents, her 
father’s two sisters and three brothers, and all the 
aunts, uncles and cousins were murdered by the Nazis. 
Is that a lie?   
 Yesterday, the man who calls the Holocaust a lie 
spoke from this rostrum. I commend those who refused 
to come and those who left in protest. They stood up 
for moral clarity and brought honour to their countries. 
But to those who gave that denier of the Holocaust a 
hearing, I say on behalf of my people, the Jewish 
people, and of decent people everywhere: Have they no 
shame? Have they no decency? A mere six decades 
after the Holocaust, they give legitimacy to a man who 
denies the murder of 6 million Jews, while promising 
to wipe out the State of Israel, the State of the Jews. 
 That is a disgrace. It is a mockery of the Charter 
of the United Nations. Perhaps some representatives 
think that that man and his odious regime threaten only 
the Jews. If they believe that, they are wrong — dead 
wrong. History has shown us time and again that what 
starts with attacks on the Jews eventually ends up 
engulfing many, many others.  
 For this Iranian regime is fuelled by an extreme 
fundamentalism that burst onto the world scene three 
decades ago after lying dormant for centuries. In the 
past 30 years, that fanaticism has swept across the 
globe with a murderous violence that knows no bounds 
and with a cold-blooded impartiality in the choice of 
its victims. It has callously slaughtered Muslims, 
Christians, Jews, Hindus and many others. The 
adherents of that unforgiving creed, although it is 
comprised of different offshoots, seek to return 
humanity to medieval times. Wherever they can, they 
impose a backward, regimented society where women, 
minorities, gays or anyone else deemed not to be a true 
believer is brutally subjugated.  
 The struggle against that fanaticism does not pit 
faith against faith, or civilization against civilization. It 
pits civilization against barbarism, the twenty-first 
century against the ninth, and those who sanctify life 
against those who glorify death. The primitivism of the 
ninth century ought to be no match for the progress of 
the twenty-first. The allure of freedom, the power of 
technology and the reach of communications should 
surely win the day. Ultimately, the past cannot triumph 
over the future, and our future offers all nations 
magnificent bounties of hope because the pace of 
progress is growing, and growing exponentially.  
 It took us centuries to get from the printing press 
to the telephone, decades to get from the telephone to 
the personal computer, and only a few years to get 
from the personal computer to the Internet. What 
seemed impossible a few years ago is already outdated, 
and we can scarcely fathom the changes that are yet to 
come. We will crack the genetic code. We will cure the 
incurable. We will lengthen our lives. We will find a 
cheap alternative to fossil fuel, and we will clean up 
the planet.    
 I am proud that my country, Israel, is at the 
forefront of many of those advances in science and 
technology, medicine and biology, agriculture and 
water, and energy and the environment. Those 
innovations in my country and in many others offer 
humanity a sunlit future of unimagined promise. 
 However, if the most primitive fanaticism can 
acquire the most deadly weapons, the march of history 
could be reversed for a time and, like the belated 
victory over the Nazis, the forces of progress and 
freedom prevail only after a horrific toll of blood and 
fortune has been exacted from mankind. That is why 
the greatest threat facing the world today is the 
marriage between religious fundamentalism and the 
weapons of mass destruction.  
 The most urgent challenge facing this body today 
is to prevent the tyrants of Tehran from acquiring 
nuclear weapons. Are the Members of the United 
Nations up to that challenge? Will the international 
community confront a despotism that terrorizes its own 
people as they bravely stand up for freedom? Will it 
take action against the dictators who stole an election 
in broad daylight and then gunned down Iranian 
protesters, who died on the sidewalks and in the streets 
choking in their own blood? Will the international 
community thwart the world’s most pernicious sponsor 
and practitioner of terrorism? Above all, will the 
international community stop the terrorist regime of 
Iran from developing atomic weapons and thereby 
endangering the peace of the entire world? 
 
 
37 09-52320 
 
 The people of Iran are courageously standing up 
to this regime. People of goodwill around the world 
stand with them, as do the thousands who have been 
protesting outside this Hall throughout the week. Will 
the United Nations stand with them? 
 The jury is still out on the United Nations. Recent 
signs are not encouraging. Rather than condemning the 
terrorists and their Iranian patrons, some here in the 
United Nations have condemned their victims. This is 
exactly what a recent United Nations report on Gaza 
did, falsely equating the terrorists with those they 
targeted. 
 For eight long years, Hamas fired rockets from 
Gaza on nearby Israeli cities and citizens — thousands 
of missiles and mortars hailing down from the sky on 
schools, homes, shopping centres and bus stops. Year 
after year, as these missiles were deliberately fired on 
our civilians, not one single United Nations resolution 
was passed condemning those criminal attacks. We 
heard nothing — absolutely nothing — from the 
Human Rights Council of the United Nations, a 
misnamed institution if ever there was one. 
 In 2005, hoping to advance peace, Israel 
unilaterally withdrew from every inch of Gaza. It was 
very painful. We dismantled 21 settlements, really 
bedroom communities and farms. We uprooted over 
8,000 Israelis; we just yanked them out of their homes. 
We did this because many in Israel believed that it 
would win peace. Well, we did not get peace. Instead 
we got an Iranian-backed terror base 50 miles from 
Tel Aviv. But life in the Israeli towns and cities 
immediately adjacent to Gaza became nothing less than 
a nightmare. The Hamas rocket attacks not only 
continued after we left, they actually increased 
dramatically. They increased tenfold. And again, the 
United Nations was silent — absolutely silent. 
 Well, after eight years of this unremitting assault, 
Israel was finally forced to respond. But how should 
we have responded? There is only one example in 
history of thousands of rockets being fired on a 
country’s civilian population. This happened when the 
Nazis rocketed British cities during the Second World 
War. During that war, the Allies levelled German cities, 
causing hundreds of thousands of casualties. I am not 
passing judgement; I am stating a fact, a fact that is the 
product of the decisions of great and honourable 
men — the leaders of Britain and the United States — 
fighting an evil force in the Second World War. 
 It is also a fact that Israel chose to respond 
differently. Faced with an enemy committing a double 
war crime — firing on civilians while hiding behind 
civilians — Israel sought to conduct surgical strikes 
against the rocket-launchers themselves. That was no 
easy task because the terrorists were firing their 
missiles from homes and schools, using mosques as 
weapons depots and missile caches, and ferreting 
explosives in ambulances. 
 Israel, by contrast, tried to minimize casualties by 
urging Palestinian civilians to vacate the targeted 
areas. We dropped countless flyers over their homes. 
We sent thousands and thousands of text messages to 
the Palestinian residents. We made thousands and 
thousands of cellular phone calls urging them to 
vacate, to leave. Never has a country gone to such 
extraordinary lengths to remove the enemy’s civilian 
population from harm’s way.  
 Yet faced with an absolutely clear-cut case of 
aggressor and victim, who do you think the United 
Nations Human Rights Council decided to condemn? 
Israel. A democracy legitimately defending itself 
against terror is morally hanged, drawn and quartered, 
and given an unfair trial to boot. By these twisted 
standards, the Human Rights Council would have 
dragged Roosevelt and Churchill to the dock as war 
criminals. What a perversion of truth! What a 
perversion of justice! 
 The delegates to the United Nations and the 
Governments that they represent have a decision to 
make. Will they accept this farce? Because if they do, 
the United Nations would revert to its darkest days, 
when the worst violators of human rights sat in 
judgement against the law-abiding democracies, when 
Zionism was equated with racism and when an 
automatic majority could be mustered to declare that 
the Earth is flat. If you had to choose a date when the 
United Nations began its descent, almost a freefall, and 
lost the respect of many thoughtful people in the 
international community, it was the day in 1975 it 
decided to equate Zionism with racism. 
 Now this body has a choice to make. If it does 
not reject this biased report, it would vitiate itself, it 
would recommence the process of vitiating its own 
relevance and importance. But it would also do 
something else. It would send the message to terrorists 
everywhere that terrorism pays: all you have to do is 
 
 
09-52320 38 
 
launch your attacks from densely populated areas, and 
you will win immunity. 
 A third point: in condemning Israel, this body 
would also deal a mortal blow to peace. Let me explain 
why. When Israel left Gaza, many hoped that the 
missile attacks would stop. Others believed that, even 
if they did not stop, at the very least Israel, in having 
made this extraordinary gesture for peace, would have 
international legitimacy to exercise its right of self-
defence if peace failed. What legitimacy? What self-
defence? 
 The same United Nations that cheered Israel as it 
left Gaza and promised to back our right of self-
defence now accuses us — my people, my country — 
of being war criminals? And for what? For acting 
responsibly in self-defence? For acting in a way that 
any country would act, with a restraint unmatched by 
many? What a travesty! 
 Israel justly defended itself against terror. This 
biased and unjust report provides a clear-cut test for all 
Governments. Will the Assembly stand with Israel or 
will it stand with the terrorists? We must know the 
answer to that question now. Now, not later. Because if 
Israel is again asked to take more risks for peace, we 
must know today that the Assembly will stand with us 
tomorrow. Only if we have the confidence that we can 
defend ourselves can we take further risks for peace. 
 Make no mistake: all of Israel wants peace. Any 
time an Arab leader genuinely wanted peace with us, 
we made peace. We made peace with Egypt led by 
Anwar Sadat. We made peace with Jordan led by King 
Hussein. And if the Palestinians truly want peace, my 
Government and I, and my people, will make peace. 
But we want a genuine peace, a defensible peace, a 
permanent peace.  
 In 1947, this body voted to establish two States 
for two peoples — a Jewish State and an Arab State. 
The Jews accepted that resolution. The Arabs rejected 
it and invaded the embryonic Jewish State with the 
hopes of annihilating it. 
 We ask the Palestinians to finally do what they 
have refused to do for 62 years: say yes to a Jewish 
State. It is as simple, as clear and as elementary as that. 
Just as we are asked to recognize a nation-State of the 
Palestinian people, the Palestinians must be asked to 
recognize the nation-State of the Jewish people. The 
Jewish people are not foreign conquerors in the Land 
of Israel. It is the land of our forefathers. 
 Inscribed on the walls outside this building is the 
great Biblical vision of peace: “Nation shall not lift up 
sword against nation. They shall learn war no more.” 
These words were spoken by the great Jewish prophet 
Isaiah 2,800 years ago as he walked in my country, in 
my city, in the hills of Judea and in the streets of 
Jerusalem.  
 We are not strangers to this land. This is our 
homeland. But as deeply connected as we are to our 
homeland, we also recognize that the Palestinians also 
live there and they want a home of their own. We want 
to live side by side with them — two free peoples 
living in peace, living in prosperity, living in dignity.  
 Peace, prosperity and dignity require one other 
element: we must have security. The Palestinians 
should have all the powers to govern themselves except 
a handful of powers that could endanger Israel. That is 
why the Palestinian State must be effectively 
demilitarized. I say “effectively” because we do not 
want another Gaza, another south Lebanon, another 
Iranian-backed terror base abutting Jerusalem and 
perched on the hills a few kilometres from Tel Aviv. 
 We want peace. I believe that with goodwill and 
with hard work such a peace can be achieved. But it 
requires that all of us roll back the forces of terror led 
by Iran that seek to destroy peace, that seek to 
eliminate Israel and to overthrow the world order.  The 
question facing the international community is whether 
it is prepared to confront those forces, or will it 
accommodate them. 
 Over 70 years ago, Winston Churchill lamented 
what he called the “confirmed unteachability of 
mankind”. By that he meant the unfortunate habit of 
civilized societies to sleep and to slumber until danger 
nearly overtakes them. Churchill bemoaned what he 
called the  
 “want of foresight, unwillingness to act when 
action would be simple and effective, lack of 
clear thinking, confusion of counsel until the 
emergency comes, until self-preservation strikes 
its jarring gong …”. 
 I speak here today in the hope that Churchill’s 
assessment of the “unteachability of mankind” is for 
once proven wrong. I speak here today in the hope that 
 
 
39 09-52320 
 
we can learn from history, that we can prevent danger 
in time. 
 In the spirit of the timeless words spoken to 
Joshua over 3,000 years ago, let us be strong and of 
good courage.  Let us confront this peril, secure our 
future and, God willing, forge an enduring peace for 
generations to come. 
(spoke in Hebrew) 
 May God bless his people with peace; may God  
give strength to his people; may God bless his people 
with peace.To the powers, to the 
voices, to the four winds: I greet you all.
 I have addressed the Assembly in Te Reo Maori, 
the indigenous language of New Zealand, and I bring 
warm Pacific greetings from all New Zealanders. 
 I am deeply honoured to lead New Zealand’s 
delegation to the General Assembly for the first time. 
Like every New Zealand Prime Minister since 1945, I 
stand here today to reaffirm my country’s commitment 
to the United Nations and the United Nations Charter. 
 The founding Members of the United Nations 
gathered in San Francisco in 1945 to create this 
Organization out of the ashes of the most destructive 
war and the most debilitating depression in modern 
history. They believed in the larger freedom of a world 
where collective action might avert common crises. 
They believed in the rule of law, by which all States 
would be held to a universal standard, and in a world 
where all peoples, faiths and cultures could flourish. 
They believed in a future in which every human being 
would be free from want and free from fear. And they 
wanted an international Organization and architecture 
that could deliver those benefits.  
 New Zealand was active among those founding 
Members in San Francisco. And, as a small, 
independent and diverse country in the Pacific, New 
Zealand still has a stake in the United Nations — this 
great meeting place for all States. 
 I have benefited personally from efforts to secure 
those ideals. My family fled persecution in Europe, and 
I was privileged to grow up in a new world where a 
child of immigrants is now accorded the extraordinary 
privilege of leading his country and addressing this 
Assembly on its behalf. 
 We meet at a time of many challenges. With 
130 heads of State and Government assembled here 
this week, the present session of the General Assembly 
represents our greatest opportunity since the 2005 
World Summit to reaffirm our collective resolve. New 
Zealand embraces that opportunity. Today, I will focus 
on some of the most pressing issues demanding 
collective responses from us. 
 The crisis in the global economy continues. We 
must remain resolute in our efforts to stabilize the 
global economy in order to permit a return to 
sustainable growth. New Zealand welcomes the actions 
of the Group of 20 (G-20) over the past year. But, in 
commending those efforts, we call on the G-20 to heed 
 
 
31 09-52470 
 
the voices of the world’s small economies and to 
ensure that they are also heard in global decision-
making. 
 Free and fair trade will be the principal engine for 
driving developing countries out of poverty and 
bringing greater prosperity to all. An essential 
component in our response to the global economic 
crisis must therefore be a balanced and ambitious 
conclusion to the Doha Round of world trade talks. A 
genuinely global agreement that reduces tariffs, 
eliminates export subsidies, reduces domestic subsidies 
and increases market access will see benefits flow to 
all States. At a time when all countries are suffering 
from the brunt of the current economic crisis, further 
delay is inexcusable. 
 As one of the world’s first truly open economies, 
New Zealand has an unwavering commitment to trade 
liberalization and to the pursuit of bilateral, regional 
and global free trade agreements. We support the call 
of the Secretary-General for the immediate suspension 
of price controls and other agricultural trade 
restrictions, in order to reduce soaring food prices and 
help millions cope with the highest food prices in 
30 years. 
 Therefore, I call on all those States and groupings 
that have broken their undertakings and reintroduced 
protectionist measures to reconsider. Those actions are 
as harmful as they are unacceptable. Agriculture, which 
is so important for developing countries in particular, is 
one of the sectors most affected. 
 The escalation of poverty is a result of the 
economic crisis. New Zealand is, naturally, proud of 
the efforts of the United Nations Development 
Programme to strengthen its focus as the largest United 
Nations development agency on poverty and the 
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.  
 For its part, New Zealand pledges to continue to 
increase its official development assistance, with a 
clear focus on the Pacific Islands region. Aid 
effectiveness is just as important as the quantum of aid. 
That is why, last month, we committed to the Cairns 
Compact, which will strengthen development 
coordination in the Pacific islands. 
 The major focus of the General Assembly this 
year must be on the challenge of climate change. 
Climate change demands innovation and a global 
response. The world cannot afford to contemplate 
failure at Copenhagen. Political leadership is needed, 
and it is on display.  
 At the Summit on climate change this week, the 
leaders of the world’s three biggest economies showed 
their determination both to make Copenhagen a success 
and to take action themselves. All countries must take 
action that reflects our individual circumstances, 
responsibilities and capabilities. 
 For our part, New Zealand is committed to 
securing a durable and meaningful agreement on 
climate change — an agreement that is both 
environmentally effective and economically efficient. I 
have set a target for New Zealand of reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 10 to 20 per cent below 
1990 levels by 2020, if there is a comprehensive global 
agreement. That amounts to a per capita drop of 35 to 
42 per cent since 1990. 
 New Zealand is acutely conscious that most of 
our greenhouse gas emissions come from livestock 
methane emissions, which so far no technology can 
reduce. At the same time we are proud of our role as a 
food producer to the world and the contribution we can 
make to assuring food security for the world’s people. 
 Our challenge is to find a way to balance growth 
in agricultural production with the need to reduce 
emissions and reach climate change targets.  
 That is not just a challenge for New Zealand, but 
one for the world. Agricultural emissions make up 
14 per cent of all emissions worldwide. As demand for 
food rises, so will those emissions. Yet so far the only 
known way to achieve emission reductions from 
agriculture is through reductions in output, which is 
not an acceptable response — not for New Zealand, 
and not for a growing world that seeks freedom from 
hunger. 
 A better response to this challenge must be found. 
In my view, the response must draw on the power and 
possibility of science. Just as New Zealand is proud of 
its agricultural producers, so are we proud of our role 
in agricultural research. This research has resulted in 
scientific and technological advances that have 
improved production and fed virtually millions of 
people. 
 But advancing research in the area of emission 
reduction requires a commitment so broad that it is 
beyond the capacity of any one individual country. 
  
 
09-52470 32 
 
That is a challenge that requires collective action, and 
it is collective action that I call for today. 
 New Zealand has developed a proposal for a 
global alliance on the reduction of agricultural 
emissions. This alliance would undertake international 
research and investment into new technologies and 
practices to help reduce agriculture-related emissions 
and would seek to achieve greater coordination of 
existing efforts. 
 Through a global alliance we can find solutions 
faster, make better use of the money that is being spent 
around the world and encourage all countries and 
companies to do more. We have been delighted with 
the interest that our proposal has received so far, and 
we will continue working with others to explore the 
concept. Today, my call to other agricultural producers 
of the world is to rise to this challenge and join New 
Zealand in this research effort.  
 I now want to address some of the security crises 
that we confront. Yesterday I had the honour to observe 
the high-level Security Council meeting on 
disarmament and non-proliferation. As a country with a 
proud record of promoting nuclear disarmament and 
non-proliferation, I was heartened by the expressions 
of support for a world free of nuclear weapons. We 
must all take full advantage of this historic moment to 
advance the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation 
agenda. We owe it to our generation and to those who 
follow us to move our vision for a world free from 
nuclear weapons forward. As a proudly nuclear-free 
nation and a country that has been at the forefront of 
that debate since the 1970s, New Zealand stands ready 
to play its part.  
 We are optimistic about the prospects for 
progress. Last week, New Zealand presided over the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in Vienna, Austria. Preventing the spread of 
nuclear weapons through the implementation of 
safeguards under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
is a fundamental pillar of the Agency’s work. Next year 
sees the quinquennial review conference of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
 New Zealand will actively work with our New 
Agenda Coalition partners for a meaningful outcome at 
that conference to bring us closer to a truly secure 
world.  
 We will also continue to address the humanitarian 
harm caused by conventional weapons. We will work 
for a robust, action-oriented outcome later this year at 
the second review conference of the Ottawa 
Convention on Landmines. 
 Looking back, I am proud of the role that New 
Zealand was able to play in the negotiation of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. The Government 
attaches priority to passing legislation to enable us to 
ratify this very significant treaty. New Zealand also 
continues to play its part in maintaining and promoting 
international peace and security. 
 Peacekeeping remains one of this Organization’s 
most essential tasks and most solemn responsibilities to 
its Members. While United Nations peacekeeping has 
been significantly strengthened since the testing it 
underwent in the 1990s, the demands now being placed 
on it are severe. 
 I want to express my profound gratitude to those 
civilians and military personnel who place their lives at 
risk to support peace and live up to the ideals of the 
Charter of the United Nations. Ensuring that United 
Nations peacekeeping is as effective and responsive as 
possible must therefore remain one of the 
Organization’s most urgent priorities. 
 The United Nations provides the legal mandate — 
and often the operational effectiveness — for our joint 
efforts to achieve and maintain peace and security. New 
Zealand is firmly committed to supporting United 
Nations peacekeeping — both its own operations and 
others that it has mandated, such as those in which we 
are involved in Afghanistan, the Solomon Islands and 
Timor-Leste. 
 All too often, however, the United Nations has 
found itself unable to respond to emerging crises. New 
Zealand therefore strongly supports the concept of 
responsibility to protect. I am pleased at the solid 
foundation that the General Assembly’s recent debate 
on that responsibility has laid for its implementation. 
 New Zealand also strongly supports the 
International Criminal Court (ICC). It is a fundamental 
tenet of our domestic legal systems that wrongdoers 
must be brought to justice. The ICC is the mechanism 
for applying that same principle to persons accused of 
the most serious international crimes. 
 New Zealand takes very seriously its 
responsibilities for creating and maintaining peace and 
 
 
33 09-52470 
 
security in its region and in the world. I am therefore 
pleased to confirm New Zealand’s candidature for the 
United Nations Security Council for 2015-2016 in the 
elections to be held in 2014. In advancing its 
candidature, New Zealand does so as a State committed 
to upholding the international rule of law and to 
providing a strong and principled Pacific voice on 
behalf of small States like ourselves with an interest in 
a fairer and more secure world. 
 We all have a stake in a world where peace and 
the rule of law prevail, where all States are secure and 
can prosper and where all people are guaranteed the 
human rights and fundamental freedoms promised 
them in the Charter.  
 But we also know that solutions to the problems 
we collectively face do not lie with inspirational goals 
and promises that can be — and far too often are — 
quickly and quietly forgotten and ignored. Hard, 
pragmatic decisions must be made. Enforceable 
solutions must be implemented. 
 We know that effective, collective action is in 
every country’s long-term, national interest. That is 
what New Zealand believed in 1945, and I recommit 
now to taking action to live up to the ideals of the 
United Nations Charter, here, in this great Hall, this 
evening.Today, 
speaking from this high rostrum, I would like to 
highlight five topics that are, in my view, important to 
all of us and our common approaches to the 
international agenda. 
 The first is the timing of this meeting and the 
moment that humankind is currently experiencing. This 
session of the General Assembly is taking place at a 
very critical and complex time. It can be said without 
exaggeration that we are living through one of the 
watershed moments of modern history. Besides the 
economic crisis — the first large-scale crisis of the era 
of globalization — global development as a whole 
continues to be threatened by regional and local 
conflicts, terrorism, cross-border crime, food shortages 
and climate change. The impact of the crisis continues 
to be felt by most countries of the world. Although so 
far we have been able, it seems, to avoid the very worst 
scenarios, the question remains: how to overcome the 
huge imbalances and deficits — amounting to trillions 
of dollars — accumulated in the global and national 
economies. 
 Our collective agenda for unification has been 
dictated by life itself, which also dictates the growing 
need for the United Nations as a time-tested 
mechanism for harmonizing the interests of different 
States and peoples. As never before, we are feeling the 
need for informal collective leadership and for an 
increased role for such platforms as the G-8 and the 
more recent G-20, as well as other negotiation and 
mediation forums, and all the more because these 
operate not on a model of opposition, but rather to 
advance the converging interests of their participants. 
 At this morning’s meeting, the President of the 
United States addressed this Assembly, and I would 
like to endorse one of the thoughts he voiced. He stated 
that no single country can or should attempt to 
dominate others, and that is absolutely true. However, 
these agreed approaches need to be implemented in 
some way, including through the United Nations 
system. 
 Another distinctive feature of modern times is the 
increasing role of regional entities, which are growing 
more active on every continent. This trend is entirely 
consistent with the principles of the United Nations. 
Russia, for its part — together with its partners in the 
Commonwealth of Independent States, in the 
framework of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 
and with its fellow BRIC countries Brazil, India and 
China — will continue to bolster the mechanisms of 
regional interaction. These mechanisms facilitate a 
collective response to common threats, while 
mitigating the consequences of the crisis for our 
citizens and increasing the sustainability of our 
national economies. 
 Secondly, I want to touch on the issue of existing 
problems. Allow me to dwell on those that cannot be 
effectively addressed without the participation or 
outside the framework of the United Nations. The first 
task in this regard is to address the imbalance of 
existing mechanisms of global economic governance, 
the inadequacy of their rules of the game, and the 
chasm between the financial markets and the real 
economy. We need to make joint efforts to establish 
financial and economic models that will protect all of 
us from such turmoil in the future. 
 Virtually all countries have seen a drop in output 
and in the standards of living of millions of their 
 
 
17 09-52228 
 
citizens. The crisis has exacerbated social problems, 
painfully tested young people at the very start of their 
lives, and caused significant growth in unemployment 
in all countries. Russia is no exception in this. 
 A painful blow has been delivered to our plans to 
alleviate poverty. A real threat of disruption of the 
Millennium Development Goals has emerged. We must 
do our utmost to prevent such a development. Donor 
assistance to countries in need cannot be postponed 
until some other time. The tasks set out as a priority by 
the international community must absolutely be 
addressed. The arrangements adopted at the G-20 
summits and the United Nations Conference on the 
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on 
Development must be implemented — and they must 
be implemented within the deadlines that we ourselves 
set. 
 The second major task in this context is to 
address the issues of global energy security. Three 
years ago at the Saint Petersburg G-8 summit in 
Russia, the principles for a new legal framework for 
such cooperation were formulated. The goal is to 
harmonize the interests of all participants in the energy 
chain: suppliers, consumers and intermediaries or 
transiters. It was not so long ago that we solidified 
these principles, and we invite all States to engage in 
discussion on them. We believe that such discussions 
should be conducted with the active involvement of 
specialized multilateral institutions, including, of 
course, the agencies of the United Nations family. 
 The third task that Russia deems to be potentially 
critical is the comprehensive strengthening of the 
United Nations itself. The United Nations must adapt 
itself in a rational way to the new global realities. It 
should strengthen its influence while preserving its 
multinational nature and the integrity of the Charter’s 
key provisions. The most important component of the 
revitalization of the United Nations is reform of the 
Security Council. The time has come to speed up the 
search for a compromise formula for the Security 
Council’s expansion, and of course to increase its 
efficiency. 
 The third issue I want to touch on is 
disarmament. The process of multilateral disarmament 
under United Nations auspices is an extremely 
important task. There are grounds for hope since, as 
members are aware, a number of positive trends have 
emerged in overcoming the protracted crisis. The 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva has adopted its 
programme of work. I should also like to mention the 
Russian-Chinese initiative to develop a treaty to 
prevent the deployment of weapons in outer space, as 
well as our current proposal to universalize the 
Russian-American Treaty on the Elimination of 
Intermediate-range and Shorter-range Missiles. 
 Russia will unswervingly follow the path of 
verifiable and irreversible reductions in nuclear 
weapons as an essential element of a new start in our 
relations with the United States. In Moscow in July this 
year, President Obama and I not only signed a relevant 
document, but also agreed on a mandate for further 
negotiations to elaborate a new, legally binding treaty. 
This treaty should replace the Treaty on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, which 
expires in December. 
 Of special importance here is the relationship 
between strategic offensive and defensive arms. In my 
meeting with President Obama this morning, we 
discussed the recently announced adjustments to the 
United States’ planned development of a missile 
defence system. I should like to state in this highest of 
forums that we view this decision as a constructive step 
in the right direction, which has deservedly received 
numerous expressions of support from the international 
community. Russia is ready to engage in detailed 
discussions with the American side and to undertake 
relevant initiatives in this field in order to reach 
mutually acceptable agreement. 
 Without resolving such problems as missile 
defence and non-nuclear strategic offensive arms, it 
will be simply impossible to achieve real progress in 
the field of nuclear disarmament. I believe that the 
work on this new treaty will be fully consistent with 
relevant provisions of the joint document endorsed by 
the President of the United States and myself at our 
meeting in Moscow. 
 We believe that other nuclear States should join 
the disarmament efforts of Russia and the United 
States. There is no need to wait for further progress in 
the Russian-American disarmament process. We can 
begin forthwith to elaborate acceptable and practical 
arrangements that take into account the differences in 
the size of potentials. In that respect, we could draw on 
international experience in the twentieth century, for 
example the 1921-1922 Washington Conference on 
naval armaments, where participants agreed on the 
  
 
09-52228 18 
 
maximum size of their fleets without insisting on parity 
in absolute terms. If we take the same approach today, 
based on the current status of nuclear arsenals, we 
could send the rest of the world a sure signal that the 
unaccounted numbers will be added to the equation of 
strategic stability. 
 Pursuing nuclear disarmament, strengthening the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime and promoting the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy will be at the very heart 
of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). We cherish the hope that it will be successful. 
 The global nuclear security summit scheduled for 
April 2010 will provide a good opportunity for a more 
detailed discussion of these issues. We support that 
initiative. We have also agreed with the United States 
Administration on joint steps for further progress on 
such aspects of nuclear security as the prevention of 
nuclear terrorism, expanding access to the benefits of 
peaceful nuclear energy to all signatories implementing 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons in good faith, and other decisions. We call for 
collective cooperation on these matters. 
 In order to reach a common understanding on 
such important issues, we must engage all nations  
and influential international organizations in the 
aforementioned negotiation processes. The international 
community, it must be said, has at its disposal such 
tried and tested measures for enhancing regional and 
international security as nuclear-weapon-free zones. In 
particular, there is a very pressing need to establish a 
zone in the Middle East free of all types of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery. This is a 
long-standing issue, with respect to which a resolution 
was adopted at the 1995 NPT Review Conference. 
 Russia, as a member of the Quartet of 
international mediators on the Middle East settlement, 
has consistently supported efforts to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime in the Middle East. 
Russia has made specific proposals within the 
framework of the NPT review process to seek mutually 
acceptable ways of implementing earlier decisions on 
this matter. All countries of the region need to take an 
active stance on this issue and demonstrate their 
willingness to achieve that end. 
 We also need to accelerate work towards a 
mechanism to ensure peace and security in North-East 
Asia. Russia has made proposals in this regard to the 
participants in the Six-Party Talks. In the present 
circumstances, this task is more urgent than ever. 
 The fourth topic I wish to address is that of 
regional conflicts and regional security. We intend to 
continue to participate in the search for effective 
options for settling regional conflicts. We are 
convinced that the use of force can only exacerbate 
such situations. That was demonstrated by the reckless 
attempt by the Georgian authorities last year to resolve 
the problems in their relations with South Ossetia by 
military means. 
 At that time, in August 2008, we came very close 
to a situation in which a local armed conflict had the 
potential to grow into a full-scale war. I am certain that 
this is clearly understood by everyone in this Hall 
today. In order to ensure that this should never recur, 
we need clear and effective mechanisms to implement 
the principle of the indivisibility of security. Without 
such a mechanism, we will not be able to move beyond 
the legacy of the past or overcome existing prejudices. 
I wish to stress that irresponsible regimes should not 
have any opportunity whatsoever to foment disputes 
among other countries. 
 The role and place of the modern nation in 
ensuring global security is a topic of the greatest 
relevance today. We have witnessed situations time and 
again in which problems emerging within the confines 
of an individual State have acquired a regional or even 
global character. The incompetence and, very often, 
ineffectiveness of national Government institutions can 
have consequences that are fraught with risks for 
several countries. The prevention of such an outcome 
is of course a very complex and sensitive issue, but one 
upon which we must deliberate together. 
 These issues were the focus of discussions at a 
recent conference held in Russia. The outcome was 
quite clear. What we require in the future is a smart 
foreign policy. The current global crisis is not limited 
to economics; it is also a crisis of ideas. It is the 
accumulation of a critical mass of outdated policies 
and development models. 
 Having developed the initiative to sign a new 
European security treaty, Russia has proposed taking a 
fresh approach to this problem and, above all, 
abandoning outdated policies. We all hope that the cold 
war has been left behind, but the world has not become 
more secure. What we need today are modern solutions 
and clear legal frameworks for implementing existing 
 
 
19 09-52228 
 
political commitments. We do not need declarations, 
appeals or demagogues; what we need are clear legal 
frameworks, including to enshrine the principle under 
international law that one must not seek to ensure one’s 
own security at the expense of the security of others. 
 Our initiative concerns the Euro-Atlantic space. 
However, its key provision on the indivisibility of 
security is a universal principle that is applicable to all 
regions of the world and is fully consistent with the 
letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter. The 
principle of the indivisibility of security should be an 
integral part of current international law. 
 Values are the last issue that I wish to mention 
from this rostrum. The protection of human rights and 
interests and the universal application of commonly 
recognized norms and principles in that area should be 
the basis for strengthening trust and stability in 
international relations. We are all united by values that 
are rooted in morality, religion, customs and traditions. 
I am talking about such fundamental concepts as the 
right to life, tolerance of dissent, responsibility towards 
one’s family, charity and compassion, which are the 
foundation both of daily life and of relations among 
States. 
 However, unfortunately, it is the reality that the 
world is witnessing growing nationalism and numerous 
manifestations of religious intolerance and hatred. That 
is why we believe that establishing a high-level group 
on interfaith dialogue under the Director-General of 
UNESCO is extremely valuable. It is particularly 
relevant on the eve of 2010, which the United Nations 
has declared International Year for the Rapprochement 
of Cultures. 
 To conclude, I cannot fail to mention, as I stand 
here, another topic that is very close to the heart of all 
citizens of our country and all peoples of the world. 
Next year, we are going to celebrate the sixty-fifth 
anniversary of the end of the Second World War. 
Russia put forward a proposal to adopt a relevant 
General Assembly resolution and to hold a special 
session to commemorate all victims of that war in May 
next year. We cannot allow its horrible lessons to be 
forgotten. 
 However, from time to time we see neo-fascist 
organizations raise their heads. Racial, national and 
ethnic crimes are being committed. Attempts are being 
made to whitewash Nazism, to deny the Holocaust and 
to review the decisions of the Nuremberg Tribunal. I 
am convinced that strong and joint resistance to 
manifestations of neo-Nazism and to attempts to revise 
the results of the Second World War enshrined in the 
United Nations Charter should remain a priority task of 
the Organization. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
principal achievements of the international community 
in the twentieth century. This Organization and its 
fruitful activities have become a symbol of the 
twentieth century, and there is simply no alternative to 
these activities. We have no right to forget that the 
United Nations possesses unique international 
legitimacy, and we all must preserve and strengthen 
this shared wealth of the peoples of the world. 
It is my honour to address the 
Assembly for the first time as the forty-fourth 
President of the United States. I come before you 
humbled by the responsibility that the American people 
have placed upon me, mindful of the enormous 
challenges of our moment in history and determined to 
act boldly and collectively on behalf of justice and 
prosperity at home and abroad. 
 I have been in office for just nine months, though 
some days it seems a lot longer. I am well aware of the 
expectations that accompany my presidency around the 
world. Those expectations are not about me. Rather 
they are, I believe, rooted in a discontent with the 
status quo that has allowed us to be increasingly 
defined by our differences and outpaced by our 
problems. But they are also rooted in hope — the hope 
that real change is possible and the hope that America 
will be a leader in bringing about such change. 
 I took office at a time when many around the 
world had come to view America with scepticism and 
distrust. A part of that was due to misperceptions and 
misinformation about my country. Part was due to 
opposition to specific policies and a belief that on 
certain critical issues America had acted unilaterally, 
without regard for the interests of others. That has fed 
an almost reflexive anti-Americanism, which too often 
has served as an excuse for collective inaction. 
 Like all of you, my responsibility is to act in the 
interests of my nation and my people, and I will never 
apologize for defending those interests. But it is my 
deeply held belief that in the year 2009, more than at 
any point in human history, the interests of nations and 
peoples are shared. The religious convictions that we 
hold in our hearts can forge new bonds among people, 
or they can tear us apart. The technology we harness 
can light the path to peace, or forever darken it. The 
energy we use can sustain our planet, or destroy it. 
What happens to the hope of a single child, anywhere, 
can enrich our world, or impoverish it. 
 In this Hall, we come from many places, but we 
share a common future. No longer do we have the 
luxury of indulging our differences to the exclusion of 
the work that we must do together. I have carried this 
message from London to Ankara, from Port-of-Spain to 
Moscow, from Accra to Cairo, and it is what I will 
speak about today. 
 Because the time has come for the world to move 
in a new direction, we must embrace a new era of 
engagement based on mutual interests and mutual 
respect, and our work must begin now. We know the 
future will be forged by deeds, and not simply words. 
Speeches alone will not solve our problems. It will take 
persistent action. 
 So for those who question the character and cause 
of my nation, I ask you to look at the concrete actions 
we have taken in just nine months. 
 On my first day in office I prohibited, without 
exception or equivocation, the use of torture by the 
United States of America. I ordered the prison at 
Guantanamo Bay closed, and we are doing the hard 
work of forging a framework to combat extremism 
within the rule of law. 
 Every nation must know that America will live its 
values, and we will lead by example. We have set a 
clear and focused goal to work with all members of 
this body to disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and 
its extremist allies — a network that has killed 
thousands of people of many faiths and nations and has 
plotted to blow up this very building. In Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, we and many nations here are helping 
those Governments to develop the capacity to take the 
lead in this effort, while working to advance 
opportunity and security for their people. 
 In Iraq we are responsibly ending a war. We have 
removed American combat brigades from Iraqi cities 
and set a deadline of next August to remove all our 
combat brigades from Iraqi territory. I have made clear 
that we will help Iraqis make the transition to full 
responsibility for their future and keep our 
commitment to remove all American troops by the end 
of 2011. 
 I have outlined a comprehensive agenda to seek 
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. In 
Moscow, the United States and Russia announced that 
we would pursue substantial reductions in our strategic 
warheads and launchers. In the Conference on 
Disarmament we agreed on a workplan to negotiate an 
end to the production of fissile materials for nuclear 
weapons. And this week, my Secretary of State will 
become the first senior American representative to the 
  
 
09-52179 10 
 
annual members’ conference of the Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty. 
 Upon taking office, I appointed a special envoy 
for Middle East peace, and America has worked 
steadily and aggressively to advance the cause of two 
States — Israel and Palestine — in which peace and 
security take root and the rights of both Israelis and 
Palestinians are respected. 
 To confront climate change we have invested 
$80 billion in clean energy. We have substantially 
increased our fuel efficiency standards. We have 
provided new incentives for conservation, launched an 
energy partnership across the Americas and moved 
from being a bystander to being a leader in 
international climate negotiations. 
 To overcome an economic crisis that touches 
every corner of the world, we worked with the Group 
of 20 nations to forge a coordinated international 
response of over $2 trillion in stimulus to bring the 
global economy back from the brink. We mobilized 
resources that help prevent the crisis from spreading 
further to developing countries, and we joined with 
others to launch a $20 billion global food security 
initiative that will lend a hand to those who need it 
most and help them build their own capacity. 
 We have also re-engaged the United Nations. We 
have paid our bills. We have joined the Human Rights 
Council. We have signed the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities. We have fully embraced the 
Millennium Development Goals, and we address our 
priorities here in this institution, for instance through the 
Security Council meeting on nuclear non-proliferation 
and disarmament that I will chair tomorrow and 
through the issues that I will discuss today. 
 That is what we have already done, but it is just a 
beginning. Some of our actions have yielded progress; 
some have laid the groundwork for progress in the 
future. But make no mistake: this cannot solely be 
America’s endeavour. Those who used to chastise 
America for acting alone in the world cannot now 
stand by and wait for America to solve the world’s 
problems alone. We have sought, in word and deed, a 
new era of engagement with the world, and now is the 
time for all of us to take our share of responsibility for 
a global response to global challenges. 
 If we are honest with ourselves, we need to admit 
that we are not living up to that responsibility. 
Consider the course that we are on if we fail to 
confront the status quo: extremists sowing terror in 
pockets of the world, protracted conflicts that grind on 
and on, genocide, mass atrocities, more nations with 
nuclear weapons, melting ice caps and ravaged 
populations, persistent poverty and pandemic disease. 
 I say this not to sow fear, but to state a fact. The 
magnitude of our challenges has yet to be met by the 
measure of our actions. This body was founded on the 
belief that the nations of the world could solve their 
problems together. Franklin Roosevelt, who died 
before he could see his vision for this institution 
become a reality, put it this way: 
 “The structure of world peace cannot be the work 
of one man, or one party, or one nation. It cannot 
be a peace of large nations or of small nations. It 
must be a peace which rests on the cooperative 
effort of the whole world.” 
 The cooperative effort of the whole world — 
those words ring even more true today when it is not 
simply peace, but our very health and prosperity that 
we hold in common. Yet, we also know that this body 
is made up of sovereign States and that, sadly but not 
surprisingly, this body has often become a forum for 
sowing discord instead of forging common ground, a 
venue for playing politics and exploiting grievances 
rather than solving problems. After all, it is easy to 
walk up to this podium and point fingers and stoke 
divisions. Nothing is easier than blaming others for our 
troubles and absolving ourselves of responsibility for 
our choices and our actions. Anybody can do that. 
Responsibility and leadership in the twenty-first 
century demand more. 
 In an era when our destiny is shared, power is no 
longer a zero-sum game. No one nation can or should 
try to dominate another nation. No world order that 
elevates one nation or group of people over another 
will succeed. No balance of power among nations will 
hold. The traditional divisions between nations of the 
South and the North make no sense in an 
interconnected world, nor do alignments of nations 
rooted in the cleavages of a long-gone cold war. 
 The time has come to realize that the old habits 
and the old arguments are irrelevant to the challenges 
faced by our peoples. They leave nations to act in 
opposition to the very goals that they claim to pursue 
and to vote, often in this body, against the interests of 
their own people. They build up walls between us and 
 
 
11 09-52179 
 
the future that our peoples seek, and the time has come 
for those walls to come down. Together we must build 
new coalitions that bridge old divides — coalitions of 
different faiths and creeds, of North and South, East, 
West, black, white and brown. 
 The choice is ours. We can be remembered as the 
generation that chose to drag the arguments of the 
twentieth century into the twenty-first, and that put off 
hard choices, refused to look ahead, and failed to keep 
pace because we defined ourselves by what we were 
against instead of what we were for; or we can be a 
generation that chooses to see the shoreline beyond the 
rough waters ahead, that comes together to serve the 
common interests of human beings, and finally gives 
meaning to the promise imbedded in the name given to 
this institution — the United Nations. That is the future 
America wants — a future of peace and prosperity that 
we can reach only if we recognize that all nations have 
rights. But all nations have responsibilities as well. 
That is the bargain that makes this work. That must be 
the guiding principle of international cooperation. 
 Today, let me put forward four pillars that I 
believe are fundamental to the future that we want for 
our children: non-proliferation and disarmament, the 
promotion of peace and security, the preservation of 
our planet, and a global economy that advances 
opportunity for all people. 
 First, we must stop the spread of nuclear weapons 
and seek the goal of a world without them. This 
institution was founded at the dawn of the atomic age 
in part because man’s capacity to kill had to be 
contained. For decades, we averted disaster, even under 
the shadow of a super-Power stand-off. But today the 
threat of proliferation is growing in scope and 
complexity. If we fail to act, we will invite nuclear 
arms races in every region and the prospect of wars and 
acts of terror on a scale that we can hardly imagine. 
 A fragile consensus stands in the way of this 
frightening outcome, and that is the basic bargain that 
shapes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT). It says that all nations have the right 
to peaceful nuclear energy, and that nations with 
nuclear weapons have a responsibility to move towards 
disarmament and those without them have the 
responsibility to forsake them. The next 12 months 
could be pivotal in determining whether this compact 
will be strengthened or will slowly dissolve. 
 America intends to keep our end of the bargain. 
We will pursue a new agreement with Russia to 
substantially reduce our strategic warheads and 
launches. We will move forward with ratification of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and work 
with others to bring the Treaty into force, so that 
nuclear testing is permanently prohibited. We will 
complete a nuclear posture review that opens the door 
to deeper cuts and reduces the role of nuclear weapons, 
and we will call upon countries to begin negotiations in 
January on a treaty to end the production of fissile 
material for weapons. 
 I will also host a summit next April that reaffirms 
each nation’s responsibility to secure nuclear material 
on its territory and to help those who cannot, because 
we must never allow a single nuclear device to fall into 
the hands of a violent extremist. And we will work to 
strengthen the institutions and initiatives that combat 
nuclear smuggling and theft. 
 All of this must support efforts to strengthen the 
NPT. Those nations that refuse to live up to their 
obligations must face consequences. Let me be clear: 
This is not about singling out individual nations. It is 
about standing up for the rights of all nations that do 
live up to their responsibilities, because a world in 
which International Atomic Energy Agency inspections 
are avoided and the United Nations demands are 
ignored will leave all people less safe and all nations 
less secure. 
 In their actions to date, the Governments of North 
Korea and Iran threaten to take us down this dangerous 
slope. We respect their rights as members of the 
community of nations. I have said before and I will 
repeat: I am committed to diplomacy that opens a path 
to greater prosperity and more secure peace for both 
nations if they live up to their obligations. But if the 
Governments of Iran and North Korea choose to ignore 
international standards; if they put the pursuit of 
nuclear weapons ahead of regional stability and the 
security and opportunity of their own people; if they 
are oblivious to the dangers of escalating nuclear arms 
races in both East Asia and the Middle East, then they 
must be held accountable. The world must stand 
together to demonstrate that international law is not an 
empty promise and that treaties will be enforced. We 
must insist that the future does not belong to fear. 
 That brings me to the second pillar for our future: 
the pursuit of peace. The United Nations was born of 
  
 
09-52179 12 
 
the belief that the people of the world can live their 
lives, raise their families and resolve their differences 
peacefully. Yet we know that in too many parts of the 
world this ideal remains an abstraction — a distant 
dream. We can either accept that outcome as inevitable 
and tolerate constant and crippling conflict, or we can 
recognize that the yearning for peace is universal and 
reassert our resolve to end conflicts around the world. 
That effort must begin with an unshakeable 
determination that the murder of innocent men, women 
and children will never be tolerated. On this, there can 
be no dispute. 
 The violent extremists who promote conflict by 
distorting faith have discredited and isolated 
themselves. They offer nothing but hatred and 
destruction. In confronting them, America will forge 
lasting partnerships to target terrorists, share 
intelligence, coordinate law enforcement and protect 
our people. We will permit no safe haven for Al-Qaida 
to launch attacks from Afghanistan or any other nation. 
We will stand by our friends on the front lines, as we 
and many nations will do in pledging support for the 
Pakistani people tomorrow. And we will pursue 
positive engagement that builds bridges among faiths 
and new partnerships for opportunity. 
 Our efforts to promote peace, however, cannot be 
limited to defeating violent extremists, for the most 
powerful weapon in our arsenal is the hope of human 
beings — the belief that the future belongs to those 
who would build and not destroy; the confidence that 
conflicts can end and a new day can begin. And that is 
why we will strengthen our support for effective 
peacekeeping, while energizing our efforts to prevent 
conflicts before they take hold.  
 We will pursue a lasting peace in Sudan, through 
support for the people of Darfur and the implementation 
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, so that we 
secure the peace that the Sudanese people deserve. 
 And in countries ravaged by violence, from Haiti to 
Congo to East Timor, we will work with the United 
Nations and other partners to support an enduring peace. 
 I will also continue to seek a just and lasting 
peace between Israel, Palestine and the Arab world. We 
will continue to work on that issue. Yesterday I had a 
constructive meeting with Prime Minister Netanyahu 
and President Abbas. We have made some progress. 
Palestinians have strengthened their efforts on security. 
Israelis have facilitated greater freedom of movement 
for the Palestinians. As a result of these efforts on both 
sides, the economy in the West Bank has begun to 
grow. 
 But more progress is needed. We continue to call 
on Palestinians to end incitement against Israel. And 
we continue to emphasize that America does not accept 
the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlements. 
 The time has come to re-launch negotiations — 
without preconditions — that address the permanent-
status issues: security for Israelis and Palestinians, 
borders, refugees and Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two 
States living side by side in peace and security: a 
Jewish State of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, 
and a viable, independent Palestinian State with 
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that began 
in 1967 and realizes the potential of the Palestinian 
people. As we pursue this goal, we will also pursue 
peace between Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Syria, 
and a broader peace between Israel and its many 
neighbours. In pursuit of that goal, we will develop 
regional initiatives with multilateral participation, 
alongside bilateral negotiations. 
 Now, I am not naive. I know this will be difficult. 
But all of us — not just the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, but all of us — must decide whether we 
are serious about peace, or whether we will only lend it 
lip-service. To break the old patterns — to break the 
cycle of insecurity and despair — all of us must say 
publicly what we would acknowledge in private. The 
United States does Israel no favours when we fail to 
couple an unwavering commitment to its security with 
an insistence that Israel respect the legitimate claims 
and rights of the Palestinians. And nations within this 
body do the Palestinians no favours when they choose 
vitriolic attacks against Israel over a constructive 
willingness to recognize Israel’s legitimacy and its 
right to exist in peace and security. 
 We must remember that the greatest price of this 
conflict is not paid by us. It is not paid by politicians. 
It is paid by the Israeli girl in Sderot who closes her 
eyes in fear that a rocket will take her life in the middle 
of the night. It is paid by the Palestinian boy in Gaza 
who has no clean water and no country to call his own. 
These are all God’s children. And after all the politics 
and all the posturing, this is about the right of every 
human being to live with dignity and security. That is a 
lesson embedded in the three great faiths that call one 
small slice of Earth the Holy Land. And that is why — 
 
 
13 09-52179 
 
even though there will be setbacks, and false starts, and 
tough days — I will not waiver in my pursuit of peace. 
 Thirdly, we must recognize that in the twenty-
first century there will be no peace unless we take 
responsibility for the preservation of our planet. And I 
thank the Secretary-General for hosting the summit on 
climate change yesterday. 
 The danger posed by climate change cannot be 
denied. Our responsibility to meet it must not be 
deferred. If we continue down our current course, 
every member of this Assembly will see irreversible 
changes within its borders. Our efforts to end conflicts 
will be eclipsed by wars over refugees and resources. 
Development will be devastated by drought and 
famine. Land that human beings have lived on for 
millennia will disappear. Future generations will look 
back and wonder why we refused to act — why we 
failed to pass on an environment that was worthy of 
our inheritance. 
 And that is why the days when America dragged 
its feet on this issue are over. We will move forward 
with investments to transform our energy economy, 
while providing incentives to make clean energy the 
profitable kind of energy. We will press ahead with 
deep cuts in emissions to reach the goals that we set for 
2020, and eventually 2050. We will continue to 
promote renewable energy and efficiency — and share 
new technologies — with countries around the world. 
And we will seize every opportunity for progress to 
address this threat in a cooperative effort with the 
entire world. 
 Those wealthy nations that did so much damage 
to the environment in the twentieth century must 
accept our obligation to lead. But responsibility does 
not end there. While we must acknowledge the need for 
differentiated responses, any effort to curb carbon 
emissions must include the fast-growing carbon 
emitters who can do more to reduce their air pollution 
without inhibiting growth. And any effort that fails 
both to help the poorest nations to adapt to the 
problems that climate change has already wrought and 
to help them travel a path of clean development simply 
will not work. 
 It is hard to change something as fundamental as 
how we use energy. I know that. It is even harder to do 
so in the midst of a global recession. Certainly, it will 
be tempting to sit back and wait for others to move 
first. But we cannot make this journey unless we all 
move forward together. As we head into Copenhagen, 
let us resolve to focus on what each of us can do for 
the sake of our common future. 
 This leads me to the final pillar that must fortify 
our future: a global economy that advances opportunity 
for all people. 
 The world is still recovering from the worst 
economic crisis since the Great Depression. In 
America, we see the engine of growth beginning to 
churn, and yet many still struggle to find a job or pay 
their bills. Across the globe, we find promising signs, 
but little certainty about what lies ahead. And far too 
many people in far too many places live through the 
daily crises that challenge our humanity: the despair of 
an empty stomach; the thirst brought on by dwindling 
water supplies; the injustice of a child dying from a 
treatable disease or a mother losing her life as she 
gives birth. 
 In Pittsburgh, we will work with the world’s 
largest economies to chart a course for growth that is 
balanced and sustained. That means vigilance to ensure 
that we do not let up until our people are back to work. 
That means taking steps to rekindle demand, so that 
global recovery can be sustained. And that means 
setting new rules of the road and strengthening 
regulation for all financial centres, so that we put an 
end to the greed and the excess and the abuse that led 
us into this disaster, and prevent a crisis like this from 
ever happening again. 
 At a time of such interdependence, we have a 
moral and pragmatic interest, however, in broader 
questions of development: the questions of development 
that existed even before this crisis happened. And so 
America will continue our historic effort to help people 
feed themselves. We have set aside $63 billion to carry 
forward the fight against HIV/AIDS, to end deaths 
from tuberculosis and malaria, to eradicate polio and to 
strengthen public health systems. We are joining with 
other countries to contribute H1N1 vaccines to the 
World Health Organization. We will integrate more 
economies into a system of global trade. We will 
support the Millennium Development Goals and 
approach next year’s summit with a global plan to 
make them a reality. And we will set our sights on the 
eradication of extreme poverty in our time. 
 Now is the time for all of us to do our part. 
Growth will not be sustained or shared unless all 
nations embrace their responsibilities. That means that 
  
 
09-52179 14 
 
wealthy nations must open their markets to more goods 
and extend a hand to those with less, while reforming 
international institutions to give more nations a greater 
voice. And developing nations must root out the 
corruption that is an obstacle to progress, for 
opportunity cannot thrive where individuals are 
oppressed and businesses have to pay bribes. That is 
why we will support honest police and independent 
judges, civil society and a vibrant private sector. Our 
goal is simple: a global economy in which growth is 
sustained and opportunity is available to all. 
 Now, the changes that I have spoken about today 
will not be easy to make, and they will not be realized 
simply by leaders like us coming together in forums 
like this, as useful as that may be. For, as in any 
assembly of members, real change can only come 
through the people we represent. That is why we must 
do the hard work to lay the groundwork for progress in 
our own capitals. That is where we will build the 
consensus to end conflicts and to harness technology 
for peaceful purposes, to change the way we use 
energy and to promote growth that can be sustained 
and shared. 
 I believe that the people of the world want this 
future for their children. And that is why we must 
champion those principles that ensure that 
Governments reflect the will of the people. These 
principles cannot be afterthoughts. Democracy and 
human rights are essential to achieving each of the 
goals that I have discussed today, because 
Governments of the people and by the people are more 
likely to act in the broader interests of their own 
people, rather than the narrow interest of those in 
power. 
 The test of our leadership will not be the degree 
to which we feed the fears and old hatreds of our 
people. True leadership will not be measured by the 
ability to muzzle dissent or to intimidate and harass 
political opponents at home. The people of the world 
want change. They will not long tolerate those who are 
on the wrong side of history. 
 This Organization’s Charter commits each of us 
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the 
dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal 
rights of men and women”. 
 Among those rights is the freedom to speak your 
mind and worship as you please, the promise of 
equality of the races and the opportunity for women 
and girls to pursue their own potential, and the ability 
of citizens to have a say in how you are governed and 
to have confidence in the administration of justice. For, 
just as no nation should be forced to accept the tyranny 
of another nation, no individual should be forced to 
accept the tyranny of their own people. 
 As an African-American, I will never forget that I 
would not be here today without the steady pursuit of a 
more perfect union in my country. That guides my 
belief that no matter how dark the day may seem, 
transformative change can be forged by those who 
choose to side with justice. And I pledge that America 
will always stand with those who stand up for their 
dignity and their rights — for the student who seeks to 
learn, the voter who demands to be heard, the innocent 
who longs to be free and the oppressed who yearns to 
be equal. 
 Democracy cannot be imposed on any nation 
from the outside. Each society must search for its own 
path, and no path is perfect. Each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its people and in its past 
traditions. And I admit that America has too often been 
selective in its promotion of democracy. But that does 
not weaken our commitment; it only reinforces it. 
There are basic principles that are universal. There are 
certain truths that are self-evident, and the United 
States of America will never waiver in our efforts to 
stand up for the right of people everywhere to 
determine their own destiny. 
 Sixty-five years ago, a weary Franklin Roosevelt 
spoke to the American people in his fourth, and final, 
inaugural address. After years of war, he sought to sum 
up the lessons that could be drawn from the terrible 
suffering and enormous sacrifice that had taken place. 
We have learned, he said, to be citizens of the world, 
members of the human community. The United Nations 
was built by men and women like Roosevelt from 
every corner of the world — from Africa and Asia, 
from Europe to the Americas. These architects of 
international cooperation had an idealism that was 
anything but naive. It was rooted in the hard-earned 
lessons of war, rooted in the wisdom that nations could 
advance their interests by acting together instead of 
splitting apart. 
 Now it falls to us, for this institution will be what 
we make of it. The United Nations does extraordinary 
good around the world, in feeding the hungry, caring 
for the sick and mending places that have been broken. 
 
 
15 09-52179 
 
But it also struggles to enforce its will and to live up to 
the ideals of its founding. I believe that those 
imperfections are not a reason to walk away from this 
institution; they are a calling to redouble our efforts. 
The United Nations can be a place where we either 
bicker about outdated grievances or forge common 
ground; a place where we focus on what drives us apart 
or what brings us together; a place where we indulge 
tyranny or a source of moral authority. In short, the 
United Nations can be an institution that is 
disconnected from what matters in the lives of our 
citizens or it can be an indispensable factor in 
advancing the interests of the people we serve. 
 We have reached a pivotal moment. The United 
States stands ready to begin a new chapter of 
international cooperation, one that recognizes the 
rights and responsibilities of all nations. And so, with 
confidence in our cause and with a commitment to our 
values, we call on all nations to join us in building the 
future that our people so richly deserve.This year marks the twentieth 
anniversary of the adoption, in 1989, of General 
Assembly resolution 44/27 A, on international 
solidarity with the liberation struggle in South Africa. 
That was one of numerous Assembly resolutions in 
which the nations of the world pledged their support 
for the eradication of apartheid. 
 Within months of the adoption of that important 
resolution, the ban on South African liberation 
movements was lifted. Nelson Mandela and other 
political prisoners were released. The stage was thus 
  
 
09-52228 20 
 
set for the negotiations that would eventually lead to 
the achievement of freedom and democracy in our 
country. 
 The role of the United Nations in the struggle to 
end apartheid is an exceptional example of the 
collective political will of the international community. 
It represented the victory of unity over division and of 
negotiation over confrontation. It represented a clear 
commitment to the promotion of basic human rights. 
As South Africans, we will always be grateful for that 
international solidarity. 
 Since the advent of democracy in 1994, we have 
built a solid, stable democracy, founded on the 
principles of unity, non-sexism, non-racialism and 
democracy. As we continue to build our young nation, 
we are cognizant of the need for a conducive 
international environment. For that reason, we are 
committed to playing our part, with the rest of the 
international community, in taking forward the fight 
against poverty and in responding to the crises that are 
confronting the world today. We must act now, 
together, to halt the degradation of the environment. 
We must act now, together, to prevent the global 
economic crisis from undoing the gains that we have 
achieved over decades. 
 The eradication of poverty must remain central to 
the work of the United Nations. The Organization must 
continue to work harder to unite the world to work to 
alleviate the suffering of the world’s poor and 
marginalized. The global economic meltdown has dealt 
a heavy blow to world efforts to eradicate poverty. But 
it should not diminish our resolve. 
 The United Nations must play a significant role 
in finding solutions to the global economic crisis. The 
crisis should not be an excuse to delay further action 
on the delivery of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Rather, it should urge us to double our efforts to 
achieve greater and faster progress. Developing 
countries did not cause the economic crisis, but they 
are severely affected by it. The crisis has further 
highlighted the urgent need for fundamental reform of 
the Bretton Woods institutions, including their 
mandate, scope, governance and responsiveness. 
 These institutions have been unrepresentative 
since their formation half a century ago. The current 
arrangements are inadequate and unfair. They do not 
reflect the changes that have taken place in the global 
economy. We should ensure that the election of the 
heads of all those institutions is more democratic, and 
opens opportunities to developing countries. The 
emerging and developing countries, including the 
poorest, must have a greater voice and greater 
participation in those institutions. Similarly, if we are 
to eradicate poverty there is an urgent need to conclude 
the Doha Round of trade negotiations in a manner that 
prioritizes development. 
 We continue to work for an African renewal, and 
welcome the ongoing support of the United Nations 
system in addressing the challenges facing the 
continent. Now more than ever, it is necessary for the 
United Nations to ensure that the international 
community collectively implements the commitments 
made to Africa. We have a viable socio-economic 
development blueprint, the New Partnership for 
Africa’s Development, which should be used in 
mobilizing resources for Africa. We appreciate that 
there can be no lasting peace without development, and 
no development without security. 
 Over the past 20 years, Africa has made much 
progress in working to end conflicts and to promote 
democratic practices and institutions. However, some 
pockets of conflict persist. For its part, South Africa 
has been engaged in mediation, conflict prevention and 
peacekeeping on the continent, in, among other places, 
Burundi, Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo. 
 The African Union has the political will to 
resolve conflicts on the continent. However, it lacks 
resources to run effective peacekeeping interventions 
and conflict prevention mechanisms. We appeal for 
support for African peacemaking efforts, and for 
greater cooperation between the United Nations and 
the African Union. In this regard, we call on the 
General Assembly to align itself with resolutions of the 
African Union and the Southern African Development 
Community that do not recognize Governments that 
come into power by force or other unconstitutional 
means. 
 The search for global peace, stability and security 
cannot be separated from the pursuit of justice, 
self-determination, human rights and economic 
development. We need to constantly reaffirm the 
inalienable human rights of all people. We call for the 
full and effective implementation of the outcomes of 
the World Conference against Racism and the 
subsequent Durban Review Conference. It is of 
 
 
21 09-52228 
 
concern that at the close of the first decade of the 
twenty-first century there are still nations that find 
their lands occupied and their peoples oppressed.  
 We are convinced that urgent and concrete steps 
are needed to resolve the situation in Western Sahara. 
 We must work with similar urgency towards the 
achievement, through negotiations, of peaceful 
coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians. This 
must be based on the creation of a viable Palestinian 
State, existing side by side with Israel, within the 1967 
borders, which must be secure and internationally 
recognized. 
 We also call for the lifting of the economic, 
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. 
 We also appreciate the recent pronouncements by 
some nuclear-weapon States on their intention to 
reduce their nuclear arsenals. 
 Let us take up this new momentum and utilize the 
opportunity of the 2010 Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to recommit ourselves to the 
full implementation of obligations under the NPT. We 
should ensure a balance among the objectives of 
disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. 
 For Africa, the impact of climate change is 
devastating and will severely undermine development 
and poverty eradication efforts. We need to act now to 
ensure that there is an inclusive, fair and effective 
global agreement on this critical challenge. The 
agreement must recognize that solving the climate 
problem cannot be separated from the struggle to 
eradicate poverty. Developed countries bear the 
greatest responsibility for climate change and its 
impact. We must therefore strike a balance between 
adaptation and mitigation. Our goal should be to 
significantly reduce emissions across the globe without 
constraining development in the countries of the South. 
 Ms. McClean (Barbados), Vice-President, took 
the Chair. 
 Developed countries must make ambitious, 
quantified and legally binding emission reduction 
commitments that are in line with science and that 
address their historical responsibilities. At Copenhagen, 
there needs to be agreement on new, additional, 
sustainable and predictable financing for adaptation. 
This should be for programmes that reduce the 
vulnerability of developing countries to the effects of 
climate change. 
 In a world that is increasingly interconnected and 
interdependent, international problems can be resolved 
effectively only through multilateral cooperation. The 
United Nations must continue to be at the centre of 
multilateralism, but it needs to be reformed if it is to 
carry out its mandate effectively, efficiently and 
transparently. 
 We remain committed to the view that no reform 
of the United Nations can be complete without the 
fundamental reform of the Security Council. It must be 
representative of the international community and 
reflect the geopolitical realities of today. If the Security 
Council is not reformed and does not have permanent 
representation for Africa, the legitimacy of the 
Council’s decisions will continue to be questioned. 
South Africa continues to advocate an expansion in 
both the permanent and non-permanent categories of 
membership. 
 Let me express our appreciation to the world for 
the celebration of the inaugural Nelson Mandela Day 
on 18 July this year. Scores of people engaged in a 
minimum of 67 minutes of voluntary action in the 
service of humanity, in honour of our icon, President 
Mandela. The Non-Aligned Movement has joined the 
call for this General Assembly to declare 18 July 
Nelson Mandela Day. This would be in recognition of 
President Mandela’s contribution to the struggle for 
democracy and the cause of humanity, and to promote 
community service across the globe. In this regard, we 
hope that the General Assembly will adopt a consensus 
resolution in support of Nelson Mandela Day. 
 South Africa is privileged to host the 2010 
Fédération Internationale de Football Association 
World Cup in the middle of next year, which will be 
the first time that the tournament has been held on 
African soil. We look forward to hosting the peoples of 
the world, who will enjoy unique African hospitality 
and vibrancy. 
 I wish to take this opportunity to thank the 
outgoing President of the General Assembly for his 
leadership at the sixty-third session of the Assembly. I 
thank the General Assembly and representatives for the 
opportunity to address this esteemed gathering. 
Working together as a global family, we can do more to 
create a better and just world.