
China is a member of the big family of the United 
Nations, and China’s development and changes have 
attracted worldwide attention. I wish to take this 
opportunity to share with the Assembly my 
observations on how one should get to know the real 
China. 
 Since the founding of the People’s Republic, and 
especially since the start of reform and opening up 
more than 30 years ago, profound changes have taken 
place in China, a big, ancient country in the East. Its 
economic and overall national strength has 
substantially increased. The lives of its people have 
markedly improved. Its social and cultural programmes 
have made considerable progress, and its exchanges 
and cooperation with the outside world have continued 
to expand. In sum, my country has made an historic 
leap from mere subsistence to moderate prosperity. 
  
 
10-54827 42 
 
 We in China are proud of our achievements, 
which were made through strenuous efforts. At the 
same time, we are clear-headed about our place and 
role in today’s world. 
 China’s gross domestic product is the third largest 
in the world, but in per capita terms it is only one tenth 
of that of developed countries. China has enjoyed more 
than 30 years of rapid growth, but its further 
development faces energy, resources and 
environmental constraints. It is a leading producer of 
many important products, but it remains at the lower 
end of the global industrial chain. China is a big 
trading nation, but its exports are low in technology 
content and value added. In many cases, we have to 
rely on imports to meet the demand for core 
technologies.  
 China’s coastal areas and some of the large and 
medium-sized cities are thriving after modernizing, but 
many places in the central and western regions and the 
vast rural areas are still rather backward. Moreover, we 
have 150 million people living below the poverty line 
set by the United Nations.  
 The life of the Chinese people has improved 
significantly, but we do not yet have a full-fledged 
social security system. Moreover, we are confronted 
with high employment pressure. Our people are more 
and more actively engaged in the country’s social and 
political development, and citizens’ basic rights and 
interests are better protected, yet our democracy and 
legal system still have room for improvement and such 
social ills as inequity and corruption still exist. 
 China has come a long way in modernization. It 
is fairly advanced in some areas of development but 
remains backward in others. And it faces 
unprecedented challenges brought by problems both 
old and new.  
 Taken as a whole, China is still in the primary 
stage of socialism and remains a developing country. 
Those are our basic national conditions. That is the real 
China. 
 China has set the strategic goal of achieving 
modernization by the middle of this century. As they 
look to the coming decades, the Chinese people will 
continue to advance along the path of reform, opening 
up and peaceful development. That path has changed 
China’s destiny and has benefited people throughout 
the country. We must stay on that path and make 
further improvements. There is no reason whatsoever 
for us to deviate from it. 
 China will continue to focus on developing the 
economy. Development is our top priority, as it 
constitutes the basis for addressing all issues. We will 
rely mainly on our own efforts in pursuing 
development. 
 As China’s industrialization and urbanization 
progress, hundreds of millions of farmers will move to 
towns and cities, which will create more domestic 
demand than ever, open up broad market and 
development space and serve as a powerful engine for 
sustaining the growth of the Chinese economy as well 
as the world economy at large. We will work hard to 
transform the economic development pattern, 
restructure the economy and set out on a path of 
balanced and sustainable development. 
 China will continue to deepen institutional 
reform. We will make consistent efforts to improve the 
socialist market economy. We will unswervingly 
strengthen and develop the public sector side of the 
economy and also unswervingly encourage, support 
and guide the development of the non-public sector. 
We will pay greater attention to ensuring and 
improving people’s well-being. We will further reform 
the income distribution system and improve the social 
security system, including old-age support, medical 
care and unemployment benefit programmes. We will 
endeavour to narrow the gap between urban and rural 
areas, between different regions and between the rich 
and the poor. We want to ensure that each and every 
citizen shares the benefit of China’s reform, opening up 
and development.  
 While deepening economic restructuring, we will 
also push forward with political restructuring. 
Otherwise, we cannot achieve the ultimate goal of 
economic reform and we will lose what we have gained 
from our modernization drive. We respect and protect 
human rights, uphold social equity and justice and 
strive to achieve free and all-around development for 
our people. That is the important hallmark of a 
democratic country under the rule of law and a basic 
guarantee for any country’s lasting peace and stability. 
 China will be even more open to the world. 
Mutually beneficial cooperation for win-win progress 
is a long-term strategy that we will stick to in opening 
up to the world. We will follow established 
international rules in expanding business ties with 
 
 
43 10-54827 
 
other countries. We will continue to improve the 
environment for foreign investors, optimize the 
structure of foreign capital utilization and explore new 
ways for overseas investment and cooperation.  
 We are committed to promoting the establishment 
of a fair, equitable, inclusive and well-managed new 
international financial order and an open and free 
international trading regime. We are against 
protectionism in all its manifestations. In the course of 
modernization, we will not only continue to bring in 
and utilize advanced achievements from the rest of the 
world in the economic, scientific and technological 
fields, but also boldly draw upon the achievements of 
human civilization in the fields of social management 
and cultural development. 
 China will continue to develop education, science 
and technology. How can China narrow the 
development gap with the advanced countries and 
enhance the sustainability of its strong growth? I 
believe two things are of fundamental importance: first 
is education, and second is science and technology. 
China has formulated medium- and long-term 
development programmes on education and on science 
and technology. Going forward, we will focus our 
efforts on implementing those two programmes and 
building China into a country strong in human 
resources and innovation by 2020. 
 China will continue to carry forward its fine 
culture. The development of a country and rejuvenation 
of a nation require not only great economic strength, 
but, more importantly, great cultural strength. The 
moral values and wisdom drawn from the 5,000-year-
old Chinese civilization do not belong to China alone 
but also to the world. We will vigorously develop 
cultural programmes and accelerate the development of 
a moral and ethical code that is commensurate with our 
socialist modernization drive and consistent with the 
traditional virtues of our nation.  
 We respect the diversity of civilizations and will 
increase dialogue and exchanges with other 
civilizations to forge a common cultural bond for 
humanity. The Chinese nation, which has created an 
economic miracle, will create a new cultural splendor 
as well. 
 The world of the twenty-first century is far from 
tranquil, but gone are the days when problems were 
ultimately settled by war. Peace and development 
remain the defining features of our time.  
 China will stay firmly committed to peaceful 
development. One may ask what the essence of 
peaceful development is. It is to foster a peaceful 
international environment for our development and, at 
the same time, contribute to world peace through our 
development. That is something inherent in the concept 
of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
 In the course of development, China will continue 
to take upon itself the duty of promoting the common 
progress and prosperity of mankind. We will seek and 
expand converging interests with other countries. 
China’s development will not harm anyone or pose a 
threat to anyone. There have been Powers who sought 
hegemony once they grew strong. China will never 
follow in their footsteps. 
 China values friendship and also adheres to its 
principles. It firmly upholds its core interests. When it 
comes to sovereignty, national unity and territorial 
integrity, China will not yield or compromise. 
 China will continue to firmly support the leading 
role of the United Nations in international affairs. We 
will, as always, abide by the United Nations Charter 
and fulfil in good faith our obligations under 
international conventions. We will intensify 
cooperation with fellow developing countries and 
support their having a greater say in international 
affairs. We will remain forever a good partner of and 
brother to developing countries. 
 China’s stability and development is conducive to 
a more peaceful international environment, a more 
democratic international order, a more prosperous 
global economy and a more harmonious and civilized 
world. China’s development is an opportunity for the 
world, and the world stands to gain from a China that 
is better off. History will continue to prove that. 
 A China that develops peacefully, a China that is 
full of vigour and vitality and a China that is willing 
and ready to fulfil its responsibilities will always move 
forward together with the world. Let us join hands to 
work for a world of enduring peace and prosperity.It is an 
honour for me to speak to the General Assembly today. 
 The world has changed dramatically since the 
United Nations was founded 65 years ago. 
International trade and exchange are, of course, 
nothing new. What is new, however, is how quickly the 
changes affect everybody’s lives. Only if we in the 
United Nations are and remain able to act can we shape 
these global changes. We will manage to solve 
problems relating to security and economic, social and 
ecological development only if the international 
community stands united. Germany is ready to assume 
global responsibility within the framework of the 
United Nations. 
 Germany’s foreign policy is firmly embedded in 
the international community. In Europe, a system of 
cooperation has replaced the confrontation that cruelly 
divided our continent for centuries. The European 
Union is successful because, in Europe, all peoples and 
States meet on an equal footing. The United Nations, 
too, brings together nations large and small, rich and 
poor, those that are more powerful and those with less 
influence. Cooperation between equals on an equal 
footing is our guiding principle also for work here at 
the United Nations. Each and every country must 
respect all others. 
 German foreign policy is a policy of peace. This 
autumn, Germany will stand for election as a 
non-permanent member of the Security Council 
because the Council is the ideal forum in which to 
cooperate in the cause of peace and development. 
Peace is more than the absence of war. In today’s 
globalized world, people are just as vulnerable to the 
consequences of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment as they are to violence and 
oppression. 
 Climate change has a direct impact on each and 
every one of us. Countless people are already 
personally feeling its economic and social 
consequences. In their letter to the Security Council, 
the Pacific island States rightly warned us in no 
uncertain terms just how much climate change 
threatens everyone’s security. Everyone must play their 
 
 
35 10-55103 
 
part to protect the climate. In Germany, we have just 
adopted a forward-looking energy strategy. By the year 
2050, 80 per cent of our electricity production will 
come from renewable sources. Germany has also 
pledged to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 40 per 
cent by the year 2020, compared to the 1990 baseline. 
Even now, we have reduced our carbon dioxide 
emissions by almost 30 per cent. We are pioneers in the 
field of climate protection. We are helping those who 
are now most adversely affected by climate change. We 
are particularly concerned about the fate of small 
island States. 
 Anyone who is serious about combating climate 
change has to build on innovation, new technologies 
and exchange. Developed and developing nations alike 
can profit from cooperation on future energies. 
Germany will contribute its technological expertise, for 
example, in the fields of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. In this way, we are turning the challenge of 
climate change into an opportunity for fair 
development and enhanced cooperation. Climate policy 
is a cornerstone of any sustainable development policy. 
The recent summit on the Millennium Development 
Goals laid down the next steps forward in our global 
partnership for development. 
 Education is the key to development. 
Development needs education. Education protects 
people from discrimination and oppression. Education 
fights prejudice and thereby fosters peace. Education 
also creates products and markets; education is the path 
to prosperity. The true wealth of many nations is no 
longer found in their raw materials but in the minds of 
their people. Education is a human right. It is because 
education will determine whether societies succeed or 
fail in tomorrow’s world that Germany is one of the 
major international partners for learning. By building 
on education, we are building bridges to the future for 
the young people of today. 
 The United Nations itself must also keep up with 
the pace of change. Today’s world order is not properly 
reflected if Africa and Latin America are not 
permanently represented on the Security Council. Asia, 
too, rightly considers itself to be underrepresented. The 
entire continent, not just individual States, is 
developing at breathtaking speed. We take our 
partnerships seriously, both the old and the new. 
Germany, too, remains ready to assume greater 
responsibility. 
 Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are 
not issues of the past but challenges of our time. 
Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are two 
sides of the same coin. We have to do all we possibly 
can to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not 
become the bane of globalization. Unlike the Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons five years ago, 
this May’s Review Conference was a success. If we 
work together to maintain this momentum, it will be in 
our power to ensure that this decade does not see a 
build-up of arms but becomes a decade of 
disarmament. A world without nuclear weapons is a 
long-term vision, but even a marathon begins with the 
first step. 
 There is now movement in the disarmament 
debate. The group of States founded here in New York 
on Wednesday to advance disarmament and arms 
control does not stand alone. For over 10 years, the 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva was not even 
able to agree on an agenda. That is not the way to live 
up to our shared responsibility. We met yesterday at the 
invitation of the Secretary-General to break the 
deadlock binding the Geneva Conference. Our world 
will be a more secure place when the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force and the 
production of fissile material is ended once and for all. 
 German peace policy stands for the peaceful 
settlement of regional conflicts. Germany is doing its 
utmost to ensure that the direct talks between Israel 
and the Palestinians are a success. We will continue to 
strengthen the forces of reason and reconciliation. 
During this vital period for the peace process in 
particular, I urge both sides to refrain from taking any 
action that might block the path to peace. We condemn 
any form of violence that has the sole aim of 
torpedoing the peace talks. At the same time, we call 
for the moratorium on settlement construction to be 
extended. Lasting peace will be achieved only through 
a two-State solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State 
living peacefully side by side within secure borders. 
 Iran, like every other country, naturally has the 
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
However, the Tehran leadership itself has sown doubt 
about the civilian nature of its nuclear programme. 
Iran, by demonstrating openness and transparency, can 
allay that doubt. Our offer of dialogue still stands. It is 
now up to Iran to grasp our outstretched hand. 
  
 
10-55103 36 
 
 The conference aimed at establishing a zone free 
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, 
planned for 2012, will be a major opportunity to 
strengthen peace and security in the region. Germany is 
encouraging all countries in the region to take part to 
ensure that the conference is a success. We are 
committed to a nuclear-weapon-free Middle East. 
 Germany is one of the major supporters of a 
peaceful and secure Afghanistan. As we agreed in 
London and Kabul, we want to transfer security 
responsibility for the whole of Afghanistan to the 
Afghan Government by 2014. To make progress in that 
country, so long ravaged by war and civil strife, 
effective measures must be taken to prevent the 
violence. However, military means alone will not bring 
success. We favour a comprehensive approach and 
above all a political solution. All sides now need the 
courage and the stamina to engage in reconciliation. 
 The German Government assists when people 
anywhere in the world are struck by natural disasters 
and emergencies. However, a country’s conscience is 
to be found in the hearts of its citizens. I am proud that 
my fellow Germans donate so generously at times of 
greatest need. Humanity and solidarity are global 
values; humanity and solidarity make no distinction 
based on skin colour or religious beliefs. When the 
tsunami devastated coastlines around the Indian Ocean, 
when the Haiti earthquake destroyed the work of 
decades, or just recently, when the horrific floods in 
Pakistan left havoc in their wake, we Germans shared 
the victims’ pain and helped in the most heartfelt way 
possible. We will stand by Pakistan over the coming 
months and years to ensure that the country has a 
promising economic future. 
 We are working towards a peaceful order in the 
Sudan, now and after the referendum early next year. 
We are looking for ways of achieving stable conditions 
in Yemen and are particularly active in the Friends of 
Yemen group. We are working hard to combat piracy 
off the Horn of Africa and to bring peace and stability 
to Somalia. 
 Reconstruction efforts in devastated regions 
cannot bring success overnight. Similarly, for societies 
torn by war and civil strife, the route to life in dignity 
leads through peace and reconciliation. There can be 
true peace only when human rights are respected. For 
us, such principles as the rule of law, freedom of 
opinion, freedom of the press and respect for 
inalienable human rights are essential. The protection 
of human rights remains a task for all societies. 
 It is a fundamental tenet of the United Nations 
that women determine their own lives and help decide 
the fate of their countries. Ethnic or religious 
minorities enrich their societies. Tolerance is one of 
Germany’s guiding principles. Everyone wins in the 
competition for the best ideas; in a clash of cultures, 
there can only be losers. 
 United Europe can make a valuable contribution 
on our continent and beyond. Germany is working to 
ensure that, in the future, the European Union shall 
cooperate even more closely with other regions in 
Latin America, Africa and Asia, and live up to its 
global responsibility. Germany is the third-largest 
development cooperation donor. We have practically 
recovered from the financial and economic crisis and 
are on the right track due to our robust economic 
growth. This strong economy makes Germany a strong 
global partner. 
 If all countries, small and large, work together, 
we will be able to master the pressing challenges of our 
world. 
They can count on Germany. They can rely on 
Germany. I 
come to this rostrum on behalf of France to express my 
sincere and fervent faith in the United Nations. 
France’s ambition is to be a major actor in building a 
system of global governance that is more just, more 
cohesive, more social, and a global order that is 
organized and regulated around a stronger, more 
representative and more effective United Nations — a 
United Nations capable of meeting the great challenges 
of our century. 
 I look out upon the Assembly. I know many of 
those present here today. For 25 years now — even 
more — I have been going up and down the corridors 
of the United Nations because I like the United 
Nations, because I believe in the United Nations, and 
because I know it to be indispensable. 
 I would like to speak to the Assembly candidly. I 
am going to talk about men and women, suffering and 
hope. I am going to talk about responsibility, because 
we have responsibilities as citizens, diplomats and 
political leaders to meet these sufferings, hopes and 
expectations. 
 Of course, all of us would have an infinite 
number of reasons to present a litany of generous 
intentions, only to go home, our conscience clear, for 
what we had said a little while before to the Assembly 
and then go back to our day-to-day problems at home. 
Of course, after the terrible economic crisis from which 
we have barely emerged, we have to live with reduced 
budgets and tense socio-economic situations. The times 
are difficult and our fellow citizens are worried. The 
temptation to retreat exists. Of course, to correct the 
large imbalances and injustices that undermine our 
society and to fight for the planet’s security and 
development, we can always count on others. But 
which others? There are no “others”. We are all here, 
the nations of the world, represented in the General 
Assembly, and we only have to decide together to act. 
 Not acting today would be to resign ourselves to 
disorder, injustice and chaos. That choice will never be 
France’s because it is not in keeping with our history, 
or our values, or our interests. Faced with disorder in 
the world, the greatest risk today would be to lapse into 
routine. Please do not tell me that we cannot move 
forward, that the situation is at an impasse. No, in the 
past, we have been able together, collectively, to be 
revolutionary on fundamental subjects, even at the 
expense of the national sovereignties which we all 
represent here. 
 Recall our boldness here in 1988, General 
Assembly resolution 43/131, and then two years later, 
resolution 45/100, on humanitarian assistance to 
victims of natural disasters and similar emergency 
situations. These resolutions allowed us for the first 
time to guarantee free access of humanitarian workers 
to the affected regions. Then there was Security 
Council 688 (1991) (5 April 1991) on the situation in 
Kurdistan, where, for the first time, the door was 
opened to a military operation to protect civilian 
populations against an oppressor State. 
 These were two historic moments which laid the 
first markers of the right to intervene. This became the 
responsibility to protect, which this Assembly adopted 
by consensus at the 2005 World Summit (see resolution 
60/1). Who could have imagined that such an upending 
of international law would be possible? The fight was 
long and difficult; it is not over — far from it. To speak 
candidly to the Assembly, the results are not 
completely what I had expected. But we must note that, 
together, we were able to overcome some obstacles 
which were supposed to be insurmountable. Let 
nothing stop us from taking up subjects which we 
decide on together. 
 Our first shared responsibility is development — 
to make sure that all men and women, including the 
most impoverished, have decent living conditions. The 
widening gap of inequalities is not only morally 
unacceptable, it is politically dangerous. Of course, it 
is costly to act, but the cost of inaction is even greater. 
 The conclusions of the High-level Meeting on the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that we just 
held place our responsibilities squarely before us. This 
 
 
37 10-55122 
 
is an urgent matter. We can no longer ask suffering 
populations to continue to wait. 
 The President of the French Republic, Nicolas 
Sarkozy, reminded the Assembly of this fact, that France 
is the second largest global donor of official 
development assistance — €9 billion per annum — 
targeted to education, health, food security, sanitation 
and infrastructure. France’s commitment to development 
will not slacken, but figures do not make a policy. Our 
assistance must be judged according to its results. We 
need to go further and move faster for children dying of 
malaria — one every 30 seconds — for entire families 
stricken by AIDS, and for all those who are hungry or 
cannot go to school. 
 I ask the Assembly: what planet do we wish to 
leave as a legacy to our children? Will we be able to 
make an ambitious decision to combat climate change 
and preserve our environment? This is a subject that 
concerns us all and requires a global partnership, one 
where we aspire to find an agreement on both reducing 
emissions and measures to be taken in order to adapt. 
And we must, first and foremost, ensure that the 
commitments undertaken will be implemented and that 
follow-up mechanisms and effective institutions will be 
put in place. 
 For all of this, we must find a great deal of 
money — several tens of billions of dollars per year — 
for us and our planet. Let us provide the means to 
realize our ambitions. The solutions are here, within 
reach; they have proved to be effective and await only 
our political will and our courage. They are called 
innovative financing. The tax on airline tickets was a 
step forward, a long time in coming. Today we should 
go farther by adopting an international tax on financial 
transactions which would permanently change matters 
for development. It is an idea that I have been 
defending for more than 20 years. It is a priority for 
France now. The President alluded to it here a few days 
ago. 
 Bear in mind that a minute tax of 0.005 per cent, 
that is five cents on a transaction of €1,000, could raise 
€30 billion to €40 billion per year, almost one quarter 
of official development assistance. Who could deny 
that this is a stable and predictable way of raising a 
massive amount for development? Even with half of 
that amount, it would be possible to send every child to 
school in the low-income countries. Everyone agrees 
today that it is technically and economically feasible to 
establish such a mechanism. 
 And, make no mistake; we are not talking about 
diminishing official development assistance or dodging 
our responsibilities. No, on the contrary, this amount 
would come as an addition. And so we must not waste 
time, we are together, this is what we established this 
institution for, this institution, unparalleled in history, 
called the United Nations. 
 It is now a universally recognized principle that 
development cannot occur without peace and security, 
which are the basic raison d’être of the United Nations. 
Here, the challenges remain considerable. Afghanistan, 
Somalia, the Sudan, the Middle East — so many 
conflicts continue to feed chaos throughout the world. 
 How many missed opportunities, how many 
dashed hopes, how many misunderstandings have for 
more than 60 years — I repeat, 60 years — marked this 
process, peaceful in name only, in the Middle East? 
The Arab-Israeli conflict concerns us all. I say Arab-
Israeli because, besides the Palestinian track, France 
considers it just as important to work on the Lebanese 
and Syrian tracks. Today we have before us a historic 
opportunity. We cannot let it slip. 
 The process almost stopped yesterday evening. I 
am not sure that it will continue in an orderly way and 
with unanimous support. I hope it will. We have 
limited time remaining. Palestine, the new State 
Member of the United Nations which many of us have 
been calling for, will be, I hope, the best guarantee of 
security for Israel. 
 All States in the region have a critical role to 
play. All of that is important, but what is necessary is 
that the Israelis and Palestinians make a strategic 
decision to put an end to this conflict in their own 
interests. I would therefore call on the sense of 
responsibility of President Abbas and Prime Minister 
Netanyahu; together they must make the painful 
compromises on the road to peace. 
 I have said that I have faith in the United Nations. 
I served the United Nations, as perhaps you know, in 
Kosovo and in a number of other places. I know, 
respect and deeply love the men and women who give 
life to the United Nations. From this rostrum, I wish to 
pay tribute with emotion, affection and respect, to all 
those who, in serving the United Nations, take risks 
every day for our shared ideal of peace and 
  
 
10-55122 38 
 
development. I think of all the friends we have lost — 
and the friends we may still lose — year after year, 
and, of course, of those who take their place. 
 The fight is noble. Respect for the values and 
universal principles of human rights constitutes the 
indispensable foundation on which United Nations 
action must be built. The ambition to build a world 
order founded on universal respect for human dignity 
has been and will always be at the heart of French 
diplomacy. 
 Have we collectively progressed in our service of 
these values? Not enough. How long will we continue 
to accept — now that we live in a so-called 
information society, a world where people can know 
what is happening in other places — that, in terms of 
human rights, there are so many blind spots, so many 
forgotten tragedies and so much suffering that remain 
hidden? As I asked at the beginning, what has become 
of the responsibility to protect? 
 Today the success of the United Nations must 
first of all be assessed in terms of its contribution to 
the protection of civilians. That is the first area in 
which our requirements should be upheld. Every day 
massacres and rapes are committed throughout the 
world, in Somalia, in Darfur and in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, including in regions where 
peacekeeping operations are deployed. 
 We can no longer simply count the victims when 
mass crimes are committed. Our courage must not be 
less than that of those who die from risks that we no 
longer know how to take. 
 France believes that the International Criminal 
Court is one of the most important advances made in 
the history of a humankind conscious of the dangers to 
which it is exposed by its own demons. France 
understands the criticism of those that believe that the 
Court is too slow or that it goes too far. Let us be clear, 
France will always support the idea of international 
criminal justice that is impartial and universal, for it is 
the only way of fulfilling the imperative dictated by 
our history, namely, combating impunity. To all who 
are shocked by the boldness of some of the Court’s 
prosecutions, I say that, on the contrary, it would be 
appalling if the victims were deprived of their right to 
justice. 
 Human rights, the protection of civilians, 
international justice — these are not hollow concepts 
or empty principles for us. For France, they are first 
and foremost principles of action, and the only valid 
criterion for judgement is the impact of our actions on 
the actual situation. 
 In Guinea, after the killings in the Conakry 
stadium, on 28 September 2009, we came together to 
denounce the human rights violations and to assist the 
victims of the atrocities committed. The Secretary-
General dispatched an International Commission of 
Inquiry to the field one month after the fact, and I 
would like to once again thank him sincerely for that. 
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court 
instituted proceedings. That pressure enabled Guinean 
civil society in the field to make the difference. Today 
the junta has been replaced by a transitional executive. 
Nothing has been won. There will be a second round of 
elections in two weeks. But I wanted to recall this 
success of the United Nations since at the beginning I 
said that the responsibility to protect was threatened. I 
think we can all agree that there is a movement 
forming in civil society throughout the world and that 
we can still take action.The nations 
represented here know how deeply the world has 
changed in the six and a half decades since the United 
Nations was formed; since the spirit of international 
citizenship, of peoples and nations combining their 
energies to solve our shared problems, gave birth to the 
United Nations. Today, that spirit is needed more than 
ever. 
 All of us have to respond to a world that is 
profoundly altered. As a community of nations, we face 
three profound challenges: a redrawing of the map of 
power, including a big shift in economic power; the 
globalization of problems, not least terrorism and 
climate change; and increasingly fluid forms of identity 
and the rapid circulation and potency of new ideas. 
Taken together, these mean that we are in a new world. 
All three demand matching responses. So we must 
reform and renew our multilateral institutions in line 
with the changing map of power, strengthen our actions 
on international peacebuilding, climate change and 
development, and promote liberal values and human 
rights to win the conflict of ideas. 
 The truth is that in all three of these areas we are 
not doing anything like as well as we must. The 
effectiveness of multilateral approaches is in question 
in the wake of the financial crisis, the failure of the 
climate change talks in Copenhagen and the stalling of 
the Doha Trade Round. And too many nations and 
international institutions have been too reticent about 
promoting enlightened human values. We need to inject 
new life into our institutions and new confidence into 
the expression of our ideals. 
 Turning first to the altered geography of power, it 
is an often-stated fact that the old economic order is 
being transformed and that what were once labelled 
emerging economies are now, in many cases, global 
economic players. The distribution of military power, 
too, is altering, so power is being wielded in different 
places and in different ways. This power shift requires 
us to reform our international institutions, to reinforce 
the rule of international law, and to free up 
international trade. 
 In recent years, our multinational institutions 
have sometimes struggled to adapt to the new 
circumstances, so reform is essential. And a good place 
to start is right here at the United Nations. The Security 
Council must be reformed to reflect the new geography 
of power. The United Kingdom is clear and 
unambiguous in our support for permanent seats for 
Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and for African 
representation. Put simply, the United Nations cannot 
speak for the many if it only hears the voices of the 
few. We welcome the priority that the President has 
promised to give to the Assembly’s continuing 
negotiations on this issue. 
 Closer cooperation on counter-terrorism is also 
vital, and we welcome the Assembly’s affirmation of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 
We must stand shoulder to shoulder in the struggle 
against terrorism. 
 The United Kingdom will always champion the 
United Nations. If it did not exist, we would have to 
invent it. But let us be frank. Without a radical 
overhaul, the United Nations will not provide the 
leadership the world seeks from it and needs from it. It 
is also important that the vital role of the European 
Union in promoting development and prosperity be 
adequately represented in the Assembly. 
 The redrawing of the power map also makes it 
even more important that the writ of international law 
extend across the world. Laws are the solid 
representation of our collective values. That is why it is 
so important that we uphold and reinforce the 
instruments of international justice, including the 
International Criminal Court and specific tribunals, 
such as those for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.  
 I strongly welcome the comments of President 
Obama yesterday on the vital importance of the Middle 
East peace process. I can assure the Assembly that the 
United Kingdom is committed to helping lead to the 
end of hostilities that have been so profoundly 
damaging for all sides. 
 The prevention of nuclear-weapons proliferation 
is another huge priority for the international 
community. The United Kingdom welcomes the 
success of the Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
this May, and I can assure the Assembly that we will 
continue to play our part in making the world safer 
from the threat of nuclear weapons. 
 I was ready today to welcome the progress made 
in this week’s meeting of the E3+3 group on Iran. I 
was ready to also straightforwardly reiterate our 
 
 
27 10-54959 
 
concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme. But instead, 
once again, an issue of grave global concern has been 
overshadowed by the bizarre, offensive and attention-
grabbing pronouncements by President Ahmadinejad 
from this rostrum yesterday. His remarks were intended 
to distract attention from Iran’s obligations and to 
generate media headlines. They deserve to do neither. 
 The reshaped world of power also increases the 
need to open our borders to free trade. A trading world 
is a safer world. A world trade deal, which is within 
reach, would be worth $170 billion annually to the 
world economy. Two years ago we were very close, but 
we failed to seal the deal. We simply cannot afford 
protectionism. Today, we have to recognize that we 
will need an even more ambitious deal than we 
envisaged then if we are to get an agreement. Greater 
access to markets, particularly for least developed 
countries’ exports of agriculture, supports growth and 
reduces poverty. 
 The second of the three big shifts we have to 
adapt to is the globalization of many of our problems 
and of many of the solutions to those problems. Our 
economies are, of course, tied ever more closely 
together, as recent events have dramatically proven. 
Prosperity and poverty in one part of the world impact 
on economic activity and security elsewhere. 
 Diseases can span the globe in a matter of days. 
Terrorism is conducted by international networks 
across the world. Environmental threats do not respect 
borders. We are used to thinking about stateless people. 
We have to get used to the idea of stateless problems, 
too. Conflict takes place between, across and within 
national boundaries, but wherever it takes place it can 
threaten the interests of all nations. Conflict 
undermines our collective prosperity and destroys 
development. We must work harder to prevent conflict 
by tackling the sources of violence. And where conflict 
does break out, we must be ready to help resolve it.  
 So let me take this opportunity to acknowledge 
the invaluable contribution of United Nations 
peacekeepers to laying the foundations for sustainable 
peace around the world. We owe them all, and the 
Governments that provide them, a great debt of 
gratitude. The United Kingdom, along with France and 
other partners, has been at the forefront of supporting 
and encouraging United Nations efforts to deliver more 
strategic and effective peacekeeping. We will continue 
to provide that support.  
 But peacekeeping alone is not the answer. We 
need peacebuilding, too. The United Nations is 
uniquely placed not only to keep the peace, but also to 
make it last. Effective peacebuilding can address the 
underlying causes of conflict and strengthen local, 
regional and national capacity to contribute to long-
term stability in fragile States. 
 The coming year will see some significant 
challenges to the United Nations efforts to promote 
international peace, justice and security: in the Sudan, 
where we will see a referendum on the future of 
Southern Sudan, while continuing to look for progress 
on justice in Darfur and more widely; in Somalia, 
where the African Union peacekeeping mission is 
playing a brave and crucial role, and where the 
leadership of the United Nations could be decisive; and 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where much 
progress has been made but where we have seen again 
in recent weeks how much more remains to be done to 
achieve real security and stability for many of its hard-
pressed people. 
 The United Kingdom remains fully committed to 
the mission to bring peace and prosperity to 
Afghanistan. Afghans are increasingly taking 
responsibility for their own affairs. This year’s Kabul 
Conference and, most recently, parliamentary elections 
have demonstrated Afghan commitment. Challenges 
remain, but progress is being made. The United 
Kingdom will continue to work with its international 
partners to support Afghans to build a better 
Afghanistan. 
 The United Kingdom is wholehearted in our 
support for international development. Like many 
nations, we are having to take tough action to reduce 
our financial deficits, but we are not budging a 
millimetre from our commitment to development. We 
are standing by our promise to devote 0.7 per cent of 
gross national income to international development 
assistance from 2013, and we will enshrine this 
commitment in law. 
 When disaster strikes, we must respond quickly 
and generously. Right now, Pakistan faces a 
humanitarian disaster of unimaginable proportions. As 
the Secretary-General has said, this is the largest 
disaster in the 65-year history of the United Nations. 
So we must ensure that the United Nations appeal is 
properly funded to cover both humanitarian relief and 
reconstruction, and we must ensure that there is enough 
  
 
10-54959 28 
 
support over the long term, not least in helping 
Pakistan to achieve the levels of economic growth that 
will allow the country to rebuild itself. I am very 
proud, as the representative of a European Union (EU) 
member State, that the EU has recently shown real 
leadership in promising to look at improving trade 
access for Pakistan in response to the disaster. I very 
much hope that others can follow suit. 
 So, economic power has shifted and problems 
have globalized, but at the same time the power of 
ideas has grown enormously. Identities have become 
more fluid. It is not possible to put people into neatly 
labelled national boxes any more. This means that 
winning the battle of ideas is as important as military 
prowess. 
 The work of international institutions must 
continue to be guided by the values on which those 
institutions were founded: the rule of law, both 
domestic and international; the right to freedom of 
expression and belief; democracy; and equality before 
the law. These values are sometimes described as 
Western values, but only by people who do not know 
their history. Four centuries ago, the great Mughal 
emperor Akbar was legislating for religious freedom 
and equality in what is now India, while in parts of 
Europe heretics were being burned at the stake. The 
truth is that these liberal values of equality, law and 
self-determination cannot be claimed by any nation or 
hemisphere. They are global values with global force. 
They are also the values at the heart of the United 
Nations Charter. 
 We should never apologize for promoting the idea 
that women and men are equal; never flinch from 
insisting that Governments chosen by their people are 
better; never shy away from our insistence that nobody 
should be silenced because of their religion or beliefs. 
 The United Kingdom will therefore continue to 
push for human rights across the world. Since the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 
1948, the United Nations has developed a global legal 
framework of human rights standards. We want to see 
the Human Rights Council do more to ensure that 
States implement their obligations and use the 2011 
review to improve the Council’s ability to respond 
effectively to situations of concern, such as the 
outrageous abuse of democracy and human rights in 
Burma. 
 United Kingdom foreign policy will be shaped by 
the three big challenges I have set out today: a power 
shift, the globalization of problems, and the rapid 
circulation and potency of ideas. The United Kingdom 
Government will fearlessly promote our ideals and 
interests while remaining realistic in our approach. 
 This is the spirit in which the United Kingdom 
Government is conducting a root-and-branch review of 
our own strategic defence and security policy. Our last 
review took place in 1998, but the world has changed, 
along with the character of the threats we face. This is 
not to say that we did not face grave threats before, but 
they were more fixed, more visible and more 
predictable. Today, the threats to our security are not 
rooted in specific States. They are more fluid and often 
less visible: terrorism, organized crime, or attacks from 
cyberspace. We must judge our security not by our 
ability to deal with what we know, but how able we are 
to respond to unpredictable threats. 
 The United Kingdom will also show leadership 
by example. As fierce advocates of the international 
rule of law, we will practice what we preach. No nation 
can insist on the law and then act as though it is above 
it. But our approach will also be hard-headed and 
realistic. In recent years we have learned — in same 
cases the hard way — that democracy cannot be 
created by diktat. Freedom cannot be commanded into 
existence. 
 The new coalition Government, now five-months 
old, will restore Britain’s international reputation by 
pursuing a hard-headed foreign policy based on liberal 
values.  
 The world has changed, but the values that should 
guide us have not. We have to renew our international 
institutions in line with the new realities of world 
power and influence, and fearlessly project the ideals 
of democracy, equality and freedom. Great things are 
demanded of us. Great things are necessary from us. It 
falls to our generation of leaders to meet these 
challenges together.Allow me to begin by 
congratulating you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly and by assuring you of the 
full cooperation of my delegation. In the interest of 
saving the Assembly’s valuable time, I will read out 
only part of my address, the full text of which has been 
circulated.  
 The United Nations was created, 65 years ago, to 
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, 
to affirm faith in fundamental rights, to establish 
conditions under which respect for international law 
can be maintained and to promote social progress and 
better standards of life in larger freedom. Six and a half 
decades later, globalization has made the world a much 
smaller place. It has also created conditions whereby 
the problems and challenges of one country or region 
can very quickly become those of the larger community 
of nations. 
 Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, maritime piracy, pandemics and 
epidemics, organized crime and narcotics smuggling 
recognize no borders or boundaries. Similarly, the 
fallout of intra-State conflicts, failed States, climate 
change, natural disasters, food shortages and financial 
and economic crises transcend countries and regions. 
Under those circumstances the international 
community looks to the United Nations to overcome 
the common challenges of humankind through the 
harmonized actions of nations, as stated in the Charter. 
 The United Nations is the only organization that 
can be at the centre of an international governance 
system. However, it needs urgent reform to reflect 
contemporary realities and to effectively meet 
emerging global challenges. The first step has to be the 
reform of the Security Council. The overwhelming 
majority of the membership has been clear in seeking 
an expansion in both the permanent and non-permanent 
categories of membership. It is imperative that we 
bring the negotiations to an early and logical 
conclusion. 
 We must also truly revitalize the General 
Assembly. It must reclaim its position on vital matters 
such as the appointment of the Secretary-General and 
the relationship between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Along with the Economic 
and Social Council, the General Assembly should also 
set the paradigms of multilateral engagement for the 
global economy and for development and 
developmental cooperation.  
 It is matter of much satisfaction that this year we 
have significantly advanced the United Nations reform 
agenda in the areas of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. I wish to reiterate our strong 
commitment to UN Women and to its strengthening.  
 We also need to ensure that the review of the 
Human Rights Council this year adds to the Council’s 
role as an effective, credible and premier United 
Nations mechanism dealing with human rights.  
 My Government accords the highest priority to 
the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Our development challenges were exacerbated by the 
financial and economic crisis that started in 2008. 
Acting in concert, the Group of 20 (G-20), which 
includes the largest developed and developing 
countries, reacted promptly and purposefully to stem 
the global slowdown and send a strong message of 
confidence and stability. India believes that the  
G-20 — the premier forum for international economic 
  
 
10-55396 4 
 
cooperation — can help catalyse strong, balanced and 
sustainable growth for the benefit of everyone. 
 As a country vulnerable to, and already suffering 
from, the impacts of climate change, India has an 
important stake in the success of ongoing international 
negotiations in that regard. There is no substitute to the 
United Nations-led process, with its inherent 
inclusiveness and transparency, to lead us to an 
ambitious and equitable outcome that respects the 
provisions and principles of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in 
particular the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities. It is 
important that there be acceptance of equal sharing of 
the resource of the atmosphere for all human beings. 
 India has an abiding commitment to achieve 
universal and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament 
within a specified time frame — a vision that was most 
eloquently articulated in the Assembly by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1988. More than two decades 
later, that goal still remains distant. Meanwhile, newer 
threats have emerged, including the danger of terrorists 
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. 
 India introduced a working paper on nuclear 
disarmament in 2006, which contained specific 
proposals that reflect the spirit and substance of the 
Rajiv Gandhi action plan. We call for an intensification 
of discussion and dialogue among Member States and 
the larger non-governmental community, so as to 
strengthen an international consensus that can be 
translated into concrete action to achieve nuclear 
disarmament.  
 India remains committed to the negotiations in 
the Conference on Disarmament on a multilateral,  
non-discriminatory and internationally verifiable fissile 
material cut-off treaty that meets India’s national 
security interests. We hope that the Conference will be 
able to commence negotiations at an early date. We 
remain committed to a unilateral and voluntary 
moratorium on nuclear-explosives testing. 
 Terrorism has emerged as one of the most serious 
threats to international peace and security. To defeat it, 
it is imperative for the global community to build on 
international cooperation and take concerted action 
against terrorists and their sponsors. There can be no 
justification for terrorism, just as there can be no good 
or bad terrorists. We urge Member States to display the 
necessary political will to finalize and adopt the 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 Peace and stability in South Asia is one of our 
highest priorities. We are committed to good-
neighbourly relations with all our neighbours, 
including Pakistan. In that spirit of solidarity with the 
people of Pakistan in their hour of need we pledged 
$25 million in aid, which is being channelled through 
the United Nations for flood relief efforts in that 
country. As a neighbour, we wish to provide succour 
and relief in a timely manner to the victims of that 
natural disaster. We are saddened by the loss of life and 
property that Pakistan has suffered as a result of the 
unprecedented floods. 
 It is well known that many countries have deep-
rooted concerns about the growth and consolidation of 
militancy and terrorism in Pakistan. We share those 
concerns, particularly because Jammu and Kashmir, 
which is an integral part of India, has been the target of 
such Pakistan-sponsored militancy and terrorism for 
many years now. Pakistan must fulfil its solemn 
commitment not to allow territory under its control to 
be used for terrorism directed against India. Credible 
and firm action by Pakistan against terrorist groups 
operating from its soil is in the interest of the region, as 
it is in Pakistan’s own interest.  
 Pakistan cannot impart lessons to us on 
democracy and human rights. If, however, Pakistan 
were to live up to its commitment not to allow the use 
of territory under its control by terrorists acting against 
India, that would significantly help reduce the trust 
deficit that impedes the development of better bilateral 
relations between our two countries. We are 
neighbours, and as neighbours we have an obligation to 
work together. 
 Afghanistan recently successfully concluded 
parliamentary elections. We believe the international 
community needs to be steadfast in its engagement 
with Afghanistan to ensure the success of its 
reconstruction efforts and its emergence as a 
democratic, pluralistic and prosperous society. The 
continuing existence of safe havens and sanctuaries for 
terrorists beyond Afghanistan’s borders is the major 
impediment to the restoration of peace and security in 
Afghanistan. That should be a primary focus of the 
international community. 
 Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime 
Minister, said in 1948:  
 
 
5 10-55396 
 
 “The fundamental principles on which the United 
Nations is based are right principles. We believe 
in those fundamental principles and want to help 
the Organization in following these principles.” 
The Government and the more than 1 billion people of 
India have stood by that commitment. I would like to 
solemnly reaffirm our faith in the principles that 
underlie the United Nations, and in the United Nations 
system itself. When I arrived yesterday 
in New York, I received a phone call from the chairman 
of one of the Jewish organizations, who asked me how 
I was coping with all the pressure that is being placed 
on Israel. “Surely”, he said, “it must be very difficult”. 
I recalled an old joke, which tells of five Jews who 
changed the way we see the world: Moses, law is 
everything; Jesus, love is everything; Marx, money is 
everything; Freud, sex is everything; and Einstein, 
everything is relative. So, I told him that everything is 
relative. On one hand, it is very difficult. On the other 
hand, it is easier than before, because now we have a 
stable coalition and a stable Government and we have 
the support of a majority of Israel’s citizens. We are 
ready for a fair solution and we are ready to cooperate 
with the international community. However, we are not 
ready to compromise our national security or the vital 
interests of the State of Israel. 
 At the outset, I want to emphasize that, contrary 
to what is often presented in the international media, 
the political arena in Israel is not divided between 
those who seek peace and those who seek war. 
Everyone wants peace, and the controversy in Israel 
centres on the specific question of how to achieve this 
peace, how to reach security and stability in the region. 
And the question is: why, in the 17 years since we 
signed the Oslo Accords, have we not arrived at a 
comprehensive agreement signifying the end of the 
conflict and the removal of future mutual claims? 
 Despite all of the efforts of all the good people 
with the best of intentions, including Yitzhak Rabin, 
Shimon Peres, Benjamin Netanyahu, Ehud Barak, Ariel 
Sharon and Ehud Olmert; despite the summit meetings 
at Camp David between Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat 
with the presence of former President Bill Clinton; and 
despite the Annapolis Summit between Ehud Olmert 
and Mahmoud Abbas, we are today still in deadlock. 
 In fact, contrary to the prevalent view that the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the heart of the instability 
in the Middle East or is the main reason for the 
region’s numerous conflicts, the reality is entirely 
different. More than 90 per cent of the wars and war 
victims of the Middle East since the Second World War 
did not result from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and 
are in no way connected to Israel. Rather, they stem 
from conflicts involving Muslims or conflicts between 
Arab States. The Iran-Iraq war, the Gulf war, the wars 
between North and South Yemen, the Hama atrocities 
in Syria, and the wars in Algeria and Lebanon — these 
are just a few examples from a list that goes on and on. 
 The second flawed explanation for the 
long-standing conflict between Israel and the 
Palestinians that has gained popularity is that the root 
of the problem is the so-called occupation, the 
settlements in Judea and Samaria and the settlers 
themselves. Only the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian State in Judea, Samaria and Gaza, so the 
argument goes, will ensure peace in the region. 
 It is sufficient to state a number of well-known 
facts in order to refute that claim. First, all of Judea, 
Samaria and Gaza were under Arab control for 
19 years, between 1948 and 1967. During those 
19 years, no one tried to create a Palestinian State. 
Peace agreements were achieved with Egypt and 
Jordan, despite the presence of settlements. And the 
opposite is also true: we evacuated 21 flourishing 
settlements in Gush Katif and transferred more than 
10,000 Jews. And, in return, we have Hamas in power 
and thousands of missiles landing on Sderot and 
southern Israel. 
 Another misguided argument is the claim that the 
Palestinian issue prevents a determined international 
front against Iran. This argument is not only flawed, it 
is completely irresponsible. The same argument could 
be made that the Palestinian issue prevents action on 
North Korea, piracy in Somalia, the humanitarian crisis 
in Sudan or the challenge of Afghanistan. 
 Just as the Khomeini Revolution had nothing to 
do with the Palestinian issue, neither is the Iranian 
decision to develop nuclear weapons related. In truth, 
the connection between Iran and the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict is precisely the contrary. Iran can exist without 
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizbullah, but the terrorist 
organizations cannot exist without Iran. Relying on 
those proxies, Iran can, at any given time, foil any 
agreement between Israel and the Palestinians or with 
Lebanon. 
 Thus, in searching for a durable agreement with 
the Palestinians, one that will deal with the true roots 
of the conflict and will endure for many years, one 
must understand that, first, the Iranian issue must be 
resolved. One must deal first with the root cause of the 
problem, and not its symptoms. There are, of course, 
yet other problems that must be solved; solving that 
one would not be sufficient, but it is nevertheless a 
necessary condition. 
 
 
9 10-55264 
 
 In trying to resolve the conflict between Israel 
and the Palestinians, we are dealing with two types of 
problems: emotional problems and practical problems. 
That is why the solution must also be a two-stage one. 
 The emotional problems are, first and foremost, 
the utter lack of confidence between the sides and 
issues such as Jerusalem, recognition of Israel as the 
nation-State of the Jewish people, and refugees. Under 
those conditions, we should focus on coming up with a 
long-term intermediate agreement, something that 
could take a few decades. We need to raise an entire 
new generation that will have mutual trust and will not 
be influenced by incitement and extremist messages. 
To achieve a final status agreement, we must 
understand that the primary practical obstacle is the 
friction between the two nations. 
 As is true everywhere, where there are two 
nations, two religions or two languages with competing 
claims to the same land, there is friction and conflict. 
Countless examples of ethnic conflict around the world 
confirm this, whether in the Balkans, the Caucasus, 
Africa, the Far East or the Middle East. Where 
effective separation has been achieved, conflict has 
either been avoided or has been dramatically reduced 
or resolved. Consider the cases of the former Yugoslav 
republics, the split-up of Czechoslovakia and the 
independence of East Timor as cases in point. Thus, the 
guiding principle for a final status agreement must not 
be land-for-peace but rather, exchange of populated 
territory. Let me be very clear: I am not speaking about 
moving populations, but rather about moving borders 
to better reflect demographic realities. 
 This is not an extraordinary insight and is far less 
controversial than some may seek to claim. In fact, 
precisely this notion — that a mismatch between 
borders and nationalities is a recipe for conflict — has 
long been accepted as a virtual truism in the academic 
community. Leading scholars and highly respected 
research institutions have even coined the term “right-
sizing the State” to capture the idea that States and 
nations must be in balance in order to ensure peace. 
This is not a controversial political policy. It is an 
empirical truth. 
 But beyond empirical truth there is historical 
truth, namely, the almost 4,000 years during which the 
Jewish people were born in the land of Israel and 
developed the corpus of ethical and intellectual 
treasures that have been instrumental in the rise of 
Western civilization. The 2,000 years of forced exile 
and interim conquest by Byzantines, Arabs, 
Mamelukes, Ottomans and others cannot and never will 
impair the unbreakable bonds of the Jewish people to 
its homeland. Israel is not only where we are, it is who 
we are. 
 In closing, let me remind everyone in this Hall of 
the quote on the plaza across from the United Nations, 
words spoken in Jerusalem almost 3,000 years ago by 
the Jewish prophet Isaiah: 
 “They shall beat their swords into plowshares and 
their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not 
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they 
learn war any more.” (Isaiah 2:4) 
 Inspired by the deep wisdom embodied in these 
words, let us hope that the path to true peace 
prophesied by Isaiah will guide our two peoples, in two 
nation-States, living in peace and security.It is an honour to 
lead New Zealand’s delegation this year. The opening 
of the General Assembly’s new session is the best 
example there is of the capacity of the United Nations 
to bring us all together. Our discussions here will be 
wide-ranging, but inevitably settle on two main issues: 
global security and sustainable economic development.  
 We want to make our world safer, more secure 
and more prosperous. These goals will require strong 
collective action with a focus on practical outcomes. 
New Zealand is seeking every opportunity to 
contribute. We are a young, small and fair-minded 
country. We depend upon a United Nations that is 
effective and credible. 
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. In 
addition to our indigenous Maori population, we are a 
mix of people from Europe, Asia and the Pacific. Our 
links with Europe are built on history and tradition. 
Within Asia, we are developing ever-stronger economic 
and security relationships. Our future is closely tied to 
both of these regions. We have an equally strong focus 
on our closest neighbours in the South Pacific. New 
Zealand is a Pacific country. Auckland is the largest 
Pasifika city in the world, and a number of Pacific 
countries have more citizens living in New Zealand 
than at home. 
 The security and development of the region is 
New Zealand’s constant preoccupation. It is a matter of 
grave concern that the South Pacific is second only to 
sub-Saharan Africa in terms of lack of progress 
towards the achievement of some of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). We want to see the 
MDGs achieved, and we want to see the wider Pacific 
prosper through good governance and sustainable 
economic development. That is why New Zealand is 
increasingly deploying our development resources 
within its region, since that is where they are most 
needed and where they can be most effective. 
 The development challenges in the Pacific are 
extremely complex, with vulnerable economies and 
challenging environmental circumstances. New 
Zealand has increased and will continue to increase our 
overall level of development assistance, despite 
challenging times for our domestic economy. A higher 
percentage of that larger budget will be focused on our 
region. 
 But money alone is not enough; aid effectiveness 
and donor coordination are vital. Progress will also 
depend on good governance within the region. 
 Next year we will mark the fortieth anniversary 
of the Pacific Islands Forum, the central body for 
regional engagement in the Pacific, which held its first 
meeting in New Zealand in 1971. We will welcome 
leaders from around the region back to New Zealand 
next September to celebrate our achievements over 
40 years and to take stock of the challenges we must 
face in the future. 
 The past year has reinforced the need for better 
disaster management. Just three weeks ago, residents in 
Christchurch woke to the most destructive earthquake 
in New Zealand in 80 years. Miraculously, there was 
no loss of life, but the damage runs into billions of 
dollars and people’s lives and livelihoods were 
affected. Significant aftershocks are still affecting the 
 
 
51 10-54965 
 
population. But less than a month after the earthquake 
hit, roads and buildings have been repaired, tourism 
infrastructure is at almost full capacity, and people’s 
lives are being rebuilt. 
 Others have not been so lucky. The earthquakes 
in Haiti and Chile and the recent flooding in Pakistan 
are reminders of the devastating scale of such disasters. 
The Pacific has been hit hard, too. This month will 
mark the first anniversary of the Pacific tsunami that 
took the lives of 184 people in Samoa, American 
Samoa and Tonga. 
 These events and others demonstrate the 
importance of disaster preparedness, management and 
recovery. New Zealand’s experience with major 
earthquakes has taught us how to mitigate risks, 
enforce strong building codes, and implement effective 
recovery plans. But there will be lessons we should 
learn from this recent experience. We will work with 
the United Nations system, non-governmental 
organizations and other international agencies to 
ensure that those lessons are shared and help others to 
prepare. 
 While development and disaster management are 
crucial to our quest for a safer world, underpinning 
both is security. Peacekeeping is a key responsibility of 
the Organization. Indeed, it is its peacekeeping 
operations that shape perceptions of the United Nations 
for many people around the world. 
 New Zealand is committed to supporting global 
security and United Nations peacekeeping. That is why 
we have been engaged in peacekeeping and peace 
support operations since the 1940s. New Zealand’s 
soldiers, police, engineers, corrections and customs 
officers, doctors and other personnel are today 
involved in 12 operations that span the globe from 
Africa, Afghanistan and the Middle East to Asia and 
the Pacific. 
 One of the clearest examples of New Zealand’s 
commitment to the principles of collective 
responsibility is through the United Nations effort in 
Timor-Leste. Since 1999, New Zealand has been a part 
of every United Nations mission that has served in 
Timor-Leste. We have played a major role in the 
United Nations-sanctioned international military 
operations that restored order there in 1999 and again 
in 2006. Over 6,000 New Zealanders have served in 
Timor in the past decade — a significant undertaking 
for a country of only 4.4 million people. 
 Of course, helping ensure peace and stability in 
our region alone is not enough. New Zealanders are 
among those who have been affected by terrorism, 
killed in the attacks that took place just a few blocks 
away from here in September 2001, and more recently 
in Bali, in London and in Jakarta. 
 The need to respond decisively to those who 
perpetrate such atrocities is a key reason why New 
Zealand has led the provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamyan, Afghanistan, since 2003. We have redeployed 
our special forces to work alongside the Government of 
Afghanistan and the international community to ensure 
that that country does not return to being a safe haven 
for Al-Qaida. We must address the conditions in which 
terrorism thrives. We are increasing our development 
spending in Bamyan and recently placed the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team under civilian leadership for the 
first time. 
 New Zealand is also strongly supportive of 
peacekeeping reform. The expansion in peacekeeping 
since 1990 has been dramatic. Never before has this 
Organization deployed so many missions to such 
complex environments. This expansion has opened up 
discussion of the way the United Nations conducts its 
peacekeeping operations. Clear and achievable 
mandates are needed, progress needs to be better 
monitored, and efficiency needs to be improved. 
 We are also contributing to United Nations efforts 
to strengthen peacebuilding in practice, including the 
need for better participation of women in 
peacebuilding. Of course, the response of the United 
Nations to crises has not always been successful. It is 
for this reason that New Zealand has strongly 
supported the responsibility to protect (R2P). We were 
pleased to contribute to the proposed joint Special 
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide/R2P office and 
look forward to the more comprehensive 
implementation of R2P throughout the United Nations 
system. 
 Effective pursuit of these goals — countering 
terrorism and maintaining peace and security — 
demands coordinated, collective action. The United 
Nations is the best vehicle for that action. New Zealand 
has been, and remains, proud to be a part of that 
community of collective action. In line with that 
commitment, New Zealand is seeking a seat on the 
Security Council for the 2015-2016 term. In doing so, 
  
 
10-54965 52 
 
we will work with others here who want the world to 
be a safer and more prosperous place. 
 This year significant gains have been made in 
global disarmament. New Zealand welcomes the action 
plan adopted at this year’s Non-Proliferation Treaty 
Review Conference, the groundbreaking nuclear 
security summit, and the entry into force of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. These are tangible 
and practical successes. But we still face some 
significant challenges. New Zealand is concerned by 
the continuing inertia of the Conference on 
Disarmament. The Secretary-General’s High-level 
Meeting on disarmament this morning was a valuable 
step in acknowledging this problem and trying to find a 
way forward. 
 As a country that prides itself on sustainable 
development, New Zealand is also greatly concerned 
about global environmental issues. As well as working 
towards an outcome in Cancún, we are involved in 
practical projects for addressing climate change. One 
such project is the Global Research Alliance on 
Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Fourteen per cent of 
worldwide greenhouse-gas emissions come from 
agriculture. At the same time, there are projections that 
world food production needs to increase by 50 per cent 
in the next 20 years, and to double in the next 40 years, 
to feed a growing world. 
 Clearly, we need a scientific breakthrough to help 
meet the challenge of producing more food while 
reducing emissions. New Zealand formed the Alliance, 
which now includes more than 30 agricultural nations, 
to find ways to address this problem. Scientists and 
researchers are now linking up across the world to try 
to balance the need for increased agricultural 
production with the need to address climate change. 
This is just one example of how countries can come 
together to address climate change in a very real way. 
 When I was here a year ago, we were watching to 
see whether the world would be able to climb out of 
the global economic recession. Much progress has been 
made and key economic indicators are generally 
pointing in the right direction. The rapid and 
coordinated international response, including by the 
Group of 20, has been effective. The World Trade 
Organization’s rules-based trading system has held up 
well. But, like many countries, New Zealand is 
frustrated that the conclusion of the Doha Development 
Round still eludes us. 
 Over these last few days, especially in the context 
of discussion of progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals, I have heard many fine words 
spoken in support of the world’s disadvantaged. I take 
this opportunity to remind those speakers and countries 
that the single most effective step that could be taken 
to advance the position of the world’s disadvantaged 
would be to create a framework within which they can 
trade themselves to a better future. 
 I want to strongly endorse President Obama’s 
statement, made yesterday, that there is no viable 
alternative to the resolution of conflict in the Middle 
East other than two States, Israel and Palestine, living 
side by side in peace and security. We believe that 
direct negotiations, with both parties at the table, are 
the only way to resolve the conflict. We congratulate 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu on 
having the courage to negotiate in very difficult 
circumstances. We ask that Israel heed the international 
community’s unanimous call to extend the moratorium 
on settlements and create the enabling atmosphere that 
will allow direct negotiations to continue. 
 We also agree with President Obama that 
resolution of the Middle East conflict is not just the 
responsibility of Israel and Palestine. Countries in the 
region especially, but also countries elsewhere, must 
work towards Middle East peace. New Zealand, as a 
friend of both Israel and Palestine, will play its part. I 
recently visited the Sinai, where a New Zealand officer 
has command of the Multinational Force and 
Observers. I was reminded that there has been peace 
between Israel and Egypt for more than 30 years, a 
prospect once unthinkable. With the commitment of the 
two parties and the support of the international 
community, Israel and Palestine can enjoy the same 
freedom from conflict. We all have a huge stake in 
achieving that objective. Resolution of the Palestinian 
question would tear out the fuse that threatens to ignite 
conflict in the Middle East and beyond. 
 So today we add our voice to that of President 
Obama and of others who believe that this dispute can, 
and must, be solved. And we call on all Members of 
the United Nations to lend their support to this process 
in the critical weeks ahead.The current, sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly has started with an unprecedented 
number of events covering the full range of the most 
topical international issues. It is encouraging that, in 
the light of the numerous challenges facing mankind, a 
positive unified platform for collective action has been 
taking shape, with the United Nations playing the 
central role. Having learned from the dramatic events 
of recent decades and having realized that attempts to 
cut the Gordian knot by force in violation of the 
Charter will only lead to deadlock, the international 
community has concluded that there is no alternative 
but to address political, economic and other problems 
through joint efforts based on international law. And 
the United Nations provides a universal platform to 
strengthen this positive trend in international relations.  
 The Security Council is a key instrument of this 
Organization to maintain international peace and 
security. The high-level Security Council meeting held 
on 23 September (S/PV.6389) reaffirmed its members’ 
intention to enhance that body’s efficiency, not only 
through direct involvement in conflict settlement but 
also by creating prerequisites for the non-recurrence 
and prevention of crises. This proves that the 
comprehensive approach to ensuring international 
security is gaining ground, as it reflects modern 
realities and is based on the principles and provisions 
of the United Nations Charter. 
 The United Nations faces unprecedented, serious 
and multifaceted tasks in the key area of peacekeeping. 
While paying tribute to the efforts and sacrifice of 
thousands of men and women Blue Helmets, joint 
efforts should continue to refine the theory and practice 
of peacekeeping under United Nations auspices and to 
improve the quality of planning and the conduct of 
peacekeeping operations with adequate political 
control by the Security Council. 
 It is encouraging that the United Nations is 
working towards this goal on a truly collective basis. 
Member States have quite a few constructive ideas on 
their table, which include Russia’s initiative to 
revitalize the Military Staff Committee in order to 
improve the military expertise of Security Council 
decisions. 
 This year has been marked by progress in nuclear 
disarmament. The 2010 Treaty between the United 
States of America and the Russian Federation on 
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of 
Strategic Offensive Arms, signed by the Presidents of 
Russia and the United States in Prague, is a real 
contribution by our two countries to strengthening 
international security and strategic stability. It is also 
the result of positive changes in the relations between 
Russia and the United States that have placed Russian-
American interaction in world affairs on a qualitatively 
new level.  
 We hope that the strong impetus provided by 
Moscow and Washington to the nuclear disarmament 
process will be followed similarly by all nations, 
primarily by nuclear-weapon States. 
 Pursuant to Russia’s policy towards strengthening 
the United Nations role in global security, disarmament 
and confidence-building, we intend to table three draft 
resolutions during the current General Assembly 
session: one on transparency and confidence-building 
measures in outer space activities, co-sponsored with 
China; a draft resolution on developments in the field 
of information and telecommunications in the context 
of international security; and a Russia-United States 
co-sponsored draft resolution on bilateral strategic 
offensive arms reductions and the new framework for 
strategic relations. We call for their adoption by 
consensus. 
 The universalization of the Treaty on the  
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its 
guaranteed strict implementation comprise the 
cornerstone of a strengthened international  
non-proliferation regime. In that context, the search 
must continue for an effective solution to the Iranian 
nuclear problem on the basis of NPT provisions and the 
norms of international Law. The Iranian side must 
ensure the requisite level of transparency and 
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), which is acting on behalf of the 
international community with the Security Council’s 
support. 
 Clarifying the outstanding questions about the 
Iranian nuclear programme would not only meet the 
goal of strengthening the non-proliferation regime but 
would also quite obviously promote the interests of 
Iran. Russia sees no reasonable alternative to a political 
and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear 
 
 
31 10-55396 
 
problem through constructive dialogue between Tehran 
and the six countries involved. The meeting of the 
Foreign Ministers of the six countries in New York 
helped to consolidate the shared intention to ensure the 
earliest resumption of such a dialogue. We will 
continue to do our utmost to achieve this goal. 
 As far as the sanctions instrument is concerned, 
sanctions are not a goal in themselves. The objective of 
the sanctions regime established by the Security 
Council is to signal to Iran that it must fully cooperate 
with IAEA, and to give an impetus to the negotiating 
process. All members of the international community 
must show solidarity based on mutual responsibility. 
We strongly reject a situation in which unilateral 
decisions — including ex-territorial ones that undermine 
the very foundation of further joint efforts — are made 
with regard to sanctions in parallel to collective efforts 
by the United Nations Security Council. We must put 
an end to that practice, which runs counter to 
international law and has negative political effects. 
 Even more obvious, the economic and financial 
trade blockade of Cuba, whose lifting the General 
Assembly has demanded for a number of years, is 
clearly an anachronism. The codification of the 
principle of equal and indivisible security is 
indispensable to productive international efforts in this 
field, which is the precise goal of President 
Medvedev’s initiative to conclude a treaty on European 
security. The proposal targets the complete transition of 
Euro-Atlantic policy from its old Cold War agenda to a 
new one, as well as a firm legal foundation for the 
principle of indivisible security for all in the  
Euro-Atlantic region proclaimed in the 1990s. We 
welcome the substantive dialogue on this important 
Russian initiative, which has started in various 
international forums. 
 A comprehensive settlement in the Middle East 
would make a crucial contribution towards 
strengthened global stability. The parties must 
demonstrate political will and extend every effort to 
promote the success of the resumed direct Palestinian-
Israeli talks. The results of the ministerial Quartet 
meeting of major international mediators held on  
21 September demonstrated that appropriate support to 
the Israelis and Palestinians will continue, but the 
ultimate responsibility for a successful outcome rests 
with them. 
 In this connection, the decision by the Israeli 
authorities to not extend the moratorium on Israeli 
settlement activities has raised serious concern. A way 
out of the current impasse should be found so as to 
ensure that negotiations continue. Our proposal to hold 
an international conference on the Middle East in 
Moscow is aimed at advancing the Middle East 
settlement. This proposal has gained the support of all 
interested parties and the United Nations Security 
Council. If the direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue 
becomes stable, the preparations for the Moscow forum 
can get under way, which should also substantively 
examine the Syrian and Lebanese tracks, as well as the 
prospects for the multilateral aspects of the Middle 
East settlement. 
 The development of a comprehensive strategy to 
address the interconnected problems of the Middle East 
is on the agenda. It is necessary to continue working 
towards an international conference in 2012 on the 
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction and their means of 
delivery in the Middle East, pursuant to the decision of 
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
 Russia supports the international strategy for a 
comprehensive settlement and for post-conflict 
rehabilitation of Afghanistan adopted by the Kabul 
Conference, which envisages a stage-by-stage transfer 
of responsibility for the situation in that country to 
Afghan authorities, as effective governing structures 
are established in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. 
The future of Afghanistan must be determined by the 
Afghan people themselves. The international 
community must continue to provide its assistance, 
with an important role being played by the United 
Nations. 
 Lasting stabilization in Afghanistan and 
throughout the region will be impossible without 
resolving the drug problem. The dimension of the 
danger posed by narcotics emanating from Afghanistan 
represents a clear threat to international peace and 
stability and requires more resolute actions throughout 
the entire chain of the production and proliferation of 
narcotics — from the destruction of drug crops to the 
suppression of precursor supplies, including drug 
traffickers on the sanction lists of the Security Council. 
It is also necessary to move to a new level of 
international cooperation. Russia’s initiative to 
establish financial and counter-narcotics security belts 
  
 
10-55396 32 
 
along the perimeter of Afghan’s borders is consistent 
with those goals. 
 The regional dimension of the long-term 
stabilization of Afghanistan is becoming ever more 
topical. To that end, we must fully engage the potential 
of relevant organizations that are actively working in 
close contact with Kabul on Afghan issues, including 
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 The settlement process in the Sudan is 
approaching an important milestone. As the date of 
referendum on the self-determination of the South of 
that country draws closer, the parties to the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement must redouble their 
efforts to overcome the problems that still divide them. 
We should also give new impetus to the Darfur 
settlement process. At stake is the stability of 
conditions in the Sudan and throughout the vast 
African continent. We welcome the constructive 
attitude demonstrated by the Sudanese and other 
participants in the high-level meeting on the Sudan that 
was held here recently. 
 In Somalia, the confrontation continues between 
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by the 
international community, and extremists and terrorist 
groups linked with Al-Qaida. The lack of a settlement 
on land is fuelling the problem of piracy off the coast 
of Somalia. A more resolute pursuit of the political 
process and stronger assistance to the peacekeeping 
operation of the African Union and further counter-
piracy efforts, including the criminal prosecution of 
pirates, are priorities in international efforts on the 
Somali track, as reiterated during the recent  
mini-summit on Somalia, which Russia fully supports. 
 The results of the Millennium Development 
Goals summit have reaffirmed the important role of the 
United Nations on development matters and must help 
mobilize political support and financial resources for 
the timely achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That requires joint 
efforts by Governments, international financial and 
trade institutions, the private sector and civil society, 
based on the principles of global partnership and 
shared responsibility. 
 It is obvious that most global problems, including 
the achievement of the MDGs, cannot be resolved 
without engaging innovations, advanced technologies 
and modernization solutions. The same is valid for 
such challenges as climate change, energy and food 
security and the fight against diseases. The engagement 
of the enormous potential of the United Nations, its 
family and system of specialized agencies in this area 
will allow the Organization to become a catalyst in the 
establishment and development of multilateral 
modernization alliances. Russia is prepared to 
participate actively in that work. 
 To live up to expectations, the United Nations must 
continuously renew itself. The reform of the Organization 
is progressively moving forward. This year, the 
negotiations on strengthening system-wide coherence 
were completed successfully. In particular, the new 
important United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women has been established. 
 Negotiations will continue at the current session 
of the General Assembly on the expansion of the 
composition of the Security Council. This is an 
extremely important issue on the reform agenda of the 
Organization, involving the interests of the 
overwhelming majority of States. For that reason, the 
final formula for Security Council reform should be 
based on compromise and the broadest possible 
agreement in the United Nations. This requirement is 
also fully applicable to all other aspects of United 
Nations reform. 
 This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the 
United Nations, as well as that of the end of the Second 
World War, from the ashes of which the world 
Organization was born. For the sake of the memory of 
the millions of victims and in order to prevent a 
repetition of such scourges, we must suppress attempts 
to falsify the events associated with that historic 
calamity. That is the aim of a well-known Russian 
initiative in the United Nations. We count on the 
broadest support for a draft resolution on the topic. 
 The United Nations is our common and unique 
Organization. It is up to all of us to determine how 
productive and really useful its future work will be for 
humankind. By pulling our efforts together, we will be 
able to renew the United Nations effectively and 
provide it with all the necessary resources. We are 
convinced that reasonable resources spent on that goal 
will bring tangible dividends to all members of the 
international community in the form of durable peace, 
security, cooperation and prosperity all over the globe.It is a great honour to address 
this Assembly for the second time, nearly two years 
after my election as President of the United States. We 
know this is no ordinary time for our people. We each 
come here with our own problems and priorities. But 
there are also challenges that we share in common as 
leaders and as nations. 
 We meet within an institution built from the 
rubble of war, designed to unite the world in pursuit of 
peace. And we meet within a city that for centuries has 
welcomed people from across the globe, demonstrating 
that individuals of every colour, faith and station can 
come together to pursue opportunity, build a 
community and live with the blessing of human liberty. 
 Outside the doors of this Hall, the blocks and 
neighbourhoods of this great city tell the story of a 
difficult decade. Nine years ago, the destruction of the 
World Trade Center signalled a threat that respected no 
boundary of dignity or decency. Two years ago this 
month, a financial crisis on Wall Street devastated 
American families on Main Street. These separate 
challenges have affected people around the world. Men 
and women and children have been murdered by 
extremists from Casablanca to London, from Jalalabad 
to Jakarta. The global economy suffered an enormous 
blow during the financial crisis, crippling markets and 
deferring the dreams of millions on every continent. 
Underneath these challenges to our security and 
prosperity lie deeper fears: that ancient hatreds and 
religious divides are once again ascendant; that a world 
which has grown more interconnected has somehow 
slipped beyond our control. 
 These are some of the challenges that my 
Administration has confronted since we came into 
office. And today, I would like to talk to the Assembly 
about what we have done over the last 20 months to 
meet these challenges; what our responsibility is to 
pursue peace in the Middle East; and what kind of 
world we are trying to build in this twenty-first 
century. 
 Let me begin with what we have done. I have had 
no greater focus as President than rescuing our 
economy from potential catastrophe. And in an age 
when prosperity is shared, we could not do this alone. 
So America has joined with nations around the world 
to spur growth and the renewed demand that could 
restart job creation. 
 We are reforming our system of global finance, 
beginning with Wall Street reform here at home, so that 
a crisis like this never happens again. And we made the 
Group of 20 the focal point for international 
coordination, because in a world where prosperity is 
more diffuse, we must broaden our circle of 
cooperation to include emerging economies —
economies from every corner of the globe. 
 There is much to show for our efforts, even as 
there is much work to be done. The global economy 
has been pulled back from the brink of a depression 
and is growing once more. We have resisted 
protectionism and are exploring ways to expand trade 
and commerce among nations. But we cannot — and 
will not — rest until these seeds of progress grow into 
a broader prosperity, not only for all Americans but for 
peoples around the world. 
 As for our common security, America is waging a 
more effective fight against Al-Qaida’ while winding 
down the war in Iraq. Since I took office, the United 
States has removed nearly 100,000 troops from Iraq. 
We have done so responsibly as Iraqis have 
transitioned to lead responsibility for the security of 
their country. We are now focused on building a lasting 
partnership with the Iraqi people while keeping our 
commitment to remove the rest of our troops by the 
end of next year. 
 
 
11 10-54827 
 
 While drawing down in Iraq, we have refocused 
on defeating Al-Qaida and denying its affiliates safe 
haven. In Afghanistan, the United States and our allies 
are pursuing a strategy to break the Taliban’s 
momentum and build the capacity of Afghanistan’s 
Government and security forces so that a transition to 
Afghan responsibility can begin next July. And from 
South Asia to the Horn of Africa, we are moving 
towards a more targeted approach — one that 
strengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist 
networks without deploying large American armies. 
 As we pursue the world’s most dangerous 
extremists, we are also denying them the world’s most 
dangerous weapons and pursuing the peace and 
security of a world without nuclear weapons. 
 Earlier this year, 47 nations embraced a work 
plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within 
four years. We have joined with Russia to sign the most 
comprehensive arms control treaty in decades. We have 
reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security 
strategy. And here, at the United Nations, we came 
together to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
 As part of our effort on non-proliferation, I 
offered the Islamic Republic of Iran an extended hand 
last year and underscored that it has both rights and 
responsibilities as a member of the international 
community. I also said — in this Hall — that Iran must 
be held accountable if it failed to meet those 
responsibilities. And that is what we have done. 
 Iran is the only party to the NPT that cannot 
demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclear 
programme, and those actions have consequences. 
Through Security Council resolution 1929 (2010), we 
made it clear that international law is not an empty 
promise. 
 Now let me be clear once more: the United States 
and the international community seek a resolution to 
our differences with Iran, and the door remains open to 
diplomacy should Iran choose to walk through it. But 
the Iranian Government must demonstrate a clear and 
credible commitment and confirm to the world the 
peaceful intent of its nuclear programme.  
 As we combat the spread of deadly weapons, we 
are also confronting the spectre of climate change. 
After making historic investments in clean energy and 
efficiency at home, we helped forge an accord in 
Copenhagen that — for the first time — commits all 
major economies to reduce their emissions. We are 
keenly aware this is just a first step. And going 
forward, we will support a process in which all major 
economies meet our responsibilities to protect the 
planet while unleashing the power of clean energy to 
serve as an engine of growth and development. 
 America has also embraced unique 
responsibilities that come with our power. Since the 
rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we 
have pledged our assistance, and we should all support 
the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild. And 
when the earth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, 
we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today, we 
honour those from the United Nations family who lost 
their lives in the earthquake and commit ourselves to 
stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on 
their own two feet. 
 Amidst this upheaval, we have also been 
persistent in our pursuit of peace. Last year, I pledged 
my best efforts to support the goal of two States, Israel 
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, 
as part of a comprehensive peace between Israel and all 
of its neighbours. We have travelled a winding road 
over the last 12 months, with few peaks and many 
valleys. But this month I am pleased that we have 
pursued direct negotiations between Israelis and 
Palestinians in Washington, Sharm el-Sheikh and 
Jerusalem.  
 Now I recognize that many are pessimistic about 
this process. The cynics say that Israelis and 
Palestinians are too distrustful of each other, and too 
divided internally, to forge lasting peace. Rejectionists 
on both sides will try to disrupt the process with bitter 
words and with bombs and gunfire. Some say that the 
gaps between the parties are too big; the potential for 
talks to break down is too great; and that after decades 
of failure peace is simply not possible.  
 I hear those voices of scepticism. But I ask the 
Assembly to consider the alternative. If an agreement 
is not reached, Palestinians will never know the pride 
and dignity that comes with their own State. Israelis 
will never know the certainty and security that comes 
with sovereign and stable neighbours who are 
committed to coexistence. The hard realities of 
demography will take over. More blood will be shed. 
This Holy Land will remain a symbol of our 
differences, instead of our common humanity.  
  
 
10-54827 12 
 
 I refuse to accept that future. We all have a choice 
to make. Each of us must choose the path of peace. Of 
course, that responsibility begins with the parties 
themselves, who must answer the call of history. 
Earlier this month, at the White House, I was struck by 
the words of both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “I came here today to 
find an historic compromise that will enable both 
peoples to live in peace, security and dignity”. 
President Abbas said, “We will spare no effort and we 
will work diligently and tirelessly to ensure these 
negotiations achieve their cause”. 
 These words must now be followed by action, 
and I believe that both leaders have the courage to do 
so. But the road that they have to travel is exceedingly 
difficult, which is why I call upon Israelis and 
Palestinians — and the world — to rally behind the 
goal that these leaders now share.  
 We know that there will be tests along the way, 
and that one test is fast approaching. Israel’s settlement 
moratorium has made a difference on the ground and 
improved the atmosphere for talks. 
 And our position on this issue is well known. We 
believe that the moratorium should be extended. We 
also believe that talks should press on until completed. 
Now is the time for the parties to help each other 
overcome this obstacle. Now is the time to build the 
trust — and provide the time — for substantial 
progress to be made. Now is the time for this 
opportunity to be seized, so that it does not slip away.  
 Now, peace must be made by Israelis and 
Palestinians, but we each have a responsibility to do 
our part as well. Those of us who are friends of Israel 
must understand that true security for the Jewish State 
requires an independent Palestine — one that allows 
the Palestinian people to live with dignity and 
opportunity. And those of us who are friends of the 
Palestinians must understand that the rights of the 
Palestinian people will be won only through peaceful 
means — including genuine reconciliation with a 
secure Israel. 
 I know many in this Hall count themselves as 
friends of the Palestinians. These pledges of friendship 
must now be supported by deeds. Those who have 
signed on to the Arab Peace Initiative should seize this 
opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps 
towards the normalization that it promises Israel. 
 And those who speak on behalf of Palestinian 
self-government should help the Palestinian Authority 
politically and financially, and in doing so help the 
Palestinians build the institutions of their State. 
 Those who long to see an independent Palestine 
must also stop trying to tear down Israel. After 
thousands of years, Jews and Arabs are not strangers in 
a strange land. After 60 years in the community of 
nations, Israel’s existence must not be a subject for 
debate. 
 Israel is a sovereign State, and the historic 
homeland of the Jewish people. It should be clear to all 
that efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will be 
met by the unshakeable opposition of the United 
States. Efforts to threaten or kill Israelis will do 
nothing to help the Palestinian people. The slaughter of 
innocent Israelis is not resistance; it is injustice. And 
make no mistake: the courage of a man like President 
Abbas, who stands up for his people in front of the 
world under very difficult circumstances, is far greater 
than those who fire rockets at innocent women and 
children. 
 The conflict between Israelis and Arabs is as old 
as the United Nations. And we can come back here 
next year, as we have for the last 60 years, and make 
long speeches about it. We can read familiar lists of 
grievances. We can table the same resolutions. We can 
further empower the forces of rejectionism and hate. 
And we can waste more time by carrying forward an 
argument that will not help a single Israeli or 
Palestinian child achieve a better life. We can do that. 
 Or we can say that this time will be different — 
that this time we will not let terror or turbulence or 
posturing or petty politics stand in the way. This time 
we will think, not of ourselves, but of the young girl in 
Gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams or 
the young boy in Sderot who wants to sleep without the 
nightmare of rocket fire. 
 This time we should draw upon the teachings of 
tolerance that lie at the heart of the three great religions 
that see Jerusalem’s soil as sacred. This time we should 
reach for what is best within ourselves. If we do, when 
we come back here next year, we can have an 
agreement that will lead to a new State Member of the 
United Nations — an independent, sovereign State of 
Palestine living in peace with Israel. 
 
 
13 10-54827 
 
 It is our destiny to bear the burdens of the 
challenges that I have addressed — recession and war 
and conflict. And there is always a sense of urgency, 
even emergency, that drives most of our foreign 
policies. Indeed, after millennia marked by wars, this 
very institution reflects the desire of human beings to 
create a forum to deal with emergencies that will 
inevitably come. 
 But even as we confront immediate challenges, 
we must also summon the foresight to look beyond 
them and consider what we are trying to build over the 
long term. What is the world that awaits us when 
today’s battles are brought to an end? And, that is what 
I would like to talk about with the remainder of my 
time today. 
 One of the first actions of the General Assembly 
was to adopt the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights in 1948. This Declaration begins by stating that, 
“recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal 
and inalienable rights of all members of the human 
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace 
in the world”.  
 The idea is a simple one — that freedom, justice 
and peace for the world must begin with freedom, 
justice and peace in the lives of individual human 
beings. For the United States, this is a matter of moral 
and pragmatic assessment. As Robert Kennedy said, 
“the individual man, the child of God, is the touchstone 
of value, and all society, groups, the state exist for his 
benefit”.  
 So we stand up for universal values because it is 
the right thing to do. But we also know from 
experience that those who defend these values for their 
people have been our closest friends and allies, while 
those who have denied those rights — whether terrorist 
groups or tyrannical Governments — have chosen to be 
our adversaries. 
 Human rights have never gone unchallenged — 
not in any of our nations, not in our world. Tyranny is 
still with us — whether it manifests itself in the 
Taliban killing girls who try to go to school, a North 
Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an 
armed group in Congo-Kinshasa that use rape as a 
weapon of war. 
 In times of economic unease, there can also be an 
anxiety about human rights. Today, as in past times of 
economic downturn, some put human rights aside for 
the promise of short-term stability or the false notion 
that economic growth can come at the expense of 
freedom. We see leaders abolishing term limits, we see 
crackdowns on civil society, we see corruption 
smothering entrepreneurship and good governance, we 
see democratic reforms deferred indefinitely. 
 As I said last year, each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its own people. Yet 
experience shows us that history is on the side of 
liberty; that the strongest foundation lies in open 
economies, open societies, and open Governments. To 
put it simply, democracy, more than any other form of 
government, delivers for our citizens. And I believe 
that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the 
borders between nations are blurred. 
 America is working to shape a world that fosters 
this openness. For the rot of a closed or corrupt 
economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation 
of human beings.All of us want the right to educate our 
children, to make a decent wage, to care for the sick, 
and to be carried as far as our dreams and deeds will 
take us. But that depends upon economies that tap the 
power of our people, including the potential of women 
and girls. That means letting entrepreneurs start a 
business without paying a bribe and Governments that 
support opportunity instead of stealing from their 
people. And that means rewarding hard work, instead 
of reckless risk-taking. 
 Yesterday, I put forward a new development 
policy that will pursue these goals, recognizing that 
dignity is a human right and global development is in 
our common interest. America will partner with nations 
that offer their people a path out of poverty. And 
together, we must unleash growth that powers by 
individuals and merging markets in all parts of the 
globe. 
 There is no reason why Africa should not be an 
exporter of agriculture, which is why our food security 
initiative is empowering farmers. There is no reason 
why entrepreneurs should not be able to build new 
markets in every society, which is why I hosted a 
summit on entrepreneurship earlier this spring, because 
the obligation of Government is to empower 
individuals, not to impede them. 
 The same holds true for civil society. The arc of 
human progress has been shaped by individuals with 
the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside 
of government that insisted upon democratic change 
  
 
10-54827 14 
 
and by free media that held the powerful accountable. 
We have seen that from the South Africans who stood 
up to apartheid, to the Poles of Solidarity, to the 
mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the 
Dirty War, to Americans who marched for the rights of 
all races, including my own. 
 Civil society is the conscience of our 
communities and America will always extend our 
engagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of 
Government. And we will call out those who suppress 
ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless. 
We will promote new tools of communication so 
people are empowered to connect with one another 
and, in repressive societies, to do so with security. We 
will support a free and open Internet, so individuals 
have the information to make up their own minds. And 
it is time to embrace and effectively monitor norms 
that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee 
its expansion within and across borders. 
 Open society supports open government, but it 
cannot substitute for it. There is no right more 
fundamental than the right to choose your leaders and 
determine your destiny. Now, make no mistake: the 
ultimate success of democracy in the world will not 
come because the United States dictates it; it will come 
because individual citizens demand a say in how they 
are governed. 
 There is no soil where this cannot take root, just 
as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation. 
Later this fall, I will travel to Asia. And I will visit 
India, which peacefully threw off colonialism and 
established a thriving democracy of over a billion 
people. 
 I will continue to Indonesia, the world’s largest 
Muslim-majority country, which binds together 
thousands of islands through the glue of representative 
government and civil society. I will join the Group-of-
20 meeting on the Korean peninsula, which provides 
the world’s clearest contrast between a society that is 
dynamic and open and free, and one that is imprisoned 
and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an 
ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary 
development through democracy. 
 Each of these countries gives life to democratic 
principles in its own way. And even as some 
Governments roll back reform, we also celebrate the 
courage of a President in Colombia who willingly 
stepped aside, or the promise of a new constitution in 
Kenya.  
 The common thread of progress is the principle 
that government is accountable to its citizens. And the 
diversity in this Hall makes clear — no one country 
has all the answers, but all of us must answer to our 
own people. 
 In all parts of the world, we see the promise of 
innovation to make government more open and 
accountable. And now we must build on that progress. 
And when we gather back here next year, we should 
bring specific commitments to promote transparency; 
to fight corruption; to energize civic engagement; to 
leverage new technology so that we strengthen the 
foundations of freedom in our own countries, while 
living up to the ideals that can light the world. 
 This institution can still play an indispensable 
role in the advance of human rights. It is time to 
welcome the efforts of UN Women to protect the rights 
of women around the world. 
 It is time for every Member State to open its 
elections to international monitors and increase the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. It is time to 
invigorate United Nations peacekeeping, so that 
missions have the resources necessary to succeed, and 
so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented and 
justice is enforced — because neither dignity nor 
democracy can thrive without basic security.  
 It is time to make this institution more 
accountable as well, because the challenges of the new 
century demand new ways of serving our common 
interests. 
 The world that America seeks is not one we can 
build on our own. For human rights to reach those who 
suffer the boot of oppression, we need your voices to 
speak out. In particular, I appeal to those nations that 
emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the 
second half of the last century — from South Africa to 
South Asia; from Eastern Europe to South America. Do 
not stand idly by, do not be silent, when dissidents 
elsewhere are imprisoned and protesters are beaten, 
recall your own history. Because part of the price of 
our own freedom is standing up for the freedom of 
others.  
 That belief will guide America’s leadership in 
this twenty-first century. It is a belief that has seen us 
through more than two centuries of trial, and it will see 
 
 
15 10-54827 
 
us through the challenges we face today — be they war 
or recession; conflict or division. 
 So even as we have come through a difficult 
decade, I stand here before you confident in the 
future — a future where Iraq is governed by neither a 
tyrant nor a foreign Power, and Afghanistan is freed 
from the turmoil of war; a future where the children of 
Israel and Palestine can build the peace that was not 
possible for their parents; a world where the promise of 
development reaches into the prisons of poverty and 
disease; a future where the cloud of recession gives 
way to the light of renewal, and the dream of 
opportunity is available to all.  
 This future will not be easy to reach. It will not 
come without setbacks, nor will it be quickly claimed. 
But the founding of the United Nations itself is a 
testament to human progress. Remember, in times that 
were far more trying than our own, our predecessors 
chose the hope of unity over the ease of division and 
made a promise to future generations that the dignity 
and equality of human beings would be our common 
cause. 
 It falls to us to fulfil that promise. And though we 
will be met by dark forces that will test our resolve, 
Americans have always had cause to believe that we 
can choose a better history; that we need only to look 
outside the walls around us. For through the citizens of 
every conceivable ancestry who make this city their 
own, we see living proof that opportunity can be 
accessed by all, that what unites us as human beings is 
far greater than what divides us, and that people from 
every part of this world can live together in peace.My 
delegation joins previous speakers in expressing our 
congratulations to Mr. Joseph Deiss on his election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth 
session. We want to take this opportunity to assure him 
of our full cooperation and to wish him a very 
successful and rewarding term. I also take this 
opportunity to thank Mr. Ali Treki for the excellent 
work he did in steering this Assembly during his tenure 
as President during its sixty-fourth session. 
 The theme of the sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly — “Reaffirming the central role of 
the United Nations in global governance” — resonates 
with what our global citizen, Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela, said about this body on the occasion of its 
fiftieth anniversary: 
 “The United Nations has to reassess its role, 
redefine its profile and reshape its structures. It 
should truly reflect the diversity of our universe 
and ensure equity among the nations in the 
  
 
10-55109 26 
 
exercise of power within the system of 
international relations, in general, and the 
Security Council, in particular.” (A/50/PV.37, 
p. 6) 
My delegation supports the choice of this theme, and 
we wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of the 
United Nations and the system of multilateralism. 
 Despite the challenges that face humanity in the 
twenty-first century, the relevance of the United 
Nations as a multilateral mechanism through which a 
myriad of complex world affairs can be administered 
and resolved cannot be overemphasized. Those 
challenges compel us more than ever before to 
strengthen the United Nations. South Africa is 
committed to working with other Member States to 
achieve the full potential of the United Nations to 
address the urgent challenges facing the international 
community by making it more relevant, more 
responsive to the diversity of humankind and more 
representative. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
notable successes of the twentieth century, and thanks 
to its existence the world has been spared another war 
on the scale and magnitude of the First and Second 
World Wars. The exponential growth in the 
membership of the Organization over the years, from 
51 Members in 1945 to 192 today, clearly demonstrates 
the confidence that the peoples of the world have 
placed in the United Nations and the ideals contained 
in its Charter. 
 The universal membership of the United Nations 
gives it the legitimacy to be at the centre of efforts to 
address global challenges. However, the question is 
whether the United Nations has leveraged that diversity 
of its membership as a source of strength and acted 
decisively against any tendency that runs contrary to its 
fundamental values and founding principles. 
 The answer to this is yes because, in the past, the 
United Nations played an invaluable role in the 
worldwide process of decolonization, transforming the 
political landscape of the world and bringing much-
cherished freedom and independence to the peoples of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. The Organization was 
instrumental in bringing about the demise of the 
universally despised apartheid system in our own 
country, South Africa. 
 When the Organization recognized the right to 
development as a human right, it gave voice and hope 
to those who know the face of poverty. When the 
Organization has sent its troops to far-flung places to 
keep peace among neighbours who should be living 
together, it has again underscored the reason for which 
it was established. Amid all the challenges, the United 
Nations has been relevant and responsive to our 
diverse interests. 
 Five years ago, at the World Summit, we agreed 
that, if the Organization were to continue to play its 
central role in global governance effectively, there was 
a need to strengthen and reposition it to deal with the 
challenges of the twenty-first century.  We believe that 
the revitalization of the General Assembly remains one 
of the cornerstones of the United Nations reform 
agenda. The General Assembly is the chief 
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of 
the United Nations and plays a critical role in the 
process of standard-setting and the codification of 
international law. Its decisions are taken by a collective 
among equals for the common good. 
 We will support measures that are aimed at 
enhancing the effectiveness of the General Assembly, 
especially regarding its role in the maintenance of 
international peace and security. Indeed, we witnessed 
with satisfaction how, on several occasions, the 
General Assembly acted promptly when the Security 
Council was unwilling or unable to respond to grave 
developments in the aftermath of the conflict in Gaza 
in 2009. 
 Indeed, no transformation of the United Nations 
could be complete without the fundamental reform of 
the Security Council. South Africa believes that the 
objective of the reform should be to create a Security 
Council that is truly representative of the membership 
and effectively responsive to international crises, as 
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, 
it remains a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
accounts for a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Thus, 
deliberations about us carry on without us. 
 The world should be free of weapons of mass 
destruction, in accordance with our undertakings on 
total disarmament. In that regard, South Africa 
welcomes the recently agreed programme of work of 
the Conference on Disarmament. 
 
 
27 10-55109 
 
 While the right to development and freedom from 
want are central to the work of the United Nations, we 
have just ended the High-level Plenary Meeting to 
review our performance in achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals and agreed that more needs to be 
done to act on commitments already made by the 
international community in that regard. 
 The people of Haiti have a story to tell about how 
best the international community can respond in unison 
and effectively to a nation in distress. 
 A speedy and satisfactory conclusion of the Doha 
Round of the World Trade Organization, which 
promised so much for the developing South, 
unfortunately remains a dream yet to be fulfilled. At 
the same time, the global economic crisis has 
highlighted the point that many of us have always 
made about the need to work for an international 
financial architecture that is sensitive to the 
development needs of the South. 
 The contribution of the Group of 20 (G-20) is a 
welcome development in that regard, and we believe 
that the Group should complement and reinforce the 
good work of the United Nations and not act as an 
alternative. In its composition, the G-20 will also need 
to mirror the rich diversity of humankind by making 
sure that all regions of the world, in particular Africa, 
are well represented. We look forward to the full 
implementation of the undertakings made to transform 
the international financial architecture, including the 
reform of the Bretton Woods institutions, as a step 
towards building a world system founded on equity and 
social justice. 
 Environmental issues, including climate change, 
have also become high on the priorities of the 
international agenda. South Africa is fully committed 
to a multilateral outcome on the basis of the Bali Plan 
of Action, with a two-track negotiated and legally 
binding outcome. We are convinced that the 
Copenhagen Accord provides political guidance for 
future negotiations. 
 Accordingly, we should work together to ensure 
that the forthcoming meeting of the sixteenth session 
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Mexico 
takes bold and concrete steps to address climate change 
and its effects. For our part, South Africa will have the 
opportunity to host the seventeenth session of the 
Conference of the Parties in December 2011, on the 
eve of the end of the first commitment period of the 
Kyoto Protocol. 
 Peace and stability are one of the preconditions 
for bringing about an Africa of the new beginning that 
the Chairperson of the African Union, His Excellency 
President Wa Mutharika of Malawi, spoke of on the 
first day of the general debate (see ). The 
United Nations has been an important partner to Africa, 
working with us through the African Union, whether in 
Somalia, the Sudan or the Democratic Republic of 
Congo. South Africa is encouraged by the commitment 
shown by the international community in trying to 
assist the both the Government of the Sudan and 
Southern Sudan as they prepare for the upcoming 
referendum in January 2011. 
 The people of Zimbabwe also need the helping 
hand of the international community in implementing 
their Global Political Agreement. The African Union 
and the Southern African Development Community 
speak for us, too, in calling for the lifting of sanctions 
against Zimbabwe. We will continue to work with the 
peoples of Zimbabwe, Madagascar and Burundi, 
among others, in their efforts to build and consolidate 
peace and democracy in their respective countries. 
 In the case of Western Sahara, South Africa 
remains concerned about the continuing impasse, 
which stands in the way of a solution that will result in 
the people of Western Sahara exercising their 
inalienable right to self-determination. We count on the 
United Nations, especially the Security Council, to 
continue to make decisions that enable us to decisively 
deal with the challenges of peace and security on our 
continent. 
 The United Nations should see Africa as a partner 
in the maintenance of international peace and the 
management of conflicts, and accordingly do more to 
strengthen the working relationship between the 
Security Council and the African Union Peace and 
Security Council. In this respect, South Africa will 
continue to support all international efforts to help the 
people of Palestine and Israel in their endeavour to find 
lasting peace, leading to the establishment of a viable 
Palestinian State, on the basis of the 1967 borders and 
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side 
in peace and security with Israel. 
 We are at one with the call made by several 
delegations for the lifting of the embargo on the 
Republic of Cuba. 
  
 
10-55109 28 
 
 We have converged here year after year to make 
strong statements on Palestine, the embargo on Cuba 
and the independence of the Western Sahara. The 
ultimate test of the relevance of the United Nations 
will therefore be in bringing closure to all these long 
outstanding issues in a manner that is consistent with 
our decisions and the collective will of nations 
represented in this Organization. 
In conclusion, we were also privileged recently to 
be the stage, and Africa the theatre, of the 2010 
Fédération internationale de football association World 
Cup tournament. Our people spoke for us during that 
soccer event in how they embraced each other and in 
their diversity of many nations, consistent with the 
spirit of ubuntu, which simply means “I am because 
you are”. They gave us hope and confirmed the faith 
we have in our belief that a better world is possible. 
The role of sport in development and in advancing 
peace can never be underestimated. As States, we can 
best respond to this message from our people by 
making sure that the United Nations, in playing its role 
in the global system, is more relevant, more inclusive 
and more representative. 
 Looking ahead, South Africa is honoured to have 
been endorsed by the African Union as a candidate for 
the Security Council non-permanent membership for 
the period 2011-2012. We stand ready to continue to 
contribute to the achievement of peace and security in 
the world.
China is a member of the big family of the United 
Nations, and China’s development and changes have 
attracted worldwide attention. I wish to take this 
opportunity to share with the Assembly my 
observations on how one should get to know the real 
China. 
 Since the founding of the People’s Republic, and 
especially since the start of reform and opening up 
more than 30 years ago, profound changes have taken 
place in China, a big, ancient country in the East. Its 
economic and overall national strength has 
substantially increased. The lives of its people have 
markedly improved. Its social and cultural programmes 
have made considerable progress, and its exchanges 
and cooperation with the outside world have continued 
to expand. In sum, my country has made an historic 
leap from mere subsistence to moderate prosperity. 
  
 
10-54827 42 
 
 We in China are proud of our achievements, 
which were made through strenuous efforts. At the 
same time, we are clear-headed about our place and 
role in today’s world. 
 China’s gross domestic product is the third largest 
in the world, but in per capita terms it is only one tenth 
of that of developed countries. China has enjoyed more 
than 30 years of rapid growth, but its further 
development faces energy, resources and 
environmental constraints. It is a leading producer of 
many important products, but it remains at the lower 
end of the global industrial chain. China is a big 
trading nation, but its exports are low in technology 
content and value added. In many cases, we have to 
rely on imports to meet the demand for core 
technologies.  
 China’s coastal areas and some of the large and 
medium-sized cities are thriving after modernizing, but 
many places in the central and western regions and the 
vast rural areas are still rather backward. Moreover, we 
have 150 million people living below the poverty line 
set by the United Nations.  
 The life of the Chinese people has improved 
significantly, but we do not yet have a full-fledged 
social security system. Moreover, we are confronted 
with high employment pressure. Our people are more 
and more actively engaged in the country’s social and 
political development, and citizens’ basic rights and 
interests are better protected, yet our democracy and 
legal system still have room for improvement and such 
social ills as inequity and corruption still exist. 
 China has come a long way in modernization. It 
is fairly advanced in some areas of development but 
remains backward in others. And it faces 
unprecedented challenges brought by problems both 
old and new.  
 Taken as a whole, China is still in the primary 
stage of socialism and remains a developing country. 
Those are our basic national conditions. That is the real 
China. 
 China has set the strategic goal of achieving 
modernization by the middle of this century. As they 
look to the coming decades, the Chinese people will 
continue to advance along the path of reform, opening 
up and peaceful development. That path has changed 
China’s destiny and has benefited people throughout 
the country. We must stay on that path and make 
further improvements. There is no reason whatsoever 
for us to deviate from it. 
 China will continue to focus on developing the 
economy. Development is our top priority, as it 
constitutes the basis for addressing all issues. We will 
rely mainly on our own efforts in pursuing 
development. 
 As China’s industrialization and urbanization 
progress, hundreds of millions of farmers will move to 
towns and cities, which will create more domestic 
demand than ever, open up broad market and 
development space and serve as a powerful engine for 
sustaining the growth of the Chinese economy as well 
as the world economy at large. We will work hard to 
transform the economic development pattern, 
restructure the economy and set out on a path of 
balanced and sustainable development. 
 China will continue to deepen institutional 
reform. We will make consistent efforts to improve the 
socialist market economy. We will unswervingly 
strengthen and develop the public sector side of the 
economy and also unswervingly encourage, support 
and guide the development of the non-public sector. 
We will pay greater attention to ensuring and 
improving people’s well-being. We will further reform 
the income distribution system and improve the social 
security system, including old-age support, medical 
care and unemployment benefit programmes. We will 
endeavour to narrow the gap between urban and rural 
areas, between different regions and between the rich 
and the poor. We want to ensure that each and every 
citizen shares the benefit of China’s reform, opening up 
and development.  
 While deepening economic restructuring, we will 
also push forward with political restructuring. 
Otherwise, we cannot achieve the ultimate goal of 
economic reform and we will lose what we have gained 
from our modernization drive. We respect and protect 
human rights, uphold social equity and justice and 
strive to achieve free and all-around development for 
our people. That is the important hallmark of a 
democratic country under the rule of law and a basic 
guarantee for any country’s lasting peace and stability. 
 China will be even more open to the world. 
Mutually beneficial cooperation for win-win progress 
is a long-term strategy that we will stick to in opening 
up to the world. We will follow established 
international rules in expanding business ties with 
 
 
43 10-54827 
 
other countries. We will continue to improve the 
environment for foreign investors, optimize the 
structure of foreign capital utilization and explore new 
ways for overseas investment and cooperation.  
 We are committed to promoting the establishment 
of a fair, equitable, inclusive and well-managed new 
international financial order and an open and free 
international trading regime. We are against 
protectionism in all its manifestations. In the course of 
modernization, we will not only continue to bring in 
and utilize advanced achievements from the rest of the 
world in the economic, scientific and technological 
fields, but also boldly draw upon the achievements of 
human civilization in the fields of social management 
and cultural development. 
 China will continue to develop education, science 
and technology. How can China narrow the 
development gap with the advanced countries and 
enhance the sustainability of its strong growth? I 
believe two things are of fundamental importance: first 
is education, and second is science and technology. 
China has formulated medium- and long-term 
development programmes on education and on science 
and technology. Going forward, we will focus our 
efforts on implementing those two programmes and 
building China into a country strong in human 
resources and innovation by 2020. 
 China will continue to carry forward its fine 
culture. The development of a country and rejuvenation 
of a nation require not only great economic strength, 
but, more importantly, great cultural strength. The 
moral values and wisdom drawn from the 5,000-year-
old Chinese civilization do not belong to China alone 
but also to the world. We will vigorously develop 
cultural programmes and accelerate the development of 
a moral and ethical code that is commensurate with our 
socialist modernization drive and consistent with the 
traditional virtues of our nation.  
 We respect the diversity of civilizations and will 
increase dialogue and exchanges with other 
civilizations to forge a common cultural bond for 
humanity. The Chinese nation, which has created an 
economic miracle, will create a new cultural splendor 
as well. 
 The world of the twenty-first century is far from 
tranquil, but gone are the days when problems were 
ultimately settled by war. Peace and development 
remain the defining features of our time.  
 China will stay firmly committed to peaceful 
development. One may ask what the essence of 
peaceful development is. It is to foster a peaceful 
international environment for our development and, at 
the same time, contribute to world peace through our 
development. That is something inherent in the concept 
of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
 In the course of development, China will continue 
to take upon itself the duty of promoting the common 
progress and prosperity of mankind. We will seek and 
expand converging interests with other countries. 
China’s development will not harm anyone or pose a 
threat to anyone. There have been Powers who sought 
hegemony once they grew strong. China will never 
follow in their footsteps. 
 China values friendship and also adheres to its 
principles. It firmly upholds its core interests. When it 
comes to sovereignty, national unity and territorial 
integrity, China will not yield or compromise. 
 China will continue to firmly support the leading 
role of the United Nations in international affairs. We 
will, as always, abide by the United Nations Charter 
and fulfil in good faith our obligations under 
international conventions. We will intensify 
cooperation with fellow developing countries and 
support their having a greater say in international 
affairs. We will remain forever a good partner of and 
brother to developing countries. 
 China’s stability and development is conducive to 
a more peaceful international environment, a more 
democratic international order, a more prosperous 
global economy and a more harmonious and civilized 
world. China’s development is an opportunity for the 
world, and the world stands to gain from a China that 
is better off. History will continue to prove that. 
 A China that develops peacefully, a China that is 
full of vigour and vitality and a China that is willing 
and ready to fulfil its responsibilities will always move 
forward together with the world. Let us join hands to 
work for a world of enduring peace and prosperity.It is an 
honour for me to speak to the General Assembly today. 
 The world has changed dramatically since the 
United Nations was founded 65 years ago. 
International trade and exchange are, of course, 
nothing new. What is new, however, is how quickly the 
changes affect everybody’s lives. Only if we in the 
United Nations are and remain able to act can we shape 
these global changes. We will manage to solve 
problems relating to security and economic, social and 
ecological development only if the international 
community stands united. Germany is ready to assume 
global responsibility within the framework of the 
United Nations. 
 Germany’s foreign policy is firmly embedded in 
the international community. In Europe, a system of 
cooperation has replaced the confrontation that cruelly 
divided our continent for centuries. The European 
Union is successful because, in Europe, all peoples and 
States meet on an equal footing. The United Nations, 
too, brings together nations large and small, rich and 
poor, those that are more powerful and those with less 
influence. Cooperation between equals on an equal 
footing is our guiding principle also for work here at 
the United Nations. Each and every country must 
respect all others. 
 German foreign policy is a policy of peace. This 
autumn, Germany will stand for election as a 
non-permanent member of the Security Council 
because the Council is the ideal forum in which to 
cooperate in the cause of peace and development. 
Peace is more than the absence of war. In today’s 
globalized world, people are just as vulnerable to the 
consequences of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment as they are to violence and 
oppression. 
 Climate change has a direct impact on each and 
every one of us. Countless people are already 
personally feeling its economic and social 
consequences. In their letter to the Security Council, 
the Pacific island States rightly warned us in no 
uncertain terms just how much climate change 
threatens everyone’s security. Everyone must play their 
 
 
35 10-55103 
 
part to protect the climate. In Germany, we have just 
adopted a forward-looking energy strategy. By the year 
2050, 80 per cent of our electricity production will 
come from renewable sources. Germany has also 
pledged to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 40 per 
cent by the year 2020, compared to the 1990 baseline. 
Even now, we have reduced our carbon dioxide 
emissions by almost 30 per cent. We are pioneers in the 
field of climate protection. We are helping those who 
are now most adversely affected by climate change. We 
are particularly concerned about the fate of small 
island States. 
 Anyone who is serious about combating climate 
change has to build on innovation, new technologies 
and exchange. Developed and developing nations alike 
can profit from cooperation on future energies. 
Germany will contribute its technological expertise, for 
example, in the fields of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. In this way, we are turning the challenge of 
climate change into an opportunity for fair 
development and enhanced cooperation. Climate policy 
is a cornerstone of any sustainable development policy. 
The recent summit on the Millennium Development 
Goals laid down the next steps forward in our global 
partnership for development. 
 Education is the key to development. 
Development needs education. Education protects 
people from discrimination and oppression. Education 
fights prejudice and thereby fosters peace. Education 
also creates products and markets; education is the path 
to prosperity. The true wealth of many nations is no 
longer found in their raw materials but in the minds of 
their people. Education is a human right. It is because 
education will determine whether societies succeed or 
fail in tomorrow’s world that Germany is one of the 
major international partners for learning. By building 
on education, we are building bridges to the future for 
the young people of today. 
 The United Nations itself must also keep up with 
the pace of change. Today’s world order is not properly 
reflected if Africa and Latin America are not 
permanently represented on the Security Council. Asia, 
too, rightly considers itself to be underrepresented. The 
entire continent, not just individual States, is 
developing at breathtaking speed. We take our 
partnerships seriously, both the old and the new. 
Germany, too, remains ready to assume greater 
responsibility. 
 Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are 
not issues of the past but challenges of our time. 
Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are two 
sides of the same coin. We have to do all we possibly 
can to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not 
become the bane of globalization. Unlike the Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons five years ago, 
this May’s Review Conference was a success. If we 
work together to maintain this momentum, it will be in 
our power to ensure that this decade does not see a 
build-up of arms but becomes a decade of 
disarmament. A world without nuclear weapons is a 
long-term vision, but even a marathon begins with the 
first step. 
 There is now movement in the disarmament 
debate. The group of States founded here in New York 
on Wednesday to advance disarmament and arms 
control does not stand alone. For over 10 years, the 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva was not even 
able to agree on an agenda. That is not the way to live 
up to our shared responsibility. We met yesterday at the 
invitation of the Secretary-General to break the 
deadlock binding the Geneva Conference. Our world 
will be a more secure place when the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force and the 
production of fissile material is ended once and for all. 
 German peace policy stands for the peaceful 
settlement of regional conflicts. Germany is doing its 
utmost to ensure that the direct talks between Israel 
and the Palestinians are a success. We will continue to 
strengthen the forces of reason and reconciliation. 
During this vital period for the peace process in 
particular, I urge both sides to refrain from taking any 
action that might block the path to peace. We condemn 
any form of violence that has the sole aim of 
torpedoing the peace talks. At the same time, we call 
for the moratorium on settlement construction to be 
extended. Lasting peace will be achieved only through 
a two-State solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State 
living peacefully side by side within secure borders. 
 Iran, like every other country, naturally has the 
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
However, the Tehran leadership itself has sown doubt 
about the civilian nature of its nuclear programme. 
Iran, by demonstrating openness and transparency, can 
allay that doubt. Our offer of dialogue still stands. It is 
now up to Iran to grasp our outstretched hand. 
  
 
10-55103 36 
 
 The conference aimed at establishing a zone free 
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, 
planned for 2012, will be a major opportunity to 
strengthen peace and security in the region. Germany is 
encouraging all countries in the region to take part to 
ensure that the conference is a success. We are 
committed to a nuclear-weapon-free Middle East. 
 Germany is one of the major supporters of a 
peaceful and secure Afghanistan. As we agreed in 
London and Kabul, we want to transfer security 
responsibility for the whole of Afghanistan to the 
Afghan Government by 2014. To make progress in that 
country, so long ravaged by war and civil strife, 
effective measures must be taken to prevent the 
violence. However, military means alone will not bring 
success. We favour a comprehensive approach and 
above all a political solution. All sides now need the 
courage and the stamina to engage in reconciliation. 
 The German Government assists when people 
anywhere in the world are struck by natural disasters 
and emergencies. However, a country’s conscience is 
to be found in the hearts of its citizens. I am proud that 
my fellow Germans donate so generously at times of 
greatest need. Humanity and solidarity are global 
values; humanity and solidarity make no distinction 
based on skin colour or religious beliefs. When the 
tsunami devastated coastlines around the Indian Ocean, 
when the Haiti earthquake destroyed the work of 
decades, or just recently, when the horrific floods in 
Pakistan left havoc in their wake, we Germans shared 
the victims’ pain and helped in the most heartfelt way 
possible. We will stand by Pakistan over the coming 
months and years to ensure that the country has a 
promising economic future. 
 We are working towards a peaceful order in the 
Sudan, now and after the referendum early next year. 
We are looking for ways of achieving stable conditions 
in Yemen and are particularly active in the Friends of 
Yemen group. We are working hard to combat piracy 
off the Horn of Africa and to bring peace and stability 
to Somalia. 
 Reconstruction efforts in devastated regions 
cannot bring success overnight. Similarly, for societies 
torn by war and civil strife, the route to life in dignity 
leads through peace and reconciliation. There can be 
true peace only when human rights are respected. For 
us, such principles as the rule of law, freedom of 
opinion, freedom of the press and respect for 
inalienable human rights are essential. The protection 
of human rights remains a task for all societies. 
 It is a fundamental tenet of the United Nations 
that women determine their own lives and help decide 
the fate of their countries. Ethnic or religious 
minorities enrich their societies. Tolerance is one of 
Germany’s guiding principles. Everyone wins in the 
competition for the best ideas; in a clash of cultures, 
there can only be losers. 
 United Europe can make a valuable contribution 
on our continent and beyond. Germany is working to 
ensure that, in the future, the European Union shall 
cooperate even more closely with other regions in 
Latin America, Africa and Asia, and live up to its 
global responsibility. Germany is the third-largest 
development cooperation donor. We have practically 
recovered from the financial and economic crisis and 
are on the right track due to our robust economic 
growth. This strong economy makes Germany a strong 
global partner. 
 If all countries, small and large, work together, 
we will be able to master the pressing challenges of our 
world. 
They can count on Germany. They can rely on 
Germany. I 
come to this rostrum on behalf of France to express my 
sincere and fervent faith in the United Nations. 
France’s ambition is to be a major actor in building a 
system of global governance that is more just, more 
cohesive, more social, and a global order that is 
organized and regulated around a stronger, more 
representative and more effective United Nations — a 
United Nations capable of meeting the great challenges 
of our century. 
 I look out upon the Assembly. I know many of 
those present here today. For 25 years now — even 
more — I have been going up and down the corridors 
of the United Nations because I like the United 
Nations, because I believe in the United Nations, and 
because I know it to be indispensable. 
 I would like to speak to the Assembly candidly. I 
am going to talk about men and women, suffering and 
hope. I am going to talk about responsibility, because 
we have responsibilities as citizens, diplomats and 
political leaders to meet these sufferings, hopes and 
expectations. 
 Of course, all of us would have an infinite 
number of reasons to present a litany of generous 
intentions, only to go home, our conscience clear, for 
what we had said a little while before to the Assembly 
and then go back to our day-to-day problems at home. 
Of course, after the terrible economic crisis from which 
we have barely emerged, we have to live with reduced 
budgets and tense socio-economic situations. The times 
are difficult and our fellow citizens are worried. The 
temptation to retreat exists. Of course, to correct the 
large imbalances and injustices that undermine our 
society and to fight for the planet’s security and 
development, we can always count on others. But 
which others? There are no “others”. We are all here, 
the nations of the world, represented in the General 
Assembly, and we only have to decide together to act. 
 Not acting today would be to resign ourselves to 
disorder, injustice and chaos. That choice will never be 
France’s because it is not in keeping with our history, 
or our values, or our interests. Faced with disorder in 
the world, the greatest risk today would be to lapse into 
routine. Please do not tell me that we cannot move 
forward, that the situation is at an impasse. No, in the 
past, we have been able together, collectively, to be 
revolutionary on fundamental subjects, even at the 
expense of the national sovereignties which we all 
represent here. 
 Recall our boldness here in 1988, General 
Assembly resolution 43/131, and then two years later, 
resolution 45/100, on humanitarian assistance to 
victims of natural disasters and similar emergency 
situations. These resolutions allowed us for the first 
time to guarantee free access of humanitarian workers 
to the affected regions. Then there was Security 
Council 688 (1991) (5 April 1991) on the situation in 
Kurdistan, where, for the first time, the door was 
opened to a military operation to protect civilian 
populations against an oppressor State. 
 These were two historic moments which laid the 
first markers of the right to intervene. This became the 
responsibility to protect, which this Assembly adopted 
by consensus at the 2005 World Summit (see resolution 
60/1). Who could have imagined that such an upending 
of international law would be possible? The fight was 
long and difficult; it is not over — far from it. To speak 
candidly to the Assembly, the results are not 
completely what I had expected. But we must note that, 
together, we were able to overcome some obstacles 
which were supposed to be insurmountable. Let 
nothing stop us from taking up subjects which we 
decide on together. 
 Our first shared responsibility is development — 
to make sure that all men and women, including the 
most impoverished, have decent living conditions. The 
widening gap of inequalities is not only morally 
unacceptable, it is politically dangerous. Of course, it 
is costly to act, but the cost of inaction is even greater. 
 The conclusions of the High-level Meeting on the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that we just 
held place our responsibilities squarely before us. This 
 
 
37 10-55122 
 
is an urgent matter. We can no longer ask suffering 
populations to continue to wait. 
 The President of the French Republic, Nicolas 
Sarkozy, reminded the Assembly of this fact, that France 
is the second largest global donor of official 
development assistance — €9 billion per annum — 
targeted to education, health, food security, sanitation 
and infrastructure. France’s commitment to development 
will not slacken, but figures do not make a policy. Our 
assistance must be judged according to its results. We 
need to go further and move faster for children dying of 
malaria — one every 30 seconds — for entire families 
stricken by AIDS, and for all those who are hungry or 
cannot go to school. 
 I ask the Assembly: what planet do we wish to 
leave as a legacy to our children? Will we be able to 
make an ambitious decision to combat climate change 
and preserve our environment? This is a subject that 
concerns us all and requires a global partnership, one 
where we aspire to find an agreement on both reducing 
emissions and measures to be taken in order to adapt. 
And we must, first and foremost, ensure that the 
commitments undertaken will be implemented and that 
follow-up mechanisms and effective institutions will be 
put in place. 
 For all of this, we must find a great deal of 
money — several tens of billions of dollars per year — 
for us and our planet. Let us provide the means to 
realize our ambitions. The solutions are here, within 
reach; they have proved to be effective and await only 
our political will and our courage. They are called 
innovative financing. The tax on airline tickets was a 
step forward, a long time in coming. Today we should 
go farther by adopting an international tax on financial 
transactions which would permanently change matters 
for development. It is an idea that I have been 
defending for more than 20 years. It is a priority for 
France now. The President alluded to it here a few days 
ago. 
 Bear in mind that a minute tax of 0.005 per cent, 
that is five cents on a transaction of €1,000, could raise 
€30 billion to €40 billion per year, almost one quarter 
of official development assistance. Who could deny 
that this is a stable and predictable way of raising a 
massive amount for development? Even with half of 
that amount, it would be possible to send every child to 
school in the low-income countries. Everyone agrees 
today that it is technically and economically feasible to 
establish such a mechanism. 
 And, make no mistake; we are not talking about 
diminishing official development assistance or dodging 
our responsibilities. No, on the contrary, this amount 
would come as an addition. And so we must not waste 
time, we are together, this is what we established this 
institution for, this institution, unparalleled in history, 
called the United Nations. 
 It is now a universally recognized principle that 
development cannot occur without peace and security, 
which are the basic raison d’être of the United Nations. 
Here, the challenges remain considerable. Afghanistan, 
Somalia, the Sudan, the Middle East — so many 
conflicts continue to feed chaos throughout the world. 
 How many missed opportunities, how many 
dashed hopes, how many misunderstandings have for 
more than 60 years — I repeat, 60 years — marked this 
process, peaceful in name only, in the Middle East? 
The Arab-Israeli conflict concerns us all. I say Arab-
Israeli because, besides the Palestinian track, France 
considers it just as important to work on the Lebanese 
and Syrian tracks. Today we have before us a historic 
opportunity. We cannot let it slip. 
 The process almost stopped yesterday evening. I 
am not sure that it will continue in an orderly way and 
with unanimous support. I hope it will. We have 
limited time remaining. Palestine, the new State 
Member of the United Nations which many of us have 
been calling for, will be, I hope, the best guarantee of 
security for Israel. 
 All States in the region have a critical role to 
play. All of that is important, but what is necessary is 
that the Israelis and Palestinians make a strategic 
decision to put an end to this conflict in their own 
interests. I would therefore call on the sense of 
responsibility of President Abbas and Prime Minister 
Netanyahu; together they must make the painful 
compromises on the road to peace. 
 I have said that I have faith in the United Nations. 
I served the United Nations, as perhaps you know, in 
Kosovo and in a number of other places. I know, 
respect and deeply love the men and women who give 
life to the United Nations. From this rostrum, I wish to 
pay tribute with emotion, affection and respect, to all 
those who, in serving the United Nations, take risks 
every day for our shared ideal of peace and 
  
 
10-55122 38 
 
development. I think of all the friends we have lost — 
and the friends we may still lose — year after year, 
and, of course, of those who take their place. 
 The fight is noble. Respect for the values and 
universal principles of human rights constitutes the 
indispensable foundation on which United Nations 
action must be built. The ambition to build a world 
order founded on universal respect for human dignity 
has been and will always be at the heart of French 
diplomacy. 
 Have we collectively progressed in our service of 
these values? Not enough. How long will we continue 
to accept — now that we live in a so-called 
information society, a world where people can know 
what is happening in other places — that, in terms of 
human rights, there are so many blind spots, so many 
forgotten tragedies and so much suffering that remain 
hidden? As I asked at the beginning, what has become 
of the responsibility to protect? 
 Today the success of the United Nations must 
first of all be assessed in terms of its contribution to 
the protection of civilians. That is the first area in 
which our requirements should be upheld. Every day 
massacres and rapes are committed throughout the 
world, in Somalia, in Darfur and in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, including in regions where 
peacekeeping operations are deployed. 
 We can no longer simply count the victims when 
mass crimes are committed. Our courage must not be 
less than that of those who die from risks that we no 
longer know how to take. 
 France believes that the International Criminal 
Court is one of the most important advances made in 
the history of a humankind conscious of the dangers to 
which it is exposed by its own demons. France 
understands the criticism of those that believe that the 
Court is too slow or that it goes too far. Let us be clear, 
France will always support the idea of international 
criminal justice that is impartial and universal, for it is 
the only way of fulfilling the imperative dictated by 
our history, namely, combating impunity. To all who 
are shocked by the boldness of some of the Court’s 
prosecutions, I say that, on the contrary, it would be 
appalling if the victims were deprived of their right to 
justice. 
 Human rights, the protection of civilians, 
international justice — these are not hollow concepts 
or empty principles for us. For France, they are first 
and foremost principles of action, and the only valid 
criterion for judgement is the impact of our actions on 
the actual situation. 
 In Guinea, after the killings in the Conakry 
stadium, on 28 September 2009, we came together to 
denounce the human rights violations and to assist the 
victims of the atrocities committed. The Secretary-
General dispatched an International Commission of 
Inquiry to the field one month after the fact, and I 
would like to once again thank him sincerely for that. 
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court 
instituted proceedings. That pressure enabled Guinean 
civil society in the field to make the difference. Today 
the junta has been replaced by a transitional executive. 
Nothing has been won. There will be a second round of 
elections in two weeks. But I wanted to recall this 
success of the United Nations since at the beginning I 
said that the responsibility to protect was threatened. I 
think we can all agree that there is a movement 
forming in civil society throughout the world and that 
we can still take action.The nations 
represented here know how deeply the world has 
changed in the six and a half decades since the United 
Nations was formed; since the spirit of international 
citizenship, of peoples and nations combining their 
energies to solve our shared problems, gave birth to the 
United Nations. Today, that spirit is needed more than 
ever. 
 All of us have to respond to a world that is 
profoundly altered. As a community of nations, we face 
three profound challenges: a redrawing of the map of 
power, including a big shift in economic power; the 
globalization of problems, not least terrorism and 
climate change; and increasingly fluid forms of identity 
and the rapid circulation and potency of new ideas. 
Taken together, these mean that we are in a new world. 
All three demand matching responses. So we must 
reform and renew our multilateral institutions in line 
with the changing map of power, strengthen our actions 
on international peacebuilding, climate change and 
development, and promote liberal values and human 
rights to win the conflict of ideas. 
 The truth is that in all three of these areas we are 
not doing anything like as well as we must. The 
effectiveness of multilateral approaches is in question 
in the wake of the financial crisis, the failure of the 
climate change talks in Copenhagen and the stalling of 
the Doha Trade Round. And too many nations and 
international institutions have been too reticent about 
promoting enlightened human values. We need to inject 
new life into our institutions and new confidence into 
the expression of our ideals. 
 Turning first to the altered geography of power, it 
is an often-stated fact that the old economic order is 
being transformed and that what were once labelled 
emerging economies are now, in many cases, global 
economic players. The distribution of military power, 
too, is altering, so power is being wielded in different 
places and in different ways. This power shift requires 
us to reform our international institutions, to reinforce 
the rule of international law, and to free up 
international trade. 
 In recent years, our multinational institutions 
have sometimes struggled to adapt to the new 
circumstances, so reform is essential. And a good place 
to start is right here at the United Nations. The Security 
Council must be reformed to reflect the new geography 
of power. The United Kingdom is clear and 
unambiguous in our support for permanent seats for 
Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and for African 
representation. Put simply, the United Nations cannot 
speak for the many if it only hears the voices of the 
few. We welcome the priority that the President has 
promised to give to the Assembly’s continuing 
negotiations on this issue. 
 Closer cooperation on counter-terrorism is also 
vital, and we welcome the Assembly’s affirmation of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 
We must stand shoulder to shoulder in the struggle 
against terrorism. 
 The United Kingdom will always champion the 
United Nations. If it did not exist, we would have to 
invent it. But let us be frank. Without a radical 
overhaul, the United Nations will not provide the 
leadership the world seeks from it and needs from it. It 
is also important that the vital role of the European 
Union in promoting development and prosperity be 
adequately represented in the Assembly. 
 The redrawing of the power map also makes it 
even more important that the writ of international law 
extend across the world. Laws are the solid 
representation of our collective values. That is why it is 
so important that we uphold and reinforce the 
instruments of international justice, including the 
International Criminal Court and specific tribunals, 
such as those for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.  
 I strongly welcome the comments of President 
Obama yesterday on the vital importance of the Middle 
East peace process. I can assure the Assembly that the 
United Kingdom is committed to helping lead to the 
end of hostilities that have been so profoundly 
damaging for all sides. 
 The prevention of nuclear-weapons proliferation 
is another huge priority for the international 
community. The United Kingdom welcomes the 
success of the Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
this May, and I can assure the Assembly that we will 
continue to play our part in making the world safer 
from the threat of nuclear weapons. 
 I was ready today to welcome the progress made 
in this week’s meeting of the E3+3 group on Iran. I 
was ready to also straightforwardly reiterate our 
 
 
27 10-54959 
 
concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme. But instead, 
once again, an issue of grave global concern has been 
overshadowed by the bizarre, offensive and attention-
grabbing pronouncements by President Ahmadinejad 
from this rostrum yesterday. His remarks were intended 
to distract attention from Iran’s obligations and to 
generate media headlines. They deserve to do neither. 
 The reshaped world of power also increases the 
need to open our borders to free trade. A trading world 
is a safer world. A world trade deal, which is within 
reach, would be worth $170 billion annually to the 
world economy. Two years ago we were very close, but 
we failed to seal the deal. We simply cannot afford 
protectionism. Today, we have to recognize that we 
will need an even more ambitious deal than we 
envisaged then if we are to get an agreement. Greater 
access to markets, particularly for least developed 
countries’ exports of agriculture, supports growth and 
reduces poverty. 
 The second of the three big shifts we have to 
adapt to is the globalization of many of our problems 
and of many of the solutions to those problems. Our 
economies are, of course, tied ever more closely 
together, as recent events have dramatically proven. 
Prosperity and poverty in one part of the world impact 
on economic activity and security elsewhere. 
 Diseases can span the globe in a matter of days. 
Terrorism is conducted by international networks 
across the world. Environmental threats do not respect 
borders. We are used to thinking about stateless people. 
We have to get used to the idea of stateless problems, 
too. Conflict takes place between, across and within 
national boundaries, but wherever it takes place it can 
threaten the interests of all nations. Conflict 
undermines our collective prosperity and destroys 
development. We must work harder to prevent conflict 
by tackling the sources of violence. And where conflict 
does break out, we must be ready to help resolve it.  
 So let me take this opportunity to acknowledge 
the invaluable contribution of United Nations 
peacekeepers to laying the foundations for sustainable 
peace around the world. We owe them all, and the 
Governments that provide them, a great debt of 
gratitude. The United Kingdom, along with France and 
other partners, has been at the forefront of supporting 
and encouraging United Nations efforts to deliver more 
strategic and effective peacekeeping. We will continue 
to provide that support.  
 But peacekeeping alone is not the answer. We 
need peacebuilding, too. The United Nations is 
uniquely placed not only to keep the peace, but also to 
make it last. Effective peacebuilding can address the 
underlying causes of conflict and strengthen local, 
regional and national capacity to contribute to long-
term stability in fragile States. 
 The coming year will see some significant 
challenges to the United Nations efforts to promote 
international peace, justice and security: in the Sudan, 
where we will see a referendum on the future of 
Southern Sudan, while continuing to look for progress 
on justice in Darfur and more widely; in Somalia, 
where the African Union peacekeeping mission is 
playing a brave and crucial role, and where the 
leadership of the United Nations could be decisive; and 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where much 
progress has been made but where we have seen again 
in recent weeks how much more remains to be done to 
achieve real security and stability for many of its hard-
pressed people. 
 The United Kingdom remains fully committed to 
the mission to bring peace and prosperity to 
Afghanistan. Afghans are increasingly taking 
responsibility for their own affairs. This year’s Kabul 
Conference and, most recently, parliamentary elections 
have demonstrated Afghan commitment. Challenges 
remain, but progress is being made. The United 
Kingdom will continue to work with its international 
partners to support Afghans to build a better 
Afghanistan. 
 The United Kingdom is wholehearted in our 
support for international development. Like many 
nations, we are having to take tough action to reduce 
our financial deficits, but we are not budging a 
millimetre from our commitment to development. We 
are standing by our promise to devote 0.7 per cent of 
gross national income to international development 
assistance from 2013, and we will enshrine this 
commitment in law. 
 When disaster strikes, we must respond quickly 
and generously. Right now, Pakistan faces a 
humanitarian disaster of unimaginable proportions. As 
the Secretary-General has said, this is the largest 
disaster in the 65-year history of the United Nations. 
So we must ensure that the United Nations appeal is 
properly funded to cover both humanitarian relief and 
reconstruction, and we must ensure that there is enough 
  
 
10-54959 28 
 
support over the long term, not least in helping 
Pakistan to achieve the levels of economic growth that 
will allow the country to rebuild itself. I am very 
proud, as the representative of a European Union (EU) 
member State, that the EU has recently shown real 
leadership in promising to look at improving trade 
access for Pakistan in response to the disaster. I very 
much hope that others can follow suit. 
 So, economic power has shifted and problems 
have globalized, but at the same time the power of 
ideas has grown enormously. Identities have become 
more fluid. It is not possible to put people into neatly 
labelled national boxes any more. This means that 
winning the battle of ideas is as important as military 
prowess. 
 The work of international institutions must 
continue to be guided by the values on which those 
institutions were founded: the rule of law, both 
domestic and international; the right to freedom of 
expression and belief; democracy; and equality before 
the law. These values are sometimes described as 
Western values, but only by people who do not know 
their history. Four centuries ago, the great Mughal 
emperor Akbar was legislating for religious freedom 
and equality in what is now India, while in parts of 
Europe heretics were being burned at the stake. The 
truth is that these liberal values of equality, law and 
self-determination cannot be claimed by any nation or 
hemisphere. They are global values with global force. 
They are also the values at the heart of the United 
Nations Charter. 
 We should never apologize for promoting the idea 
that women and men are equal; never flinch from 
insisting that Governments chosen by their people are 
better; never shy away from our insistence that nobody 
should be silenced because of their religion or beliefs. 
 The United Kingdom will therefore continue to 
push for human rights across the world. Since the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 
1948, the United Nations has developed a global legal 
framework of human rights standards. We want to see 
the Human Rights Council do more to ensure that 
States implement their obligations and use the 2011 
review to improve the Council’s ability to respond 
effectively to situations of concern, such as the 
outrageous abuse of democracy and human rights in 
Burma. 
 United Kingdom foreign policy will be shaped by 
the three big challenges I have set out today: a power 
shift, the globalization of problems, and the rapid 
circulation and potency of ideas. The United Kingdom 
Government will fearlessly promote our ideals and 
interests while remaining realistic in our approach. 
 This is the spirit in which the United Kingdom 
Government is conducting a root-and-branch review of 
our own strategic defence and security policy. Our last 
review took place in 1998, but the world has changed, 
along with the character of the threats we face. This is 
not to say that we did not face grave threats before, but 
they were more fixed, more visible and more 
predictable. Today, the threats to our security are not 
rooted in specific States. They are more fluid and often 
less visible: terrorism, organized crime, or attacks from 
cyberspace. We must judge our security not by our 
ability to deal with what we know, but how able we are 
to respond to unpredictable threats. 
 The United Kingdom will also show leadership 
by example. As fierce advocates of the international 
rule of law, we will practice what we preach. No nation 
can insist on the law and then act as though it is above 
it. But our approach will also be hard-headed and 
realistic. In recent years we have learned — in same 
cases the hard way — that democracy cannot be 
created by diktat. Freedom cannot be commanded into 
existence. 
 The new coalition Government, now five-months 
old, will restore Britain’s international reputation by 
pursuing a hard-headed foreign policy based on liberal 
values.  
 The world has changed, but the values that should 
guide us have not. We have to renew our international 
institutions in line with the new realities of world 
power and influence, and fearlessly project the ideals 
of democracy, equality and freedom. Great things are 
demanded of us. Great things are necessary from us. It 
falls to our generation of leaders to meet these 
challenges together.Allow me to begin by 
congratulating you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly and by assuring you of the 
full cooperation of my delegation. In the interest of 
saving the Assembly’s valuable time, I will read out 
only part of my address, the full text of which has been 
circulated.  
 The United Nations was created, 65 years ago, to 
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, 
to affirm faith in fundamental rights, to establish 
conditions under which respect for international law 
can be maintained and to promote social progress and 
better standards of life in larger freedom. Six and a half 
decades later, globalization has made the world a much 
smaller place. It has also created conditions whereby 
the problems and challenges of one country or region 
can very quickly become those of the larger community 
of nations. 
 Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, maritime piracy, pandemics and 
epidemics, organized crime and narcotics smuggling 
recognize no borders or boundaries. Similarly, the 
fallout of intra-State conflicts, failed States, climate 
change, natural disasters, food shortages and financial 
and economic crises transcend countries and regions. 
Under those circumstances the international 
community looks to the United Nations to overcome 
the common challenges of humankind through the 
harmonized actions of nations, as stated in the Charter. 
 The United Nations is the only organization that 
can be at the centre of an international governance 
system. However, it needs urgent reform to reflect 
contemporary realities and to effectively meet 
emerging global challenges. The first step has to be the 
reform of the Security Council. The overwhelming 
majority of the membership has been clear in seeking 
an expansion in both the permanent and non-permanent 
categories of membership. It is imperative that we 
bring the negotiations to an early and logical 
conclusion. 
 We must also truly revitalize the General 
Assembly. It must reclaim its position on vital matters 
such as the appointment of the Secretary-General and 
the relationship between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Along with the Economic 
and Social Council, the General Assembly should also 
set the paradigms of multilateral engagement for the 
global economy and for development and 
developmental cooperation.  
 It is matter of much satisfaction that this year we 
have significantly advanced the United Nations reform 
agenda in the areas of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. I wish to reiterate our strong 
commitment to UN Women and to its strengthening.  
 We also need to ensure that the review of the 
Human Rights Council this year adds to the Council’s 
role as an effective, credible and premier United 
Nations mechanism dealing with human rights.  
 My Government accords the highest priority to 
the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Our development challenges were exacerbated by the 
financial and economic crisis that started in 2008. 
Acting in concert, the Group of 20 (G-20), which 
includes the largest developed and developing 
countries, reacted promptly and purposefully to stem 
the global slowdown and send a strong message of 
confidence and stability. India believes that the  
G-20 — the premier forum for international economic 
  
 
10-55396 4 
 
cooperation — can help catalyse strong, balanced and 
sustainable growth for the benefit of everyone. 
 As a country vulnerable to, and already suffering 
from, the impacts of climate change, India has an 
important stake in the success of ongoing international 
negotiations in that regard. There is no substitute to the 
United Nations-led process, with its inherent 
inclusiveness and transparency, to lead us to an 
ambitious and equitable outcome that respects the 
provisions and principles of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in 
particular the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities. It is 
important that there be acceptance of equal sharing of 
the resource of the atmosphere for all human beings. 
 India has an abiding commitment to achieve 
universal and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament 
within a specified time frame — a vision that was most 
eloquently articulated in the Assembly by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1988. More than two decades 
later, that goal still remains distant. Meanwhile, newer 
threats have emerged, including the danger of terrorists 
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. 
 India introduced a working paper on nuclear 
disarmament in 2006, which contained specific 
proposals that reflect the spirit and substance of the 
Rajiv Gandhi action plan. We call for an intensification 
of discussion and dialogue among Member States and 
the larger non-governmental community, so as to 
strengthen an international consensus that can be 
translated into concrete action to achieve nuclear 
disarmament.  
 India remains committed to the negotiations in 
the Conference on Disarmament on a multilateral,  
non-discriminatory and internationally verifiable fissile 
material cut-off treaty that meets India’s national 
security interests. We hope that the Conference will be 
able to commence negotiations at an early date. We 
remain committed to a unilateral and voluntary 
moratorium on nuclear-explosives testing. 
 Terrorism has emerged as one of the most serious 
threats to international peace and security. To defeat it, 
it is imperative for the global community to build on 
international cooperation and take concerted action 
against terrorists and their sponsors. There can be no 
justification for terrorism, just as there can be no good 
or bad terrorists. We urge Member States to display the 
necessary political will to finalize and adopt the 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 Peace and stability in South Asia is one of our 
highest priorities. We are committed to good-
neighbourly relations with all our neighbours, 
including Pakistan. In that spirit of solidarity with the 
people of Pakistan in their hour of need we pledged 
$25 million in aid, which is being channelled through 
the United Nations for flood relief efforts in that 
country. As a neighbour, we wish to provide succour 
and relief in a timely manner to the victims of that 
natural disaster. We are saddened by the loss of life and 
property that Pakistan has suffered as a result of the 
unprecedented floods. 
 It is well known that many countries have deep-
rooted concerns about the growth and consolidation of 
militancy and terrorism in Pakistan. We share those 
concerns, particularly because Jammu and Kashmir, 
which is an integral part of India, has been the target of 
such Pakistan-sponsored militancy and terrorism for 
many years now. Pakistan must fulfil its solemn 
commitment not to allow territory under its control to 
be used for terrorism directed against India. Credible 
and firm action by Pakistan against terrorist groups 
operating from its soil is in the interest of the region, as 
it is in Pakistan’s own interest.  
 Pakistan cannot impart lessons to us on 
democracy and human rights. If, however, Pakistan 
were to live up to its commitment not to allow the use 
of territory under its control by terrorists acting against 
India, that would significantly help reduce the trust 
deficit that impedes the development of better bilateral 
relations between our two countries. We are 
neighbours, and as neighbours we have an obligation to 
work together. 
 Afghanistan recently successfully concluded 
parliamentary elections. We believe the international 
community needs to be steadfast in its engagement 
with Afghanistan to ensure the success of its 
reconstruction efforts and its emergence as a 
democratic, pluralistic and prosperous society. The 
continuing existence of safe havens and sanctuaries for 
terrorists beyond Afghanistan’s borders is the major 
impediment to the restoration of peace and security in 
Afghanistan. That should be a primary focus of the 
international community. 
 Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime 
Minister, said in 1948:  
 
 
5 10-55396 
 
 “The fundamental principles on which the United 
Nations is based are right principles. We believe 
in those fundamental principles and want to help 
the Organization in following these principles.” 
The Government and the more than 1 billion people of 
India have stood by that commitment. I would like to 
solemnly reaffirm our faith in the principles that 
underlie the United Nations, and in the United Nations 
system itself. When I arrived yesterday 
in New York, I received a phone call from the chairman 
of one of the Jewish organizations, who asked me how 
I was coping with all the pressure that is being placed 
on Israel. “Surely”, he said, “it must be very difficult”. 
I recalled an old joke, which tells of five Jews who 
changed the way we see the world: Moses, law is 
everything; Jesus, love is everything; Marx, money is 
everything; Freud, sex is everything; and Einstein, 
everything is relative. So, I told him that everything is 
relative. On one hand, it is very difficult. On the other 
hand, it is easier than before, because now we have a 
stable coalition and a stable Government and we have 
the support of a majority of Israel’s citizens. We are 
ready for a fair solution and we are ready to cooperate 
with the international community. However, we are not 
ready to compromise our national security or the vital 
interests of the State of Israel. 
 At the outset, I want to emphasize that, contrary 
to what is often presented in the international media, 
the political arena in Israel is not divided between 
those who seek peace and those who seek war. 
Everyone wants peace, and the controversy in Israel 
centres on the specific question of how to achieve this 
peace, how to reach security and stability in the region. 
And the question is: why, in the 17 years since we 
signed the Oslo Accords, have we not arrived at a 
comprehensive agreement signifying the end of the 
conflict and the removal of future mutual claims? 
 Despite all of the efforts of all the good people 
with the best of intentions, including Yitzhak Rabin, 
Shimon Peres, Benjamin Netanyahu, Ehud Barak, Ariel 
Sharon and Ehud Olmert; despite the summit meetings 
at Camp David between Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat 
with the presence of former President Bill Clinton; and 
despite the Annapolis Summit between Ehud Olmert 
and Mahmoud Abbas, we are today still in deadlock. 
 In fact, contrary to the prevalent view that the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the heart of the instability 
in the Middle East or is the main reason for the 
region’s numerous conflicts, the reality is entirely 
different. More than 90 per cent of the wars and war 
victims of the Middle East since the Second World War 
did not result from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and 
are in no way connected to Israel. Rather, they stem 
from conflicts involving Muslims or conflicts between 
Arab States. The Iran-Iraq war, the Gulf war, the wars 
between North and South Yemen, the Hama atrocities 
in Syria, and the wars in Algeria and Lebanon — these 
are just a few examples from a list that goes on and on. 
 The second flawed explanation for the 
long-standing conflict between Israel and the 
Palestinians that has gained popularity is that the root 
of the problem is the so-called occupation, the 
settlements in Judea and Samaria and the settlers 
themselves. Only the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian State in Judea, Samaria and Gaza, so the 
argument goes, will ensure peace in the region. 
 It is sufficient to state a number of well-known 
facts in order to refute that claim. First, all of Judea, 
Samaria and Gaza were under Arab control for 
19 years, between 1948 and 1967. During those 
19 years, no one tried to create a Palestinian State. 
Peace agreements were achieved with Egypt and 
Jordan, despite the presence of settlements. And the 
opposite is also true: we evacuated 21 flourishing 
settlements in Gush Katif and transferred more than 
10,000 Jews. And, in return, we have Hamas in power 
and thousands of missiles landing on Sderot and 
southern Israel. 
 Another misguided argument is the claim that the 
Palestinian issue prevents a determined international 
front against Iran. This argument is not only flawed, it 
is completely irresponsible. The same argument could 
be made that the Palestinian issue prevents action on 
North Korea, piracy in Somalia, the humanitarian crisis 
in Sudan or the challenge of Afghanistan. 
 Just as the Khomeini Revolution had nothing to 
do with the Palestinian issue, neither is the Iranian 
decision to develop nuclear weapons related. In truth, 
the connection between Iran and the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict is precisely the contrary. Iran can exist without 
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizbullah, but the terrorist 
organizations cannot exist without Iran. Relying on 
those proxies, Iran can, at any given time, foil any 
agreement between Israel and the Palestinians or with 
Lebanon. 
 Thus, in searching for a durable agreement with 
the Palestinians, one that will deal with the true roots 
of the conflict and will endure for many years, one 
must understand that, first, the Iranian issue must be 
resolved. One must deal first with the root cause of the 
problem, and not its symptoms. There are, of course, 
yet other problems that must be solved; solving that 
one would not be sufficient, but it is nevertheless a 
necessary condition. 
 
 
9 10-55264 
 
 In trying to resolve the conflict between Israel 
and the Palestinians, we are dealing with two types of 
problems: emotional problems and practical problems. 
That is why the solution must also be a two-stage one. 
 The emotional problems are, first and foremost, 
the utter lack of confidence between the sides and 
issues such as Jerusalem, recognition of Israel as the 
nation-State of the Jewish people, and refugees. Under 
those conditions, we should focus on coming up with a 
long-term intermediate agreement, something that 
could take a few decades. We need to raise an entire 
new generation that will have mutual trust and will not 
be influenced by incitement and extremist messages. 
To achieve a final status agreement, we must 
understand that the primary practical obstacle is the 
friction between the two nations. 
 As is true everywhere, where there are two 
nations, two religions or two languages with competing 
claims to the same land, there is friction and conflict. 
Countless examples of ethnic conflict around the world 
confirm this, whether in the Balkans, the Caucasus, 
Africa, the Far East or the Middle East. Where 
effective separation has been achieved, conflict has 
either been avoided or has been dramatically reduced 
or resolved. Consider the cases of the former Yugoslav 
republics, the split-up of Czechoslovakia and the 
independence of East Timor as cases in point. Thus, the 
guiding principle for a final status agreement must not 
be land-for-peace but rather, exchange of populated 
territory. Let me be very clear: I am not speaking about 
moving populations, but rather about moving borders 
to better reflect demographic realities. 
 This is not an extraordinary insight and is far less 
controversial than some may seek to claim. In fact, 
precisely this notion — that a mismatch between 
borders and nationalities is a recipe for conflict — has 
long been accepted as a virtual truism in the academic 
community. Leading scholars and highly respected 
research institutions have even coined the term “right-
sizing the State” to capture the idea that States and 
nations must be in balance in order to ensure peace. 
This is not a controversial political policy. It is an 
empirical truth. 
 But beyond empirical truth there is historical 
truth, namely, the almost 4,000 years during which the 
Jewish people were born in the land of Israel and 
developed the corpus of ethical and intellectual 
treasures that have been instrumental in the rise of 
Western civilization. The 2,000 years of forced exile 
and interim conquest by Byzantines, Arabs, 
Mamelukes, Ottomans and others cannot and never will 
impair the unbreakable bonds of the Jewish people to 
its homeland. Israel is not only where we are, it is who 
we are. 
 In closing, let me remind everyone in this Hall of 
the quote on the plaza across from the United Nations, 
words spoken in Jerusalem almost 3,000 years ago by 
the Jewish prophet Isaiah: 
 “They shall beat their swords into plowshares and 
their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not 
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they 
learn war any more.” (Isaiah 2:4) 
 Inspired by the deep wisdom embodied in these 
words, let us hope that the path to true peace 
prophesied by Isaiah will guide our two peoples, in two 
nation-States, living in peace and security.It is an honour to 
lead New Zealand’s delegation this year. The opening 
of the General Assembly’s new session is the best 
example there is of the capacity of the United Nations 
to bring us all together. Our discussions here will be 
wide-ranging, but inevitably settle on two main issues: 
global security and sustainable economic development.  
 We want to make our world safer, more secure 
and more prosperous. These goals will require strong 
collective action with a focus on practical outcomes. 
New Zealand is seeking every opportunity to 
contribute. We are a young, small and fair-minded 
country. We depend upon a United Nations that is 
effective and credible. 
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. In 
addition to our indigenous Maori population, we are a 
mix of people from Europe, Asia and the Pacific. Our 
links with Europe are built on history and tradition. 
Within Asia, we are developing ever-stronger economic 
and security relationships. Our future is closely tied to 
both of these regions. We have an equally strong focus 
on our closest neighbours in the South Pacific. New 
Zealand is a Pacific country. Auckland is the largest 
Pasifika city in the world, and a number of Pacific 
countries have more citizens living in New Zealand 
than at home. 
 The security and development of the region is 
New Zealand’s constant preoccupation. It is a matter of 
grave concern that the South Pacific is second only to 
sub-Saharan Africa in terms of lack of progress 
towards the achievement of some of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). We want to see the 
MDGs achieved, and we want to see the wider Pacific 
prosper through good governance and sustainable 
economic development. That is why New Zealand is 
increasingly deploying our development resources 
within its region, since that is where they are most 
needed and where they can be most effective. 
 The development challenges in the Pacific are 
extremely complex, with vulnerable economies and 
challenging environmental circumstances. New 
Zealand has increased and will continue to increase our 
overall level of development assistance, despite 
challenging times for our domestic economy. A higher 
percentage of that larger budget will be focused on our 
region. 
 But money alone is not enough; aid effectiveness 
and donor coordination are vital. Progress will also 
depend on good governance within the region. 
 Next year we will mark the fortieth anniversary 
of the Pacific Islands Forum, the central body for 
regional engagement in the Pacific, which held its first 
meeting in New Zealand in 1971. We will welcome 
leaders from around the region back to New Zealand 
next September to celebrate our achievements over 
40 years and to take stock of the challenges we must 
face in the future. 
 The past year has reinforced the need for better 
disaster management. Just three weeks ago, residents in 
Christchurch woke to the most destructive earthquake 
in New Zealand in 80 years. Miraculously, there was 
no loss of life, but the damage runs into billions of 
dollars and people’s lives and livelihoods were 
affected. Significant aftershocks are still affecting the 
 
 
51 10-54965 
 
population. But less than a month after the earthquake 
hit, roads and buildings have been repaired, tourism 
infrastructure is at almost full capacity, and people’s 
lives are being rebuilt. 
 Others have not been so lucky. The earthquakes 
in Haiti and Chile and the recent flooding in Pakistan 
are reminders of the devastating scale of such disasters. 
The Pacific has been hit hard, too. This month will 
mark the first anniversary of the Pacific tsunami that 
took the lives of 184 people in Samoa, American 
Samoa and Tonga. 
 These events and others demonstrate the 
importance of disaster preparedness, management and 
recovery. New Zealand’s experience with major 
earthquakes has taught us how to mitigate risks, 
enforce strong building codes, and implement effective 
recovery plans. But there will be lessons we should 
learn from this recent experience. We will work with 
the United Nations system, non-governmental 
organizations and other international agencies to 
ensure that those lessons are shared and help others to 
prepare. 
 While development and disaster management are 
crucial to our quest for a safer world, underpinning 
both is security. Peacekeeping is a key responsibility of 
the Organization. Indeed, it is its peacekeeping 
operations that shape perceptions of the United Nations 
for many people around the world. 
 New Zealand is committed to supporting global 
security and United Nations peacekeeping. That is why 
we have been engaged in peacekeeping and peace 
support operations since the 1940s. New Zealand’s 
soldiers, police, engineers, corrections and customs 
officers, doctors and other personnel are today 
involved in 12 operations that span the globe from 
Africa, Afghanistan and the Middle East to Asia and 
the Pacific. 
 One of the clearest examples of New Zealand’s 
commitment to the principles of collective 
responsibility is through the United Nations effort in 
Timor-Leste. Since 1999, New Zealand has been a part 
of every United Nations mission that has served in 
Timor-Leste. We have played a major role in the 
United Nations-sanctioned international military 
operations that restored order there in 1999 and again 
in 2006. Over 6,000 New Zealanders have served in 
Timor in the past decade — a significant undertaking 
for a country of only 4.4 million people. 
 Of course, helping ensure peace and stability in 
our region alone is not enough. New Zealanders are 
among those who have been affected by terrorism, 
killed in the attacks that took place just a few blocks 
away from here in September 2001, and more recently 
in Bali, in London and in Jakarta. 
 The need to respond decisively to those who 
perpetrate such atrocities is a key reason why New 
Zealand has led the provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamyan, Afghanistan, since 2003. We have redeployed 
our special forces to work alongside the Government of 
Afghanistan and the international community to ensure 
that that country does not return to being a safe haven 
for Al-Qaida. We must address the conditions in which 
terrorism thrives. We are increasing our development 
spending in Bamyan and recently placed the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team under civilian leadership for the 
first time. 
 New Zealand is also strongly supportive of 
peacekeeping reform. The expansion in peacekeeping 
since 1990 has been dramatic. Never before has this 
Organization deployed so many missions to such 
complex environments. This expansion has opened up 
discussion of the way the United Nations conducts its 
peacekeeping operations. Clear and achievable 
mandates are needed, progress needs to be better 
monitored, and efficiency needs to be improved. 
 We are also contributing to United Nations efforts 
to strengthen peacebuilding in practice, including the 
need for better participation of women in 
peacebuilding. Of course, the response of the United 
Nations to crises has not always been successful. It is 
for this reason that New Zealand has strongly 
supported the responsibility to protect (R2P). We were 
pleased to contribute to the proposed joint Special 
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide/R2P office and 
look forward to the more comprehensive 
implementation of R2P throughout the United Nations 
system. 
 Effective pursuit of these goals — countering 
terrorism and maintaining peace and security — 
demands coordinated, collective action. The United 
Nations is the best vehicle for that action. New Zealand 
has been, and remains, proud to be a part of that 
community of collective action. In line with that 
commitment, New Zealand is seeking a seat on the 
Security Council for the 2015-2016 term. In doing so, 
  
 
10-54965 52 
 
we will work with others here who want the world to 
be a safer and more prosperous place. 
 This year significant gains have been made in 
global disarmament. New Zealand welcomes the action 
plan adopted at this year’s Non-Proliferation Treaty 
Review Conference, the groundbreaking nuclear 
security summit, and the entry into force of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. These are tangible 
and practical successes. But we still face some 
significant challenges. New Zealand is concerned by 
the continuing inertia of the Conference on 
Disarmament. The Secretary-General’s High-level 
Meeting on disarmament this morning was a valuable 
step in acknowledging this problem and trying to find a 
way forward. 
 As a country that prides itself on sustainable 
development, New Zealand is also greatly concerned 
about global environmental issues. As well as working 
towards an outcome in Cancún, we are involved in 
practical projects for addressing climate change. One 
such project is the Global Research Alliance on 
Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Fourteen per cent of 
worldwide greenhouse-gas emissions come from 
agriculture. At the same time, there are projections that 
world food production needs to increase by 50 per cent 
in the next 20 years, and to double in the next 40 years, 
to feed a growing world. 
 Clearly, we need a scientific breakthrough to help 
meet the challenge of producing more food while 
reducing emissions. New Zealand formed the Alliance, 
which now includes more than 30 agricultural nations, 
to find ways to address this problem. Scientists and 
researchers are now linking up across the world to try 
to balance the need for increased agricultural 
production with the need to address climate change. 
This is just one example of how countries can come 
together to address climate change in a very real way. 
 When I was here a year ago, we were watching to 
see whether the world would be able to climb out of 
the global economic recession. Much progress has been 
made and key economic indicators are generally 
pointing in the right direction. The rapid and 
coordinated international response, including by the 
Group of 20, has been effective. The World Trade 
Organization’s rules-based trading system has held up 
well. But, like many countries, New Zealand is 
frustrated that the conclusion of the Doha Development 
Round still eludes us. 
 Over these last few days, especially in the context 
of discussion of progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals, I have heard many fine words 
spoken in support of the world’s disadvantaged. I take 
this opportunity to remind those speakers and countries 
that the single most effective step that could be taken 
to advance the position of the world’s disadvantaged 
would be to create a framework within which they can 
trade themselves to a better future. 
 I want to strongly endorse President Obama’s 
statement, made yesterday, that there is no viable 
alternative to the resolution of conflict in the Middle 
East other than two States, Israel and Palestine, living 
side by side in peace and security. We believe that 
direct negotiations, with both parties at the table, are 
the only way to resolve the conflict. We congratulate 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu on 
having the courage to negotiate in very difficult 
circumstances. We ask that Israel heed the international 
community’s unanimous call to extend the moratorium 
on settlements and create the enabling atmosphere that 
will allow direct negotiations to continue. 
 We also agree with President Obama that 
resolution of the Middle East conflict is not just the 
responsibility of Israel and Palestine. Countries in the 
region especially, but also countries elsewhere, must 
work towards Middle East peace. New Zealand, as a 
friend of both Israel and Palestine, will play its part. I 
recently visited the Sinai, where a New Zealand officer 
has command of the Multinational Force and 
Observers. I was reminded that there has been peace 
between Israel and Egypt for more than 30 years, a 
prospect once unthinkable. With the commitment of the 
two parties and the support of the international 
community, Israel and Palestine can enjoy the same 
freedom from conflict. We all have a huge stake in 
achieving that objective. Resolution of the Palestinian 
question would tear out the fuse that threatens to ignite 
conflict in the Middle East and beyond. 
 So today we add our voice to that of President 
Obama and of others who believe that this dispute can, 
and must, be solved. And we call on all Members of 
the United Nations to lend their support to this process 
in the critical weeks ahead.The current, sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly has started with an unprecedented 
number of events covering the full range of the most 
topical international issues. It is encouraging that, in 
the light of the numerous challenges facing mankind, a 
positive unified platform for collective action has been 
taking shape, with the United Nations playing the 
central role. Having learned from the dramatic events 
of recent decades and having realized that attempts to 
cut the Gordian knot by force in violation of the 
Charter will only lead to deadlock, the international 
community has concluded that there is no alternative 
but to address political, economic and other problems 
through joint efforts based on international law. And 
the United Nations provides a universal platform to 
strengthen this positive trend in international relations.  
 The Security Council is a key instrument of this 
Organization to maintain international peace and 
security. The high-level Security Council meeting held 
on 23 September (S/PV.6389) reaffirmed its members’ 
intention to enhance that body’s efficiency, not only 
through direct involvement in conflict settlement but 
also by creating prerequisites for the non-recurrence 
and prevention of crises. This proves that the 
comprehensive approach to ensuring international 
security is gaining ground, as it reflects modern 
realities and is based on the principles and provisions 
of the United Nations Charter. 
 The United Nations faces unprecedented, serious 
and multifaceted tasks in the key area of peacekeeping. 
While paying tribute to the efforts and sacrifice of 
thousands of men and women Blue Helmets, joint 
efforts should continue to refine the theory and practice 
of peacekeeping under United Nations auspices and to 
improve the quality of planning and the conduct of 
peacekeeping operations with adequate political 
control by the Security Council. 
 It is encouraging that the United Nations is 
working towards this goal on a truly collective basis. 
Member States have quite a few constructive ideas on 
their table, which include Russia’s initiative to 
revitalize the Military Staff Committee in order to 
improve the military expertise of Security Council 
decisions. 
 This year has been marked by progress in nuclear 
disarmament. The 2010 Treaty between the United 
States of America and the Russian Federation on 
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of 
Strategic Offensive Arms, signed by the Presidents of 
Russia and the United States in Prague, is a real 
contribution by our two countries to strengthening 
international security and strategic stability. It is also 
the result of positive changes in the relations between 
Russia and the United States that have placed Russian-
American interaction in world affairs on a qualitatively 
new level.  
 We hope that the strong impetus provided by 
Moscow and Washington to the nuclear disarmament 
process will be followed similarly by all nations, 
primarily by nuclear-weapon States. 
 Pursuant to Russia’s policy towards strengthening 
the United Nations role in global security, disarmament 
and confidence-building, we intend to table three draft 
resolutions during the current General Assembly 
session: one on transparency and confidence-building 
measures in outer space activities, co-sponsored with 
China; a draft resolution on developments in the field 
of information and telecommunications in the context 
of international security; and a Russia-United States 
co-sponsored draft resolution on bilateral strategic 
offensive arms reductions and the new framework for 
strategic relations. We call for their adoption by 
consensus. 
 The universalization of the Treaty on the  
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its 
guaranteed strict implementation comprise the 
cornerstone of a strengthened international  
non-proliferation regime. In that context, the search 
must continue for an effective solution to the Iranian 
nuclear problem on the basis of NPT provisions and the 
norms of international Law. The Iranian side must 
ensure the requisite level of transparency and 
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), which is acting on behalf of the 
international community with the Security Council’s 
support. 
 Clarifying the outstanding questions about the 
Iranian nuclear programme would not only meet the 
goal of strengthening the non-proliferation regime but 
would also quite obviously promote the interests of 
Iran. Russia sees no reasonable alternative to a political 
and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear 
 
 
31 10-55396 
 
problem through constructive dialogue between Tehran 
and the six countries involved. The meeting of the 
Foreign Ministers of the six countries in New York 
helped to consolidate the shared intention to ensure the 
earliest resumption of such a dialogue. We will 
continue to do our utmost to achieve this goal. 
 As far as the sanctions instrument is concerned, 
sanctions are not a goal in themselves. The objective of 
the sanctions regime established by the Security 
Council is to signal to Iran that it must fully cooperate 
with IAEA, and to give an impetus to the negotiating 
process. All members of the international community 
must show solidarity based on mutual responsibility. 
We strongly reject a situation in which unilateral 
decisions — including ex-territorial ones that undermine 
the very foundation of further joint efforts — are made 
with regard to sanctions in parallel to collective efforts 
by the United Nations Security Council. We must put 
an end to that practice, which runs counter to 
international law and has negative political effects. 
 Even more obvious, the economic and financial 
trade blockade of Cuba, whose lifting the General 
Assembly has demanded for a number of years, is 
clearly an anachronism. The codification of the 
principle of equal and indivisible security is 
indispensable to productive international efforts in this 
field, which is the precise goal of President 
Medvedev’s initiative to conclude a treaty on European 
security. The proposal targets the complete transition of 
Euro-Atlantic policy from its old Cold War agenda to a 
new one, as well as a firm legal foundation for the 
principle of indivisible security for all in the  
Euro-Atlantic region proclaimed in the 1990s. We 
welcome the substantive dialogue on this important 
Russian initiative, which has started in various 
international forums. 
 A comprehensive settlement in the Middle East 
would make a crucial contribution towards 
strengthened global stability. The parties must 
demonstrate political will and extend every effort to 
promote the success of the resumed direct Palestinian-
Israeli talks. The results of the ministerial Quartet 
meeting of major international mediators held on  
21 September demonstrated that appropriate support to 
the Israelis and Palestinians will continue, but the 
ultimate responsibility for a successful outcome rests 
with them. 
 In this connection, the decision by the Israeli 
authorities to not extend the moratorium on Israeli 
settlement activities has raised serious concern. A way 
out of the current impasse should be found so as to 
ensure that negotiations continue. Our proposal to hold 
an international conference on the Middle East in 
Moscow is aimed at advancing the Middle East 
settlement. This proposal has gained the support of all 
interested parties and the United Nations Security 
Council. If the direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue 
becomes stable, the preparations for the Moscow forum 
can get under way, which should also substantively 
examine the Syrian and Lebanese tracks, as well as the 
prospects for the multilateral aspects of the Middle 
East settlement. 
 The development of a comprehensive strategy to 
address the interconnected problems of the Middle East 
is on the agenda. It is necessary to continue working 
towards an international conference in 2012 on the 
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction and their means of 
delivery in the Middle East, pursuant to the decision of 
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
 Russia supports the international strategy for a 
comprehensive settlement and for post-conflict 
rehabilitation of Afghanistan adopted by the Kabul 
Conference, which envisages a stage-by-stage transfer 
of responsibility for the situation in that country to 
Afghan authorities, as effective governing structures 
are established in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. 
The future of Afghanistan must be determined by the 
Afghan people themselves. The international 
community must continue to provide its assistance, 
with an important role being played by the United 
Nations. 
 Lasting stabilization in Afghanistan and 
throughout the region will be impossible without 
resolving the drug problem. The dimension of the 
danger posed by narcotics emanating from Afghanistan 
represents a clear threat to international peace and 
stability and requires more resolute actions throughout 
the entire chain of the production and proliferation of 
narcotics — from the destruction of drug crops to the 
suppression of precursor supplies, including drug 
traffickers on the sanction lists of the Security Council. 
It is also necessary to move to a new level of 
international cooperation. Russia’s initiative to 
establish financial and counter-narcotics security belts 
  
 
10-55396 32 
 
along the perimeter of Afghan’s borders is consistent 
with those goals. 
 The regional dimension of the long-term 
stabilization of Afghanistan is becoming ever more 
topical. To that end, we must fully engage the potential 
of relevant organizations that are actively working in 
close contact with Kabul on Afghan issues, including 
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 The settlement process in the Sudan is 
approaching an important milestone. As the date of 
referendum on the self-determination of the South of 
that country draws closer, the parties to the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement must redouble their 
efforts to overcome the problems that still divide them. 
We should also give new impetus to the Darfur 
settlement process. At stake is the stability of 
conditions in the Sudan and throughout the vast 
African continent. We welcome the constructive 
attitude demonstrated by the Sudanese and other 
participants in the high-level meeting on the Sudan that 
was held here recently. 
 In Somalia, the confrontation continues between 
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by the 
international community, and extremists and terrorist 
groups linked with Al-Qaida. The lack of a settlement 
on land is fuelling the problem of piracy off the coast 
of Somalia. A more resolute pursuit of the political 
process and stronger assistance to the peacekeeping 
operation of the African Union and further counter-
piracy efforts, including the criminal prosecution of 
pirates, are priorities in international efforts on the 
Somali track, as reiterated during the recent  
mini-summit on Somalia, which Russia fully supports. 
 The results of the Millennium Development 
Goals summit have reaffirmed the important role of the 
United Nations on development matters and must help 
mobilize political support and financial resources for 
the timely achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That requires joint 
efforts by Governments, international financial and 
trade institutions, the private sector and civil society, 
based on the principles of global partnership and 
shared responsibility. 
 It is obvious that most global problems, including 
the achievement of the MDGs, cannot be resolved 
without engaging innovations, advanced technologies 
and modernization solutions. The same is valid for 
such challenges as climate change, energy and food 
security and the fight against diseases. The engagement 
of the enormous potential of the United Nations, its 
family and system of specialized agencies in this area 
will allow the Organization to become a catalyst in the 
establishment and development of multilateral 
modernization alliances. Russia is prepared to 
participate actively in that work. 
 To live up to expectations, the United Nations must 
continuously renew itself. The reform of the Organization 
is progressively moving forward. This year, the 
negotiations on strengthening system-wide coherence 
were completed successfully. In particular, the new 
important United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women has been established. 
 Negotiations will continue at the current session 
of the General Assembly on the expansion of the 
composition of the Security Council. This is an 
extremely important issue on the reform agenda of the 
Organization, involving the interests of the 
overwhelming majority of States. For that reason, the 
final formula for Security Council reform should be 
based on compromise and the broadest possible 
agreement in the United Nations. This requirement is 
also fully applicable to all other aspects of United 
Nations reform. 
 This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the 
United Nations, as well as that of the end of the Second 
World War, from the ashes of which the world 
Organization was born. For the sake of the memory of 
the millions of victims and in order to prevent a 
repetition of such scourges, we must suppress attempts 
to falsify the events associated with that historic 
calamity. That is the aim of a well-known Russian 
initiative in the United Nations. We count on the 
broadest support for a draft resolution on the topic. 
 The United Nations is our common and unique 
Organization. It is up to all of us to determine how 
productive and really useful its future work will be for 
humankind. By pulling our efforts together, we will be 
able to renew the United Nations effectively and 
provide it with all the necessary resources. We are 
convinced that reasonable resources spent on that goal 
will bring tangible dividends to all members of the 
international community in the form of durable peace, 
security, cooperation and prosperity all over the globe.It is a great honour to address 
this Assembly for the second time, nearly two years 
after my election as President of the United States. We 
know this is no ordinary time for our people. We each 
come here with our own problems and priorities. But 
there are also challenges that we share in common as 
leaders and as nations. 
 We meet within an institution built from the 
rubble of war, designed to unite the world in pursuit of 
peace. And we meet within a city that for centuries has 
welcomed people from across the globe, demonstrating 
that individuals of every colour, faith and station can 
come together to pursue opportunity, build a 
community and live with the blessing of human liberty. 
 Outside the doors of this Hall, the blocks and 
neighbourhoods of this great city tell the story of a 
difficult decade. Nine years ago, the destruction of the 
World Trade Center signalled a threat that respected no 
boundary of dignity or decency. Two years ago this 
month, a financial crisis on Wall Street devastated 
American families on Main Street. These separate 
challenges have affected people around the world. Men 
and women and children have been murdered by 
extremists from Casablanca to London, from Jalalabad 
to Jakarta. The global economy suffered an enormous 
blow during the financial crisis, crippling markets and 
deferring the dreams of millions on every continent. 
Underneath these challenges to our security and 
prosperity lie deeper fears: that ancient hatreds and 
religious divides are once again ascendant; that a world 
which has grown more interconnected has somehow 
slipped beyond our control. 
 These are some of the challenges that my 
Administration has confronted since we came into 
office. And today, I would like to talk to the Assembly 
about what we have done over the last 20 months to 
meet these challenges; what our responsibility is to 
pursue peace in the Middle East; and what kind of 
world we are trying to build in this twenty-first 
century. 
 Let me begin with what we have done. I have had 
no greater focus as President than rescuing our 
economy from potential catastrophe. And in an age 
when prosperity is shared, we could not do this alone. 
So America has joined with nations around the world 
to spur growth and the renewed demand that could 
restart job creation. 
 We are reforming our system of global finance, 
beginning with Wall Street reform here at home, so that 
a crisis like this never happens again. And we made the 
Group of 20 the focal point for international 
coordination, because in a world where prosperity is 
more diffuse, we must broaden our circle of 
cooperation to include emerging economies —
economies from every corner of the globe. 
 There is much to show for our efforts, even as 
there is much work to be done. The global economy 
has been pulled back from the brink of a depression 
and is growing once more. We have resisted 
protectionism and are exploring ways to expand trade 
and commerce among nations. But we cannot — and 
will not — rest until these seeds of progress grow into 
a broader prosperity, not only for all Americans but for 
peoples around the world. 
 As for our common security, America is waging a 
more effective fight against Al-Qaida’ while winding 
down the war in Iraq. Since I took office, the United 
States has removed nearly 100,000 troops from Iraq. 
We have done so responsibly as Iraqis have 
transitioned to lead responsibility for the security of 
their country. We are now focused on building a lasting 
partnership with the Iraqi people while keeping our 
commitment to remove the rest of our troops by the 
end of next year. 
 
 
11 10-54827 
 
 While drawing down in Iraq, we have refocused 
on defeating Al-Qaida and denying its affiliates safe 
haven. In Afghanistan, the United States and our allies 
are pursuing a strategy to break the Taliban’s 
momentum and build the capacity of Afghanistan’s 
Government and security forces so that a transition to 
Afghan responsibility can begin next July. And from 
South Asia to the Horn of Africa, we are moving 
towards a more targeted approach — one that 
strengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist 
networks without deploying large American armies. 
 As we pursue the world’s most dangerous 
extremists, we are also denying them the world’s most 
dangerous weapons and pursuing the peace and 
security of a world without nuclear weapons. 
 Earlier this year, 47 nations embraced a work 
plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within 
four years. We have joined with Russia to sign the most 
comprehensive arms control treaty in decades. We have 
reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security 
strategy. And here, at the United Nations, we came 
together to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
 As part of our effort on non-proliferation, I 
offered the Islamic Republic of Iran an extended hand 
last year and underscored that it has both rights and 
responsibilities as a member of the international 
community. I also said — in this Hall — that Iran must 
be held accountable if it failed to meet those 
responsibilities. And that is what we have done. 
 Iran is the only party to the NPT that cannot 
demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclear 
programme, and those actions have consequences. 
Through Security Council resolution 1929 (2010), we 
made it clear that international law is not an empty 
promise. 
 Now let me be clear once more: the United States 
and the international community seek a resolution to 
our differences with Iran, and the door remains open to 
diplomacy should Iran choose to walk through it. But 
the Iranian Government must demonstrate a clear and 
credible commitment and confirm to the world the 
peaceful intent of its nuclear programme.  
 As we combat the spread of deadly weapons, we 
are also confronting the spectre of climate change. 
After making historic investments in clean energy and 
efficiency at home, we helped forge an accord in 
Copenhagen that — for the first time — commits all 
major economies to reduce their emissions. We are 
keenly aware this is just a first step. And going 
forward, we will support a process in which all major 
economies meet our responsibilities to protect the 
planet while unleashing the power of clean energy to 
serve as an engine of growth and development. 
 America has also embraced unique 
responsibilities that come with our power. Since the 
rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we 
have pledged our assistance, and we should all support 
the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild. And 
when the earth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, 
we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today, we 
honour those from the United Nations family who lost 
their lives in the earthquake and commit ourselves to 
stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on 
their own two feet. 
 Amidst this upheaval, we have also been 
persistent in our pursuit of peace. Last year, I pledged 
my best efforts to support the goal of two States, Israel 
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, 
as part of a comprehensive peace between Israel and all 
of its neighbours. We have travelled a winding road 
over the last 12 months, with few peaks and many 
valleys. But this month I am pleased that we have 
pursued direct negotiations between Israelis and 
Palestinians in Washington, Sharm el-Sheikh and 
Jerusalem.  
 Now I recognize that many are pessimistic about 
this process. The cynics say that Israelis and 
Palestinians are too distrustful of each other, and too 
divided internally, to forge lasting peace. Rejectionists 
on both sides will try to disrupt the process with bitter 
words and with bombs and gunfire. Some say that the 
gaps between the parties are too big; the potential for 
talks to break down is too great; and that after decades 
of failure peace is simply not possible.  
 I hear those voices of scepticism. But I ask the 
Assembly to consider the alternative. If an agreement 
is not reached, Palestinians will never know the pride 
and dignity that comes with their own State. Israelis 
will never know the certainty and security that comes 
with sovereign and stable neighbours who are 
committed to coexistence. The hard realities of 
demography will take over. More blood will be shed. 
This Holy Land will remain a symbol of our 
differences, instead of our common humanity.  
  
 
10-54827 12 
 
 I refuse to accept that future. We all have a choice 
to make. Each of us must choose the path of peace. Of 
course, that responsibility begins with the parties 
themselves, who must answer the call of history. 
Earlier this month, at the White House, I was struck by 
the words of both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “I came here today to 
find an historic compromise that will enable both 
peoples to live in peace, security and dignity”. 
President Abbas said, “We will spare no effort and we 
will work diligently and tirelessly to ensure these 
negotiations achieve their cause”. 
 These words must now be followed by action, 
and I believe that both leaders have the courage to do 
so. But the road that they have to travel is exceedingly 
difficult, which is why I call upon Israelis and 
Palestinians — and the world — to rally behind the 
goal that these leaders now share.  
 We know that there will be tests along the way, 
and that one test is fast approaching. Israel’s settlement 
moratorium has made a difference on the ground and 
improved the atmosphere for talks. 
 And our position on this issue is well known. We 
believe that the moratorium should be extended. We 
also believe that talks should press on until completed. 
Now is the time for the parties to help each other 
overcome this obstacle. Now is the time to build the 
trust — and provide the time — for substantial 
progress to be made. Now is the time for this 
opportunity to be seized, so that it does not slip away.  
 Now, peace must be made by Israelis and 
Palestinians, but we each have a responsibility to do 
our part as well. Those of us who are friends of Israel 
must understand that true security for the Jewish State 
requires an independent Palestine — one that allows 
the Palestinian people to live with dignity and 
opportunity. And those of us who are friends of the 
Palestinians must understand that the rights of the 
Palestinian people will be won only through peaceful 
means — including genuine reconciliation with a 
secure Israel. 
 I know many in this Hall count themselves as 
friends of the Palestinians. These pledges of friendship 
must now be supported by deeds. Those who have 
signed on to the Arab Peace Initiative should seize this 
opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps 
towards the normalization that it promises Israel. 
 And those who speak on behalf of Palestinian 
self-government should help the Palestinian Authority 
politically and financially, and in doing so help the 
Palestinians build the institutions of their State. 
 Those who long to see an independent Palestine 
must also stop trying to tear down Israel. After 
thousands of years, Jews and Arabs are not strangers in 
a strange land. After 60 years in the community of 
nations, Israel’s existence must not be a subject for 
debate. 
 Israel is a sovereign State, and the historic 
homeland of the Jewish people. It should be clear to all 
that efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will be 
met by the unshakeable opposition of the United 
States. Efforts to threaten or kill Israelis will do 
nothing to help the Palestinian people. The slaughter of 
innocent Israelis is not resistance; it is injustice. And 
make no mistake: the courage of a man like President 
Abbas, who stands up for his people in front of the 
world under very difficult circumstances, is far greater 
than those who fire rockets at innocent women and 
children. 
 The conflict between Israelis and Arabs is as old 
as the United Nations. And we can come back here 
next year, as we have for the last 60 years, and make 
long speeches about it. We can read familiar lists of 
grievances. We can table the same resolutions. We can 
further empower the forces of rejectionism and hate. 
And we can waste more time by carrying forward an 
argument that will not help a single Israeli or 
Palestinian child achieve a better life. We can do that. 
 Or we can say that this time will be different — 
that this time we will not let terror or turbulence or 
posturing or petty politics stand in the way. This time 
we will think, not of ourselves, but of the young girl in 
Gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams or 
the young boy in Sderot who wants to sleep without the 
nightmare of rocket fire. 
 This time we should draw upon the teachings of 
tolerance that lie at the heart of the three great religions 
that see Jerusalem’s soil as sacred. This time we should 
reach for what is best within ourselves. If we do, when 
we come back here next year, we can have an 
agreement that will lead to a new State Member of the 
United Nations — an independent, sovereign State of 
Palestine living in peace with Israel. 
 
 
13 10-54827 
 
 It is our destiny to bear the burdens of the 
challenges that I have addressed — recession and war 
and conflict. And there is always a sense of urgency, 
even emergency, that drives most of our foreign 
policies. Indeed, after millennia marked by wars, this 
very institution reflects the desire of human beings to 
create a forum to deal with emergencies that will 
inevitably come. 
 But even as we confront immediate challenges, 
we must also summon the foresight to look beyond 
them and consider what we are trying to build over the 
long term. What is the world that awaits us when 
today’s battles are brought to an end? And, that is what 
I would like to talk about with the remainder of my 
time today. 
 One of the first actions of the General Assembly 
was to adopt the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights in 1948. This Declaration begins by stating that, 
“recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal 
and inalienable rights of all members of the human 
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace 
in the world”.  
 The idea is a simple one — that freedom, justice 
and peace for the world must begin with freedom, 
justice and peace in the lives of individual human 
beings. For the United States, this is a matter of moral 
and pragmatic assessment. As Robert Kennedy said, 
“the individual man, the child of God, is the touchstone 
of value, and all society, groups, the state exist for his 
benefit”.  
 So we stand up for universal values because it is 
the right thing to do. But we also know from 
experience that those who defend these values for their 
people have been our closest friends and allies, while 
those who have denied those rights — whether terrorist 
groups or tyrannical Governments — have chosen to be 
our adversaries. 
 Human rights have never gone unchallenged — 
not in any of our nations, not in our world. Tyranny is 
still with us — whether it manifests itself in the 
Taliban killing girls who try to go to school, a North 
Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an 
armed group in Congo-Kinshasa that use rape as a 
weapon of war. 
 In times of economic unease, there can also be an 
anxiety about human rights. Today, as in past times of 
economic downturn, some put human rights aside for 
the promise of short-term stability or the false notion 
that economic growth can come at the expense of 
freedom. We see leaders abolishing term limits, we see 
crackdowns on civil society, we see corruption 
smothering entrepreneurship and good governance, we 
see democratic reforms deferred indefinitely. 
 As I said last year, each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its own people. Yet 
experience shows us that history is on the side of 
liberty; that the strongest foundation lies in open 
economies, open societies, and open Governments. To 
put it simply, democracy, more than any other form of 
government, delivers for our citizens. And I believe 
that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the 
borders between nations are blurred. 
 America is working to shape a world that fosters 
this openness. For the rot of a closed or corrupt 
economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation 
of human beings.All of us want the right to educate our 
children, to make a decent wage, to care for the sick, 
and to be carried as far as our dreams and deeds will 
take us. But that depends upon economies that tap the 
power of our people, including the potential of women 
and girls. That means letting entrepreneurs start a 
business without paying a bribe and Governments that 
support opportunity instead of stealing from their 
people. And that means rewarding hard work, instead 
of reckless risk-taking. 
 Yesterday, I put forward a new development 
policy that will pursue these goals, recognizing that 
dignity is a human right and global development is in 
our common interest. America will partner with nations 
that offer their people a path out of poverty. And 
together, we must unleash growth that powers by 
individuals and merging markets in all parts of the 
globe. 
 There is no reason why Africa should not be an 
exporter of agriculture, which is why our food security 
initiative is empowering farmers. There is no reason 
why entrepreneurs should not be able to build new 
markets in every society, which is why I hosted a 
summit on entrepreneurship earlier this spring, because 
the obligation of Government is to empower 
individuals, not to impede them. 
 The same holds true for civil society. The arc of 
human progress has been shaped by individuals with 
the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside 
of government that insisted upon democratic change 
  
 
10-54827 14 
 
and by free media that held the powerful accountable. 
We have seen that from the South Africans who stood 
up to apartheid, to the Poles of Solidarity, to the 
mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the 
Dirty War, to Americans who marched for the rights of 
all races, including my own. 
 Civil society is the conscience of our 
communities and America will always extend our 
engagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of 
Government. And we will call out those who suppress 
ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless. 
We will promote new tools of communication so 
people are empowered to connect with one another 
and, in repressive societies, to do so with security. We 
will support a free and open Internet, so individuals 
have the information to make up their own minds. And 
it is time to embrace and effectively monitor norms 
that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee 
its expansion within and across borders. 
 Open society supports open government, but it 
cannot substitute for it. There is no right more 
fundamental than the right to choose your leaders and 
determine your destiny. Now, make no mistake: the 
ultimate success of democracy in the world will not 
come because the United States dictates it; it will come 
because individual citizens demand a say in how they 
are governed. 
 There is no soil where this cannot take root, just 
as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation. 
Later this fall, I will travel to Asia. And I will visit 
India, which peacefully threw off colonialism and 
established a thriving democracy of over a billion 
people. 
 I will continue to Indonesia, the world’s largest 
Muslim-majority country, which binds together 
thousands of islands through the glue of representative 
government and civil society. I will join the Group-of-
20 meeting on the Korean peninsula, which provides 
the world’s clearest contrast between a society that is 
dynamic and open and free, and one that is imprisoned 
and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an 
ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary 
development through democracy. 
 Each of these countries gives life to democratic 
principles in its own way. And even as some 
Governments roll back reform, we also celebrate the 
courage of a President in Colombia who willingly 
stepped aside, or the promise of a new constitution in 
Kenya.  
 The common thread of progress is the principle 
that government is accountable to its citizens. And the 
diversity in this Hall makes clear — no one country 
has all the answers, but all of us must answer to our 
own people. 
 In all parts of the world, we see the promise of 
innovation to make government more open and 
accountable. And now we must build on that progress. 
And when we gather back here next year, we should 
bring specific commitments to promote transparency; 
to fight corruption; to energize civic engagement; to 
leverage new technology so that we strengthen the 
foundations of freedom in our own countries, while 
living up to the ideals that can light the world. 
 This institution can still play an indispensable 
role in the advance of human rights. It is time to 
welcome the efforts of UN Women to protect the rights 
of women around the world. 
 It is time for every Member State to open its 
elections to international monitors and increase the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. It is time to 
invigorate United Nations peacekeeping, so that 
missions have the resources necessary to succeed, and 
so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented and 
justice is enforced — because neither dignity nor 
democracy can thrive without basic security.  
 It is time to make this institution more 
accountable as well, because the challenges of the new 
century demand new ways of serving our common 
interests. 
 The world that America seeks is not one we can 
build on our own. For human rights to reach those who 
suffer the boot of oppression, we need your voices to 
speak out. In particular, I appeal to those nations that 
emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the 
second half of the last century — from South Africa to 
South Asia; from Eastern Europe to South America. Do 
not stand idly by, do not be silent, when dissidents 
elsewhere are imprisoned and protesters are beaten, 
recall your own history. Because part of the price of 
our own freedom is standing up for the freedom of 
others.  
 That belief will guide America’s leadership in 
this twenty-first century. It is a belief that has seen us 
through more than two centuries of trial, and it will see 
 
 
15 10-54827 
 
us through the challenges we face today — be they war 
or recession; conflict or division. 
 So even as we have come through a difficult 
decade, I stand here before you confident in the 
future — a future where Iraq is governed by neither a 
tyrant nor a foreign Power, and Afghanistan is freed 
from the turmoil of war; a future where the children of 
Israel and Palestine can build the peace that was not 
possible for their parents; a world where the promise of 
development reaches into the prisons of poverty and 
disease; a future where the cloud of recession gives 
way to the light of renewal, and the dream of 
opportunity is available to all.  
 This future will not be easy to reach. It will not 
come without setbacks, nor will it be quickly claimed. 
But the founding of the United Nations itself is a 
testament to human progress. Remember, in times that 
were far more trying than our own, our predecessors 
chose the hope of unity over the ease of division and 
made a promise to future generations that the dignity 
and equality of human beings would be our common 
cause. 
 It falls to us to fulfil that promise. And though we 
will be met by dark forces that will test our resolve, 
Americans have always had cause to believe that we 
can choose a better history; that we need only to look 
outside the walls around us. For through the citizens of 
every conceivable ancestry who make this city their 
own, we see living proof that opportunity can be 
accessed by all, that what unites us as human beings is 
far greater than what divides us, and that people from 
every part of this world can live together in peace.My 
delegation joins previous speakers in expressing our 
congratulations to Mr. Joseph Deiss on his election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth 
session. We want to take this opportunity to assure him 
of our full cooperation and to wish him a very 
successful and rewarding term. I also take this 
opportunity to thank Mr. Ali Treki for the excellent 
work he did in steering this Assembly during his tenure 
as President during its sixty-fourth session. 
 The theme of the sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly — “Reaffirming the central role of 
the United Nations in global governance” — resonates 
with what our global citizen, Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela, said about this body on the occasion of its 
fiftieth anniversary: 
 “The United Nations has to reassess its role, 
redefine its profile and reshape its structures. It 
should truly reflect the diversity of our universe 
and ensure equity among the nations in the 
  
 
10-55109 26 
 
exercise of power within the system of 
international relations, in general, and the 
Security Council, in particular.” (A/50/PV.37, 
p. 6) 
My delegation supports the choice of this theme, and 
we wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of the 
United Nations and the system of multilateralism. 
 Despite the challenges that face humanity in the 
twenty-first century, the relevance of the United 
Nations as a multilateral mechanism through which a 
myriad of complex world affairs can be administered 
and resolved cannot be overemphasized. Those 
challenges compel us more than ever before to 
strengthen the United Nations. South Africa is 
committed to working with other Member States to 
achieve the full potential of the United Nations to 
address the urgent challenges facing the international 
community by making it more relevant, more 
responsive to the diversity of humankind and more 
representative. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
notable successes of the twentieth century, and thanks 
to its existence the world has been spared another war 
on the scale and magnitude of the First and Second 
World Wars. The exponential growth in the 
membership of the Organization over the years, from 
51 Members in 1945 to 192 today, clearly demonstrates 
the confidence that the peoples of the world have 
placed in the United Nations and the ideals contained 
in its Charter. 
 The universal membership of the United Nations 
gives it the legitimacy to be at the centre of efforts to 
address global challenges. However, the question is 
whether the United Nations has leveraged that diversity 
of its membership as a source of strength and acted 
decisively against any tendency that runs contrary to its 
fundamental values and founding principles. 
 The answer to this is yes because, in the past, the 
United Nations played an invaluable role in the 
worldwide process of decolonization, transforming the 
political landscape of the world and bringing much-
cherished freedom and independence to the peoples of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. The Organization was 
instrumental in bringing about the demise of the 
universally despised apartheid system in our own 
country, South Africa. 
 When the Organization recognized the right to 
development as a human right, it gave voice and hope 
to those who know the face of poverty. When the 
Organization has sent its troops to far-flung places to 
keep peace among neighbours who should be living 
together, it has again underscored the reason for which 
it was established. Amid all the challenges, the United 
Nations has been relevant and responsive to our 
diverse interests. 
 Five years ago, at the World Summit, we agreed 
that, if the Organization were to continue to play its 
central role in global governance effectively, there was 
a need to strengthen and reposition it to deal with the 
challenges of the twenty-first century.  We believe that 
the revitalization of the General Assembly remains one 
of the cornerstones of the United Nations reform 
agenda. The General Assembly is the chief 
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of 
the United Nations and plays a critical role in the 
process of standard-setting and the codification of 
international law. Its decisions are taken by a collective 
among equals for the common good. 
 We will support measures that are aimed at 
enhancing the effectiveness of the General Assembly, 
especially regarding its role in the maintenance of 
international peace and security. Indeed, we witnessed 
with satisfaction how, on several occasions, the 
General Assembly acted promptly when the Security 
Council was unwilling or unable to respond to grave 
developments in the aftermath of the conflict in Gaza 
in 2009. 
 Indeed, no transformation of the United Nations 
could be complete without the fundamental reform of 
the Security Council. South Africa believes that the 
objective of the reform should be to create a Security 
Council that is truly representative of the membership 
and effectively responsive to international crises, as 
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, 
it remains a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
accounts for a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Thus, 
deliberations about us carry on without us. 
 The world should be free of weapons of mass 
destruction, in accordance with our undertakings on 
total disarmament. In that regard, South Africa 
welcomes the recently agreed programme of work of 
the Conference on Disarmament. 
 
 
27 10-55109 
 
 While the right to development and freedom from 
want are central to the work of the United Nations, we 
have just ended the High-level Plenary Meeting to 
review our performance in achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals and agreed that more needs to be 
done to act on commitments already made by the 
international community in that regard. 
 The people of Haiti have a story to tell about how 
best the international community can respond in unison 
and effectively to a nation in distress. 
 A speedy and satisfactory conclusion of the Doha 
Round of the World Trade Organization, which 
promised so much for the developing South, 
unfortunately remains a dream yet to be fulfilled. At 
the same time, the global economic crisis has 
highlighted the point that many of us have always 
made about the need to work for an international 
financial architecture that is sensitive to the 
development needs of the South. 
 The contribution of the Group of 20 (G-20) is a 
welcome development in that regard, and we believe 
that the Group should complement and reinforce the 
good work of the United Nations and not act as an 
alternative. In its composition, the G-20 will also need 
to mirror the rich diversity of humankind by making 
sure that all regions of the world, in particular Africa, 
are well represented. We look forward to the full 
implementation of the undertakings made to transform 
the international financial architecture, including the 
reform of the Bretton Woods institutions, as a step 
towards building a world system founded on equity and 
social justice. 
 Environmental issues, including climate change, 
have also become high on the priorities of the 
international agenda. South Africa is fully committed 
to a multilateral outcome on the basis of the Bali Plan 
of Action, with a two-track negotiated and legally 
binding outcome. We are convinced that the 
Copenhagen Accord provides political guidance for 
future negotiations. 
 Accordingly, we should work together to ensure 
that the forthcoming meeting of the sixteenth session 
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Mexico 
takes bold and concrete steps to address climate change 
and its effects. For our part, South Africa will have the 
opportunity to host the seventeenth session of the 
Conference of the Parties in December 2011, on the 
eve of the end of the first commitment period of the 
Kyoto Protocol. 
 Peace and stability are one of the preconditions 
for bringing about an Africa of the new beginning that 
the Chairperson of the African Union, His Excellency 
President Wa Mutharika of Malawi, spoke of on the 
first day of the general debate (see ). The 
United Nations has been an important partner to Africa, 
working with us through the African Union, whether in 
Somalia, the Sudan or the Democratic Republic of 
Congo. South Africa is encouraged by the commitment 
shown by the international community in trying to 
assist the both the Government of the Sudan and 
Southern Sudan as they prepare for the upcoming 
referendum in January 2011. 
 The people of Zimbabwe also need the helping 
hand of the international community in implementing 
their Global Political Agreement. The African Union 
and the Southern African Development Community 
speak for us, too, in calling for the lifting of sanctions 
against Zimbabwe. We will continue to work with the 
peoples of Zimbabwe, Madagascar and Burundi, 
among others, in their efforts to build and consolidate 
peace and democracy in their respective countries. 
 In the case of Western Sahara, South Africa 
remains concerned about the continuing impasse, 
which stands in the way of a solution that will result in 
the people of Western Sahara exercising their 
inalienable right to self-determination. We count on the 
United Nations, especially the Security Council, to 
continue to make decisions that enable us to decisively 
deal with the challenges of peace and security on our 
continent. 
 The United Nations should see Africa as a partner 
in the maintenance of international peace and the 
management of conflicts, and accordingly do more to 
strengthen the working relationship between the 
Security Council and the African Union Peace and 
Security Council. In this respect, South Africa will 
continue to support all international efforts to help the 
people of Palestine and Israel in their endeavour to find 
lasting peace, leading to the establishment of a viable 
Palestinian State, on the basis of the 1967 borders and 
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side 
in peace and security with Israel. 
 We are at one with the call made by several 
delegations for the lifting of the embargo on the 
Republic of Cuba. 
  
 
10-55109 28 
 
 We have converged here year after year to make 
strong statements on Palestine, the embargo on Cuba 
and the independence of the Western Sahara. The 
ultimate test of the relevance of the United Nations 
will therefore be in bringing closure to all these long 
outstanding issues in a manner that is consistent with 
our decisions and the collective will of nations 
represented in this Organization. 
In conclusion, we were also privileged recently to 
be the stage, and Africa the theatre, of the 2010 
Fédération internationale de football association World 
Cup tournament. Our people spoke for us during that 
soccer event in how they embraced each other and in 
their diversity of many nations, consistent with the 
spirit of ubuntu, which simply means “I am because 
you are”. They gave us hope and confirmed the faith 
we have in our belief that a better world is possible. 
The role of sport in development and in advancing 
peace can never be underestimated. As States, we can 
best respond to this message from our people by 
making sure that the United Nations, in playing its role 
in the global system, is more relevant, more inclusive 
and more representative. 
 Looking ahead, South Africa is honoured to have 
been endorsed by the African Union as a candidate for 
the Security Council non-permanent membership for 
the period 2011-2012. We stand ready to continue to 
contribute to the achievement of peace and security in 
the world.
China is a member of the big family of the United 
Nations, and China’s development and changes have 
attracted worldwide attention. I wish to take this 
opportunity to share with the Assembly my 
observations on how one should get to know the real 
China. 
 Since the founding of the People’s Republic, and 
especially since the start of reform and opening up 
more than 30 years ago, profound changes have taken 
place in China, a big, ancient country in the East. Its 
economic and overall national strength has 
substantially increased. The lives of its people have 
markedly improved. Its social and cultural programmes 
have made considerable progress, and its exchanges 
and cooperation with the outside world have continued 
to expand. In sum, my country has made an historic 
leap from mere subsistence to moderate prosperity. 
  
 
10-54827 42 
 
 We in China are proud of our achievements, 
which were made through strenuous efforts. At the 
same time, we are clear-headed about our place and 
role in today’s world. 
 China’s gross domestic product is the third largest 
in the world, but in per capita terms it is only one tenth 
of that of developed countries. China has enjoyed more 
than 30 years of rapid growth, but its further 
development faces energy, resources and 
environmental constraints. It is a leading producer of 
many important products, but it remains at the lower 
end of the global industrial chain. China is a big 
trading nation, but its exports are low in technology 
content and value added. In many cases, we have to 
rely on imports to meet the demand for core 
technologies.  
 China’s coastal areas and some of the large and 
medium-sized cities are thriving after modernizing, but 
many places in the central and western regions and the 
vast rural areas are still rather backward. Moreover, we 
have 150 million people living below the poverty line 
set by the United Nations.  
 The life of the Chinese people has improved 
significantly, but we do not yet have a full-fledged 
social security system. Moreover, we are confronted 
with high employment pressure. Our people are more 
and more actively engaged in the country’s social and 
political development, and citizens’ basic rights and 
interests are better protected, yet our democracy and 
legal system still have room for improvement and such 
social ills as inequity and corruption still exist. 
 China has come a long way in modernization. It 
is fairly advanced in some areas of development but 
remains backward in others. And it faces 
unprecedented challenges brought by problems both 
old and new.  
 Taken as a whole, China is still in the primary 
stage of socialism and remains a developing country. 
Those are our basic national conditions. That is the real 
China. 
 China has set the strategic goal of achieving 
modernization by the middle of this century. As they 
look to the coming decades, the Chinese people will 
continue to advance along the path of reform, opening 
up and peaceful development. That path has changed 
China’s destiny and has benefited people throughout 
the country. We must stay on that path and make 
further improvements. There is no reason whatsoever 
for us to deviate from it. 
 China will continue to focus on developing the 
economy. Development is our top priority, as it 
constitutes the basis for addressing all issues. We will 
rely mainly on our own efforts in pursuing 
development. 
 As China’s industrialization and urbanization 
progress, hundreds of millions of farmers will move to 
towns and cities, which will create more domestic 
demand than ever, open up broad market and 
development space and serve as a powerful engine for 
sustaining the growth of the Chinese economy as well 
as the world economy at large. We will work hard to 
transform the economic development pattern, 
restructure the economy and set out on a path of 
balanced and sustainable development. 
 China will continue to deepen institutional 
reform. We will make consistent efforts to improve the 
socialist market economy. We will unswervingly 
strengthen and develop the public sector side of the 
economy and also unswervingly encourage, support 
and guide the development of the non-public sector. 
We will pay greater attention to ensuring and 
improving people’s well-being. We will further reform 
the income distribution system and improve the social 
security system, including old-age support, medical 
care and unemployment benefit programmes. We will 
endeavour to narrow the gap between urban and rural 
areas, between different regions and between the rich 
and the poor. We want to ensure that each and every 
citizen shares the benefit of China’s reform, opening up 
and development.  
 While deepening economic restructuring, we will 
also push forward with political restructuring. 
Otherwise, we cannot achieve the ultimate goal of 
economic reform and we will lose what we have gained 
from our modernization drive. We respect and protect 
human rights, uphold social equity and justice and 
strive to achieve free and all-around development for 
our people. That is the important hallmark of a 
democratic country under the rule of law and a basic 
guarantee for any country’s lasting peace and stability. 
 China will be even more open to the world. 
Mutually beneficial cooperation for win-win progress 
is a long-term strategy that we will stick to in opening 
up to the world. We will follow established 
international rules in expanding business ties with 
 
 
43 10-54827 
 
other countries. We will continue to improve the 
environment for foreign investors, optimize the 
structure of foreign capital utilization and explore new 
ways for overseas investment and cooperation.  
 We are committed to promoting the establishment 
of a fair, equitable, inclusive and well-managed new 
international financial order and an open and free 
international trading regime. We are against 
protectionism in all its manifestations. In the course of 
modernization, we will not only continue to bring in 
and utilize advanced achievements from the rest of the 
world in the economic, scientific and technological 
fields, but also boldly draw upon the achievements of 
human civilization in the fields of social management 
and cultural development. 
 China will continue to develop education, science 
and technology. How can China narrow the 
development gap with the advanced countries and 
enhance the sustainability of its strong growth? I 
believe two things are of fundamental importance: first 
is education, and second is science and technology. 
China has formulated medium- and long-term 
development programmes on education and on science 
and technology. Going forward, we will focus our 
efforts on implementing those two programmes and 
building China into a country strong in human 
resources and innovation by 2020. 
 China will continue to carry forward its fine 
culture. The development of a country and rejuvenation 
of a nation require not only great economic strength, 
but, more importantly, great cultural strength. The 
moral values and wisdom drawn from the 5,000-year-
old Chinese civilization do not belong to China alone 
but also to the world. We will vigorously develop 
cultural programmes and accelerate the development of 
a moral and ethical code that is commensurate with our 
socialist modernization drive and consistent with the 
traditional virtues of our nation.  
 We respect the diversity of civilizations and will 
increase dialogue and exchanges with other 
civilizations to forge a common cultural bond for 
humanity. The Chinese nation, which has created an 
economic miracle, will create a new cultural splendor 
as well. 
 The world of the twenty-first century is far from 
tranquil, but gone are the days when problems were 
ultimately settled by war. Peace and development 
remain the defining features of our time.  
 China will stay firmly committed to peaceful 
development. One may ask what the essence of 
peaceful development is. It is to foster a peaceful 
international environment for our development and, at 
the same time, contribute to world peace through our 
development. That is something inherent in the concept 
of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
 In the course of development, China will continue 
to take upon itself the duty of promoting the common 
progress and prosperity of mankind. We will seek and 
expand converging interests with other countries. 
China’s development will not harm anyone or pose a 
threat to anyone. There have been Powers who sought 
hegemony once they grew strong. China will never 
follow in their footsteps. 
 China values friendship and also adheres to its 
principles. It firmly upholds its core interests. When it 
comes to sovereignty, national unity and territorial 
integrity, China will not yield or compromise. 
 China will continue to firmly support the leading 
role of the United Nations in international affairs. We 
will, as always, abide by the United Nations Charter 
and fulfil in good faith our obligations under 
international conventions. We will intensify 
cooperation with fellow developing countries and 
support their having a greater say in international 
affairs. We will remain forever a good partner of and 
brother to developing countries. 
 China’s stability and development is conducive to 
a more peaceful international environment, a more 
democratic international order, a more prosperous 
global economy and a more harmonious and civilized 
world. China’s development is an opportunity for the 
world, and the world stands to gain from a China that 
is better off. History will continue to prove that. 
 A China that develops peacefully, a China that is 
full of vigour and vitality and a China that is willing 
and ready to fulfil its responsibilities will always move 
forward together with the world. Let us join hands to 
work for a world of enduring peace and prosperity.It is an 
honour for me to speak to the General Assembly today. 
 The world has changed dramatically since the 
United Nations was founded 65 years ago. 
International trade and exchange are, of course, 
nothing new. What is new, however, is how quickly the 
changes affect everybody’s lives. Only if we in the 
United Nations are and remain able to act can we shape 
these global changes. We will manage to solve 
problems relating to security and economic, social and 
ecological development only if the international 
community stands united. Germany is ready to assume 
global responsibility within the framework of the 
United Nations. 
 Germany’s foreign policy is firmly embedded in 
the international community. In Europe, a system of 
cooperation has replaced the confrontation that cruelly 
divided our continent for centuries. The European 
Union is successful because, in Europe, all peoples and 
States meet on an equal footing. The United Nations, 
too, brings together nations large and small, rich and 
poor, those that are more powerful and those with less 
influence. Cooperation between equals on an equal 
footing is our guiding principle also for work here at 
the United Nations. Each and every country must 
respect all others. 
 German foreign policy is a policy of peace. This 
autumn, Germany will stand for election as a 
non-permanent member of the Security Council 
because the Council is the ideal forum in which to 
cooperate in the cause of peace and development. 
Peace is more than the absence of war. In today’s 
globalized world, people are just as vulnerable to the 
consequences of climate change, poverty and 
underdevelopment as they are to violence and 
oppression. 
 Climate change has a direct impact on each and 
every one of us. Countless people are already 
personally feeling its economic and social 
consequences. In their letter to the Security Council, 
the Pacific island States rightly warned us in no 
uncertain terms just how much climate change 
threatens everyone’s security. Everyone must play their 
 
 
35 10-55103 
 
part to protect the climate. In Germany, we have just 
adopted a forward-looking energy strategy. By the year 
2050, 80 per cent of our electricity production will 
come from renewable sources. Germany has also 
pledged to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 40 per 
cent by the year 2020, compared to the 1990 baseline. 
Even now, we have reduced our carbon dioxide 
emissions by almost 30 per cent. We are pioneers in the 
field of climate protection. We are helping those who 
are now most adversely affected by climate change. We 
are particularly concerned about the fate of small 
island States. 
 Anyone who is serious about combating climate 
change has to build on innovation, new technologies 
and exchange. Developed and developing nations alike 
can profit from cooperation on future energies. 
Germany will contribute its technological expertise, for 
example, in the fields of renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. In this way, we are turning the challenge of 
climate change into an opportunity for fair 
development and enhanced cooperation. Climate policy 
is a cornerstone of any sustainable development policy. 
The recent summit on the Millennium Development 
Goals laid down the next steps forward in our global 
partnership for development. 
 Education is the key to development. 
Development needs education. Education protects 
people from discrimination and oppression. Education 
fights prejudice and thereby fosters peace. Education 
also creates products and markets; education is the path 
to prosperity. The true wealth of many nations is no 
longer found in their raw materials but in the minds of 
their people. Education is a human right. It is because 
education will determine whether societies succeed or 
fail in tomorrow’s world that Germany is one of the 
major international partners for learning. By building 
on education, we are building bridges to the future for 
the young people of today. 
 The United Nations itself must also keep up with 
the pace of change. Today’s world order is not properly 
reflected if Africa and Latin America are not 
permanently represented on the Security Council. Asia, 
too, rightly considers itself to be underrepresented. The 
entire continent, not just individual States, is 
developing at breathtaking speed. We take our 
partnerships seriously, both the old and the new. 
Germany, too, remains ready to assume greater 
responsibility. 
 Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are 
not issues of the past but challenges of our time. 
Disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are two 
sides of the same coin. We have to do all we possibly 
can to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not 
become the bane of globalization. Unlike the Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons five years ago, 
this May’s Review Conference was a success. If we 
work together to maintain this momentum, it will be in 
our power to ensure that this decade does not see a 
build-up of arms but becomes a decade of 
disarmament. A world without nuclear weapons is a 
long-term vision, but even a marathon begins with the 
first step. 
 There is now movement in the disarmament 
debate. The group of States founded here in New York 
on Wednesday to advance disarmament and arms 
control does not stand alone. For over 10 years, the 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva was not even 
able to agree on an agenda. That is not the way to live 
up to our shared responsibility. We met yesterday at the 
invitation of the Secretary-General to break the 
deadlock binding the Geneva Conference. Our world 
will be a more secure place when the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force and the 
production of fissile material is ended once and for all. 
 German peace policy stands for the peaceful 
settlement of regional conflicts. Germany is doing its 
utmost to ensure that the direct talks between Israel 
and the Palestinians are a success. We will continue to 
strengthen the forces of reason and reconciliation. 
During this vital period for the peace process in 
particular, I urge both sides to refrain from taking any 
action that might block the path to peace. We condemn 
any form of violence that has the sole aim of 
torpedoing the peace talks. At the same time, we call 
for the moratorium on settlement construction to be 
extended. Lasting peace will be achieved only through 
a two-State solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State 
living peacefully side by side within secure borders. 
 Iran, like every other country, naturally has the 
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
However, the Tehran leadership itself has sown doubt 
about the civilian nature of its nuclear programme. 
Iran, by demonstrating openness and transparency, can 
allay that doubt. Our offer of dialogue still stands. It is 
now up to Iran to grasp our outstretched hand. 
  
 
10-55103 36 
 
 The conference aimed at establishing a zone free 
of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, 
planned for 2012, will be a major opportunity to 
strengthen peace and security in the region. Germany is 
encouraging all countries in the region to take part to 
ensure that the conference is a success. We are 
committed to a nuclear-weapon-free Middle East. 
 Germany is one of the major supporters of a 
peaceful and secure Afghanistan. As we agreed in 
London and Kabul, we want to transfer security 
responsibility for the whole of Afghanistan to the 
Afghan Government by 2014. To make progress in that 
country, so long ravaged by war and civil strife, 
effective measures must be taken to prevent the 
violence. However, military means alone will not bring 
success. We favour a comprehensive approach and 
above all a political solution. All sides now need the 
courage and the stamina to engage in reconciliation. 
 The German Government assists when people 
anywhere in the world are struck by natural disasters 
and emergencies. However, a country’s conscience is 
to be found in the hearts of its citizens. I am proud that 
my fellow Germans donate so generously at times of 
greatest need. Humanity and solidarity are global 
values; humanity and solidarity make no distinction 
based on skin colour or religious beliefs. When the 
tsunami devastated coastlines around the Indian Ocean, 
when the Haiti earthquake destroyed the work of 
decades, or just recently, when the horrific floods in 
Pakistan left havoc in their wake, we Germans shared 
the victims’ pain and helped in the most heartfelt way 
possible. We will stand by Pakistan over the coming 
months and years to ensure that the country has a 
promising economic future. 
 We are working towards a peaceful order in the 
Sudan, now and after the referendum early next year. 
We are looking for ways of achieving stable conditions 
in Yemen and are particularly active in the Friends of 
Yemen group. We are working hard to combat piracy 
off the Horn of Africa and to bring peace and stability 
to Somalia. 
 Reconstruction efforts in devastated regions 
cannot bring success overnight. Similarly, for societies 
torn by war and civil strife, the route to life in dignity 
leads through peace and reconciliation. There can be 
true peace only when human rights are respected. For 
us, such principles as the rule of law, freedom of 
opinion, freedom of the press and respect for 
inalienable human rights are essential. The protection 
of human rights remains a task for all societies. 
 It is a fundamental tenet of the United Nations 
that women determine their own lives and help decide 
the fate of their countries. Ethnic or religious 
minorities enrich their societies. Tolerance is one of 
Germany’s guiding principles. Everyone wins in the 
competition for the best ideas; in a clash of cultures, 
there can only be losers. 
 United Europe can make a valuable contribution 
on our continent and beyond. Germany is working to 
ensure that, in the future, the European Union shall 
cooperate even more closely with other regions in 
Latin America, Africa and Asia, and live up to its 
global responsibility. Germany is the third-largest 
development cooperation donor. We have practically 
recovered from the financial and economic crisis and 
are on the right track due to our robust economic 
growth. This strong economy makes Germany a strong 
global partner. 
 If all countries, small and large, work together, 
we will be able to master the pressing challenges of our 
world. 
They can count on Germany. They can rely on 
Germany. I 
come to this rostrum on behalf of France to express my 
sincere and fervent faith in the United Nations. 
France’s ambition is to be a major actor in building a 
system of global governance that is more just, more 
cohesive, more social, and a global order that is 
organized and regulated around a stronger, more 
representative and more effective United Nations — a 
United Nations capable of meeting the great challenges 
of our century. 
 I look out upon the Assembly. I know many of 
those present here today. For 25 years now — even 
more — I have been going up and down the corridors 
of the United Nations because I like the United 
Nations, because I believe in the United Nations, and 
because I know it to be indispensable. 
 I would like to speak to the Assembly candidly. I 
am going to talk about men and women, suffering and 
hope. I am going to talk about responsibility, because 
we have responsibilities as citizens, diplomats and 
political leaders to meet these sufferings, hopes and 
expectations. 
 Of course, all of us would have an infinite 
number of reasons to present a litany of generous 
intentions, only to go home, our conscience clear, for 
what we had said a little while before to the Assembly 
and then go back to our day-to-day problems at home. 
Of course, after the terrible economic crisis from which 
we have barely emerged, we have to live with reduced 
budgets and tense socio-economic situations. The times 
are difficult and our fellow citizens are worried. The 
temptation to retreat exists. Of course, to correct the 
large imbalances and injustices that undermine our 
society and to fight for the planet’s security and 
development, we can always count on others. But 
which others? There are no “others”. We are all here, 
the nations of the world, represented in the General 
Assembly, and we only have to decide together to act. 
 Not acting today would be to resign ourselves to 
disorder, injustice and chaos. That choice will never be 
France’s because it is not in keeping with our history, 
or our values, or our interests. Faced with disorder in 
the world, the greatest risk today would be to lapse into 
routine. Please do not tell me that we cannot move 
forward, that the situation is at an impasse. No, in the 
past, we have been able together, collectively, to be 
revolutionary on fundamental subjects, even at the 
expense of the national sovereignties which we all 
represent here. 
 Recall our boldness here in 1988, General 
Assembly resolution 43/131, and then two years later, 
resolution 45/100, on humanitarian assistance to 
victims of natural disasters and similar emergency 
situations. These resolutions allowed us for the first 
time to guarantee free access of humanitarian workers 
to the affected regions. Then there was Security 
Council 688 (1991) (5 April 1991) on the situation in 
Kurdistan, where, for the first time, the door was 
opened to a military operation to protect civilian 
populations against an oppressor State. 
 These were two historic moments which laid the 
first markers of the right to intervene. This became the 
responsibility to protect, which this Assembly adopted 
by consensus at the 2005 World Summit (see resolution 
60/1). Who could have imagined that such an upending 
of international law would be possible? The fight was 
long and difficult; it is not over — far from it. To speak 
candidly to the Assembly, the results are not 
completely what I had expected. But we must note that, 
together, we were able to overcome some obstacles 
which were supposed to be insurmountable. Let 
nothing stop us from taking up subjects which we 
decide on together. 
 Our first shared responsibility is development — 
to make sure that all men and women, including the 
most impoverished, have decent living conditions. The 
widening gap of inequalities is not only morally 
unacceptable, it is politically dangerous. Of course, it 
is costly to act, but the cost of inaction is even greater. 
 The conclusions of the High-level Meeting on the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that we just 
held place our responsibilities squarely before us. This 
 
 
37 10-55122 
 
is an urgent matter. We can no longer ask suffering 
populations to continue to wait. 
 The President of the French Republic, Nicolas 
Sarkozy, reminded the Assembly of this fact, that France 
is the second largest global donor of official 
development assistance — €9 billion per annum — 
targeted to education, health, food security, sanitation 
and infrastructure. France’s commitment to development 
will not slacken, but figures do not make a policy. Our 
assistance must be judged according to its results. We 
need to go further and move faster for children dying of 
malaria — one every 30 seconds — for entire families 
stricken by AIDS, and for all those who are hungry or 
cannot go to school. 
 I ask the Assembly: what planet do we wish to 
leave as a legacy to our children? Will we be able to 
make an ambitious decision to combat climate change 
and preserve our environment? This is a subject that 
concerns us all and requires a global partnership, one 
where we aspire to find an agreement on both reducing 
emissions and measures to be taken in order to adapt. 
And we must, first and foremost, ensure that the 
commitments undertaken will be implemented and that 
follow-up mechanisms and effective institutions will be 
put in place. 
 For all of this, we must find a great deal of 
money — several tens of billions of dollars per year — 
for us and our planet. Let us provide the means to 
realize our ambitions. The solutions are here, within 
reach; they have proved to be effective and await only 
our political will and our courage. They are called 
innovative financing. The tax on airline tickets was a 
step forward, a long time in coming. Today we should 
go farther by adopting an international tax on financial 
transactions which would permanently change matters 
for development. It is an idea that I have been 
defending for more than 20 years. It is a priority for 
France now. The President alluded to it here a few days 
ago. 
 Bear in mind that a minute tax of 0.005 per cent, 
that is five cents on a transaction of €1,000, could raise 
€30 billion to €40 billion per year, almost one quarter 
of official development assistance. Who could deny 
that this is a stable and predictable way of raising a 
massive amount for development? Even with half of 
that amount, it would be possible to send every child to 
school in the low-income countries. Everyone agrees 
today that it is technically and economically feasible to 
establish such a mechanism. 
 And, make no mistake; we are not talking about 
diminishing official development assistance or dodging 
our responsibilities. No, on the contrary, this amount 
would come as an addition. And so we must not waste 
time, we are together, this is what we established this 
institution for, this institution, unparalleled in history, 
called the United Nations. 
 It is now a universally recognized principle that 
development cannot occur without peace and security, 
which are the basic raison d’être of the United Nations. 
Here, the challenges remain considerable. Afghanistan, 
Somalia, the Sudan, the Middle East — so many 
conflicts continue to feed chaos throughout the world. 
 How many missed opportunities, how many 
dashed hopes, how many misunderstandings have for 
more than 60 years — I repeat, 60 years — marked this 
process, peaceful in name only, in the Middle East? 
The Arab-Israeli conflict concerns us all. I say Arab-
Israeli because, besides the Palestinian track, France 
considers it just as important to work on the Lebanese 
and Syrian tracks. Today we have before us a historic 
opportunity. We cannot let it slip. 
 The process almost stopped yesterday evening. I 
am not sure that it will continue in an orderly way and 
with unanimous support. I hope it will. We have 
limited time remaining. Palestine, the new State 
Member of the United Nations which many of us have 
been calling for, will be, I hope, the best guarantee of 
security for Israel. 
 All States in the region have a critical role to 
play. All of that is important, but what is necessary is 
that the Israelis and Palestinians make a strategic 
decision to put an end to this conflict in their own 
interests. I would therefore call on the sense of 
responsibility of President Abbas and Prime Minister 
Netanyahu; together they must make the painful 
compromises on the road to peace. 
 I have said that I have faith in the United Nations. 
I served the United Nations, as perhaps you know, in 
Kosovo and in a number of other places. I know, 
respect and deeply love the men and women who give 
life to the United Nations. From this rostrum, I wish to 
pay tribute with emotion, affection and respect, to all 
those who, in serving the United Nations, take risks 
every day for our shared ideal of peace and 
  
 
10-55122 38 
 
development. I think of all the friends we have lost — 
and the friends we may still lose — year after year, 
and, of course, of those who take their place. 
 The fight is noble. Respect for the values and 
universal principles of human rights constitutes the 
indispensable foundation on which United Nations 
action must be built. The ambition to build a world 
order founded on universal respect for human dignity 
has been and will always be at the heart of French 
diplomacy. 
 Have we collectively progressed in our service of 
these values? Not enough. How long will we continue 
to accept — now that we live in a so-called 
information society, a world where people can know 
what is happening in other places — that, in terms of 
human rights, there are so many blind spots, so many 
forgotten tragedies and so much suffering that remain 
hidden? As I asked at the beginning, what has become 
of the responsibility to protect? 
 Today the success of the United Nations must 
first of all be assessed in terms of its contribution to 
the protection of civilians. That is the first area in 
which our requirements should be upheld. Every day 
massacres and rapes are committed throughout the 
world, in Somalia, in Darfur and in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, including in regions where 
peacekeeping operations are deployed. 
 We can no longer simply count the victims when 
mass crimes are committed. Our courage must not be 
less than that of those who die from risks that we no 
longer know how to take. 
 France believes that the International Criminal 
Court is one of the most important advances made in 
the history of a humankind conscious of the dangers to 
which it is exposed by its own demons. France 
understands the criticism of those that believe that the 
Court is too slow or that it goes too far. Let us be clear, 
France will always support the idea of international 
criminal justice that is impartial and universal, for it is 
the only way of fulfilling the imperative dictated by 
our history, namely, combating impunity. To all who 
are shocked by the boldness of some of the Court’s 
prosecutions, I say that, on the contrary, it would be 
appalling if the victims were deprived of their right to 
justice. 
 Human rights, the protection of civilians, 
international justice — these are not hollow concepts 
or empty principles for us. For France, they are first 
and foremost principles of action, and the only valid 
criterion for judgement is the impact of our actions on 
the actual situation. 
 In Guinea, after the killings in the Conakry 
stadium, on 28 September 2009, we came together to 
denounce the human rights violations and to assist the 
victims of the atrocities committed. The Secretary-
General dispatched an International Commission of 
Inquiry to the field one month after the fact, and I 
would like to once again thank him sincerely for that. 
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court 
instituted proceedings. That pressure enabled Guinean 
civil society in the field to make the difference. Today 
the junta has been replaced by a transitional executive. 
Nothing has been won. There will be a second round of 
elections in two weeks. But I wanted to recall this 
success of the United Nations since at the beginning I 
said that the responsibility to protect was threatened. I 
think we can all agree that there is a movement 
forming in civil society throughout the world and that 
we can still take action.The nations 
represented here know how deeply the world has 
changed in the six and a half decades since the United 
Nations was formed; since the spirit of international 
citizenship, of peoples and nations combining their 
energies to solve our shared problems, gave birth to the 
United Nations. Today, that spirit is needed more than 
ever. 
 All of us have to respond to a world that is 
profoundly altered. As a community of nations, we face 
three profound challenges: a redrawing of the map of 
power, including a big shift in economic power; the 
globalization of problems, not least terrorism and 
climate change; and increasingly fluid forms of identity 
and the rapid circulation and potency of new ideas. 
Taken together, these mean that we are in a new world. 
All three demand matching responses. So we must 
reform and renew our multilateral institutions in line 
with the changing map of power, strengthen our actions 
on international peacebuilding, climate change and 
development, and promote liberal values and human 
rights to win the conflict of ideas. 
 The truth is that in all three of these areas we are 
not doing anything like as well as we must. The 
effectiveness of multilateral approaches is in question 
in the wake of the financial crisis, the failure of the 
climate change talks in Copenhagen and the stalling of 
the Doha Trade Round. And too many nations and 
international institutions have been too reticent about 
promoting enlightened human values. We need to inject 
new life into our institutions and new confidence into 
the expression of our ideals. 
 Turning first to the altered geography of power, it 
is an often-stated fact that the old economic order is 
being transformed and that what were once labelled 
emerging economies are now, in many cases, global 
economic players. The distribution of military power, 
too, is altering, so power is being wielded in different 
places and in different ways. This power shift requires 
us to reform our international institutions, to reinforce 
the rule of international law, and to free up 
international trade. 
 In recent years, our multinational institutions 
have sometimes struggled to adapt to the new 
circumstances, so reform is essential. And a good place 
to start is right here at the United Nations. The Security 
Council must be reformed to reflect the new geography 
of power. The United Kingdom is clear and 
unambiguous in our support for permanent seats for 
Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and for African 
representation. Put simply, the United Nations cannot 
speak for the many if it only hears the voices of the 
few. We welcome the priority that the President has 
promised to give to the Assembly’s continuing 
negotiations on this issue. 
 Closer cooperation on counter-terrorism is also 
vital, and we welcome the Assembly’s affirmation of 
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 
We must stand shoulder to shoulder in the struggle 
against terrorism. 
 The United Kingdom will always champion the 
United Nations. If it did not exist, we would have to 
invent it. But let us be frank. Without a radical 
overhaul, the United Nations will not provide the 
leadership the world seeks from it and needs from it. It 
is also important that the vital role of the European 
Union in promoting development and prosperity be 
adequately represented in the Assembly. 
 The redrawing of the power map also makes it 
even more important that the writ of international law 
extend across the world. Laws are the solid 
representation of our collective values. That is why it is 
so important that we uphold and reinforce the 
instruments of international justice, including the 
International Criminal Court and specific tribunals, 
such as those for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.  
 I strongly welcome the comments of President 
Obama yesterday on the vital importance of the Middle 
East peace process. I can assure the Assembly that the 
United Kingdom is committed to helping lead to the 
end of hostilities that have been so profoundly 
damaging for all sides. 
 The prevention of nuclear-weapons proliferation 
is another huge priority for the international 
community. The United Kingdom welcomes the 
success of the Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
this May, and I can assure the Assembly that we will 
continue to play our part in making the world safer 
from the threat of nuclear weapons. 
 I was ready today to welcome the progress made 
in this week’s meeting of the E3+3 group on Iran. I 
was ready to also straightforwardly reiterate our 
 
 
27 10-54959 
 
concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme. But instead, 
once again, an issue of grave global concern has been 
overshadowed by the bizarre, offensive and attention-
grabbing pronouncements by President Ahmadinejad 
from this rostrum yesterday. His remarks were intended 
to distract attention from Iran’s obligations and to 
generate media headlines. They deserve to do neither. 
 The reshaped world of power also increases the 
need to open our borders to free trade. A trading world 
is a safer world. A world trade deal, which is within 
reach, would be worth $170 billion annually to the 
world economy. Two years ago we were very close, but 
we failed to seal the deal. We simply cannot afford 
protectionism. Today, we have to recognize that we 
will need an even more ambitious deal than we 
envisaged then if we are to get an agreement. Greater 
access to markets, particularly for least developed 
countries’ exports of agriculture, supports growth and 
reduces poverty. 
 The second of the three big shifts we have to 
adapt to is the globalization of many of our problems 
and of many of the solutions to those problems. Our 
economies are, of course, tied ever more closely 
together, as recent events have dramatically proven. 
Prosperity and poverty in one part of the world impact 
on economic activity and security elsewhere. 
 Diseases can span the globe in a matter of days. 
Terrorism is conducted by international networks 
across the world. Environmental threats do not respect 
borders. We are used to thinking about stateless people. 
We have to get used to the idea of stateless problems, 
too. Conflict takes place between, across and within 
national boundaries, but wherever it takes place it can 
threaten the interests of all nations. Conflict 
undermines our collective prosperity and destroys 
development. We must work harder to prevent conflict 
by tackling the sources of violence. And where conflict 
does break out, we must be ready to help resolve it.  
 So let me take this opportunity to acknowledge 
the invaluable contribution of United Nations 
peacekeepers to laying the foundations for sustainable 
peace around the world. We owe them all, and the 
Governments that provide them, a great debt of 
gratitude. The United Kingdom, along with France and 
other partners, has been at the forefront of supporting 
and encouraging United Nations efforts to deliver more 
strategic and effective peacekeeping. We will continue 
to provide that support.  
 But peacekeeping alone is not the answer. We 
need peacebuilding, too. The United Nations is 
uniquely placed not only to keep the peace, but also to 
make it last. Effective peacebuilding can address the 
underlying causes of conflict and strengthen local, 
regional and national capacity to contribute to long-
term stability in fragile States. 
 The coming year will see some significant 
challenges to the United Nations efforts to promote 
international peace, justice and security: in the Sudan, 
where we will see a referendum on the future of 
Southern Sudan, while continuing to look for progress 
on justice in Darfur and more widely; in Somalia, 
where the African Union peacekeeping mission is 
playing a brave and crucial role, and where the 
leadership of the United Nations could be decisive; and 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where much 
progress has been made but where we have seen again 
in recent weeks how much more remains to be done to 
achieve real security and stability for many of its hard-
pressed people. 
 The United Kingdom remains fully committed to 
the mission to bring peace and prosperity to 
Afghanistan. Afghans are increasingly taking 
responsibility for their own affairs. This year’s Kabul 
Conference and, most recently, parliamentary elections 
have demonstrated Afghan commitment. Challenges 
remain, but progress is being made. The United 
Kingdom will continue to work with its international 
partners to support Afghans to build a better 
Afghanistan. 
 The United Kingdom is wholehearted in our 
support for international development. Like many 
nations, we are having to take tough action to reduce 
our financial deficits, but we are not budging a 
millimetre from our commitment to development. We 
are standing by our promise to devote 0.7 per cent of 
gross national income to international development 
assistance from 2013, and we will enshrine this 
commitment in law. 
 When disaster strikes, we must respond quickly 
and generously. Right now, Pakistan faces a 
humanitarian disaster of unimaginable proportions. As 
the Secretary-General has said, this is the largest 
disaster in the 65-year history of the United Nations. 
So we must ensure that the United Nations appeal is 
properly funded to cover both humanitarian relief and 
reconstruction, and we must ensure that there is enough 
  
 
10-54959 28 
 
support over the long term, not least in helping 
Pakistan to achieve the levels of economic growth that 
will allow the country to rebuild itself. I am very 
proud, as the representative of a European Union (EU) 
member State, that the EU has recently shown real 
leadership in promising to look at improving trade 
access for Pakistan in response to the disaster. I very 
much hope that others can follow suit. 
 So, economic power has shifted and problems 
have globalized, but at the same time the power of 
ideas has grown enormously. Identities have become 
more fluid. It is not possible to put people into neatly 
labelled national boxes any more. This means that 
winning the battle of ideas is as important as military 
prowess. 
 The work of international institutions must 
continue to be guided by the values on which those 
institutions were founded: the rule of law, both 
domestic and international; the right to freedom of 
expression and belief; democracy; and equality before 
the law. These values are sometimes described as 
Western values, but only by people who do not know 
their history. Four centuries ago, the great Mughal 
emperor Akbar was legislating for religious freedom 
and equality in what is now India, while in parts of 
Europe heretics were being burned at the stake. The 
truth is that these liberal values of equality, law and 
self-determination cannot be claimed by any nation or 
hemisphere. They are global values with global force. 
They are also the values at the heart of the United 
Nations Charter. 
 We should never apologize for promoting the idea 
that women and men are equal; never flinch from 
insisting that Governments chosen by their people are 
better; never shy away from our insistence that nobody 
should be silenced because of their religion or beliefs. 
 The United Kingdom will therefore continue to 
push for human rights across the world. Since the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 
1948, the United Nations has developed a global legal 
framework of human rights standards. We want to see 
the Human Rights Council do more to ensure that 
States implement their obligations and use the 2011 
review to improve the Council’s ability to respond 
effectively to situations of concern, such as the 
outrageous abuse of democracy and human rights in 
Burma. 
 United Kingdom foreign policy will be shaped by 
the three big challenges I have set out today: a power 
shift, the globalization of problems, and the rapid 
circulation and potency of ideas. The United Kingdom 
Government will fearlessly promote our ideals and 
interests while remaining realistic in our approach. 
 This is the spirit in which the United Kingdom 
Government is conducting a root-and-branch review of 
our own strategic defence and security policy. Our last 
review took place in 1998, but the world has changed, 
along with the character of the threats we face. This is 
not to say that we did not face grave threats before, but 
they were more fixed, more visible and more 
predictable. Today, the threats to our security are not 
rooted in specific States. They are more fluid and often 
less visible: terrorism, organized crime, or attacks from 
cyberspace. We must judge our security not by our 
ability to deal with what we know, but how able we are 
to respond to unpredictable threats. 
 The United Kingdom will also show leadership 
by example. As fierce advocates of the international 
rule of law, we will practice what we preach. No nation 
can insist on the law and then act as though it is above 
it. But our approach will also be hard-headed and 
realistic. In recent years we have learned — in same 
cases the hard way — that democracy cannot be 
created by diktat. Freedom cannot be commanded into 
existence. 
 The new coalition Government, now five-months 
old, will restore Britain’s international reputation by 
pursuing a hard-headed foreign policy based on liberal 
values.  
 The world has changed, but the values that should 
guide us have not. We have to renew our international 
institutions in line with the new realities of world 
power and influence, and fearlessly project the ideals 
of democracy, equality and freedom. Great things are 
demanded of us. Great things are necessary from us. It 
falls to our generation of leaders to meet these 
challenges together.Allow me to begin by 
congratulating you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly and by assuring you of the 
full cooperation of my delegation. In the interest of 
saving the Assembly’s valuable time, I will read out 
only part of my address, the full text of which has been 
circulated.  
 The United Nations was created, 65 years ago, to 
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, 
to affirm faith in fundamental rights, to establish 
conditions under which respect for international law 
can be maintained and to promote social progress and 
better standards of life in larger freedom. Six and a half 
decades later, globalization has made the world a much 
smaller place. It has also created conditions whereby 
the problems and challenges of one country or region 
can very quickly become those of the larger community 
of nations. 
 Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction, maritime piracy, pandemics and 
epidemics, organized crime and narcotics smuggling 
recognize no borders or boundaries. Similarly, the 
fallout of intra-State conflicts, failed States, climate 
change, natural disasters, food shortages and financial 
and economic crises transcend countries and regions. 
Under those circumstances the international 
community looks to the United Nations to overcome 
the common challenges of humankind through the 
harmonized actions of nations, as stated in the Charter. 
 The United Nations is the only organization that 
can be at the centre of an international governance 
system. However, it needs urgent reform to reflect 
contemporary realities and to effectively meet 
emerging global challenges. The first step has to be the 
reform of the Security Council. The overwhelming 
majority of the membership has been clear in seeking 
an expansion in both the permanent and non-permanent 
categories of membership. It is imperative that we 
bring the negotiations to an early and logical 
conclusion. 
 We must also truly revitalize the General 
Assembly. It must reclaim its position on vital matters 
such as the appointment of the Secretary-General and 
the relationship between the United Nations and the 
Bretton Woods institutions. Along with the Economic 
and Social Council, the General Assembly should also 
set the paradigms of multilateral engagement for the 
global economy and for development and 
developmental cooperation.  
 It is matter of much satisfaction that this year we 
have significantly advanced the United Nations reform 
agenda in the areas of gender equality and women’s 
empowerment. I wish to reiterate our strong 
commitment to UN Women and to its strengthening.  
 We also need to ensure that the review of the 
Human Rights Council this year adds to the Council’s 
role as an effective, credible and premier United 
Nations mechanism dealing with human rights.  
 My Government accords the highest priority to 
the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. 
Our development challenges were exacerbated by the 
financial and economic crisis that started in 2008. 
Acting in concert, the Group of 20 (G-20), which 
includes the largest developed and developing 
countries, reacted promptly and purposefully to stem 
the global slowdown and send a strong message of 
confidence and stability. India believes that the  
G-20 — the premier forum for international economic 
  
 
10-55396 4 
 
cooperation — can help catalyse strong, balanced and 
sustainable growth for the benefit of everyone. 
 As a country vulnerable to, and already suffering 
from, the impacts of climate change, India has an 
important stake in the success of ongoing international 
negotiations in that regard. There is no substitute to the 
United Nations-led process, with its inherent 
inclusiveness and transparency, to lead us to an 
ambitious and equitable outcome that respects the 
provisions and principles of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in 
particular the principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities. It is 
important that there be acceptance of equal sharing of 
the resource of the atmosphere for all human beings. 
 India has an abiding commitment to achieve 
universal and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament 
within a specified time frame — a vision that was most 
eloquently articulated in the Assembly by Prime 
Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1988. More than two decades 
later, that goal still remains distant. Meanwhile, newer 
threats have emerged, including the danger of terrorists 
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. 
 India introduced a working paper on nuclear 
disarmament in 2006, which contained specific 
proposals that reflect the spirit and substance of the 
Rajiv Gandhi action plan. We call for an intensification 
of discussion and dialogue among Member States and 
the larger non-governmental community, so as to 
strengthen an international consensus that can be 
translated into concrete action to achieve nuclear 
disarmament.  
 India remains committed to the negotiations in 
the Conference on Disarmament on a multilateral,  
non-discriminatory and internationally verifiable fissile 
material cut-off treaty that meets India’s national 
security interests. We hope that the Conference will be 
able to commence negotiations at an early date. We 
remain committed to a unilateral and voluntary 
moratorium on nuclear-explosives testing. 
 Terrorism has emerged as one of the most serious 
threats to international peace and security. To defeat it, 
it is imperative for the global community to build on 
international cooperation and take concerted action 
against terrorists and their sponsors. There can be no 
justification for terrorism, just as there can be no good 
or bad terrorists. We urge Member States to display the 
necessary political will to finalize and adopt the 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
 Peace and stability in South Asia is one of our 
highest priorities. We are committed to good-
neighbourly relations with all our neighbours, 
including Pakistan. In that spirit of solidarity with the 
people of Pakistan in their hour of need we pledged 
$25 million in aid, which is being channelled through 
the United Nations for flood relief efforts in that 
country. As a neighbour, we wish to provide succour 
and relief in a timely manner to the victims of that 
natural disaster. We are saddened by the loss of life and 
property that Pakistan has suffered as a result of the 
unprecedented floods. 
 It is well known that many countries have deep-
rooted concerns about the growth and consolidation of 
militancy and terrorism in Pakistan. We share those 
concerns, particularly because Jammu and Kashmir, 
which is an integral part of India, has been the target of 
such Pakistan-sponsored militancy and terrorism for 
many years now. Pakistan must fulfil its solemn 
commitment not to allow territory under its control to 
be used for terrorism directed against India. Credible 
and firm action by Pakistan against terrorist groups 
operating from its soil is in the interest of the region, as 
it is in Pakistan’s own interest.  
 Pakistan cannot impart lessons to us on 
democracy and human rights. If, however, Pakistan 
were to live up to its commitment not to allow the use 
of territory under its control by terrorists acting against 
India, that would significantly help reduce the trust 
deficit that impedes the development of better bilateral 
relations between our two countries. We are 
neighbours, and as neighbours we have an obligation to 
work together. 
 Afghanistan recently successfully concluded 
parliamentary elections. We believe the international 
community needs to be steadfast in its engagement 
with Afghanistan to ensure the success of its 
reconstruction efforts and its emergence as a 
democratic, pluralistic and prosperous society. The 
continuing existence of safe havens and sanctuaries for 
terrorists beyond Afghanistan’s borders is the major 
impediment to the restoration of peace and security in 
Afghanistan. That should be a primary focus of the 
international community. 
 Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s first Prime 
Minister, said in 1948:  
 
 
5 10-55396 
 
 “The fundamental principles on which the United 
Nations is based are right principles. We believe 
in those fundamental principles and want to help 
the Organization in following these principles.” 
The Government and the more than 1 billion people of 
India have stood by that commitment. I would like to 
solemnly reaffirm our faith in the principles that 
underlie the United Nations, and in the United Nations 
system itself. When I arrived yesterday 
in New York, I received a phone call from the chairman 
of one of the Jewish organizations, who asked me how 
I was coping with all the pressure that is being placed 
on Israel. “Surely”, he said, “it must be very difficult”. 
I recalled an old joke, which tells of five Jews who 
changed the way we see the world: Moses, law is 
everything; Jesus, love is everything; Marx, money is 
everything; Freud, sex is everything; and Einstein, 
everything is relative. So, I told him that everything is 
relative. On one hand, it is very difficult. On the other 
hand, it is easier than before, because now we have a 
stable coalition and a stable Government and we have 
the support of a majority of Israel’s citizens. We are 
ready for a fair solution and we are ready to cooperate 
with the international community. However, we are not 
ready to compromise our national security or the vital 
interests of the State of Israel. 
 At the outset, I want to emphasize that, contrary 
to what is often presented in the international media, 
the political arena in Israel is not divided between 
those who seek peace and those who seek war. 
Everyone wants peace, and the controversy in Israel 
centres on the specific question of how to achieve this 
peace, how to reach security and stability in the region. 
And the question is: why, in the 17 years since we 
signed the Oslo Accords, have we not arrived at a 
comprehensive agreement signifying the end of the 
conflict and the removal of future mutual claims? 
 Despite all of the efforts of all the good people 
with the best of intentions, including Yitzhak Rabin, 
Shimon Peres, Benjamin Netanyahu, Ehud Barak, Ariel 
Sharon and Ehud Olmert; despite the summit meetings 
at Camp David between Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat 
with the presence of former President Bill Clinton; and 
despite the Annapolis Summit between Ehud Olmert 
and Mahmoud Abbas, we are today still in deadlock. 
 In fact, contrary to the prevalent view that the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the heart of the instability 
in the Middle East or is the main reason for the 
region’s numerous conflicts, the reality is entirely 
different. More than 90 per cent of the wars and war 
victims of the Middle East since the Second World War 
did not result from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and 
are in no way connected to Israel. Rather, they stem 
from conflicts involving Muslims or conflicts between 
Arab States. The Iran-Iraq war, the Gulf war, the wars 
between North and South Yemen, the Hama atrocities 
in Syria, and the wars in Algeria and Lebanon — these 
are just a few examples from a list that goes on and on. 
 The second flawed explanation for the 
long-standing conflict between Israel and the 
Palestinians that has gained popularity is that the root 
of the problem is the so-called occupation, the 
settlements in Judea and Samaria and the settlers 
themselves. Only the establishment of an independent 
Palestinian State in Judea, Samaria and Gaza, so the 
argument goes, will ensure peace in the region. 
 It is sufficient to state a number of well-known 
facts in order to refute that claim. First, all of Judea, 
Samaria and Gaza were under Arab control for 
19 years, between 1948 and 1967. During those 
19 years, no one tried to create a Palestinian State. 
Peace agreements were achieved with Egypt and 
Jordan, despite the presence of settlements. And the 
opposite is also true: we evacuated 21 flourishing 
settlements in Gush Katif and transferred more than 
10,000 Jews. And, in return, we have Hamas in power 
and thousands of missiles landing on Sderot and 
southern Israel. 
 Another misguided argument is the claim that the 
Palestinian issue prevents a determined international 
front against Iran. This argument is not only flawed, it 
is completely irresponsible. The same argument could 
be made that the Palestinian issue prevents action on 
North Korea, piracy in Somalia, the humanitarian crisis 
in Sudan or the challenge of Afghanistan. 
 Just as the Khomeini Revolution had nothing to 
do with the Palestinian issue, neither is the Iranian 
decision to develop nuclear weapons related. In truth, 
the connection between Iran and the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflict is precisely the contrary. Iran can exist without 
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizbullah, but the terrorist 
organizations cannot exist without Iran. Relying on 
those proxies, Iran can, at any given time, foil any 
agreement between Israel and the Palestinians or with 
Lebanon. 
 Thus, in searching for a durable agreement with 
the Palestinians, one that will deal with the true roots 
of the conflict and will endure for many years, one 
must understand that, first, the Iranian issue must be 
resolved. One must deal first with the root cause of the 
problem, and not its symptoms. There are, of course, 
yet other problems that must be solved; solving that 
one would not be sufficient, but it is nevertheless a 
necessary condition. 
 
 
9 10-55264 
 
 In trying to resolve the conflict between Israel 
and the Palestinians, we are dealing with two types of 
problems: emotional problems and practical problems. 
That is why the solution must also be a two-stage one. 
 The emotional problems are, first and foremost, 
the utter lack of confidence between the sides and 
issues such as Jerusalem, recognition of Israel as the 
nation-State of the Jewish people, and refugees. Under 
those conditions, we should focus on coming up with a 
long-term intermediate agreement, something that 
could take a few decades. We need to raise an entire 
new generation that will have mutual trust and will not 
be influenced by incitement and extremist messages. 
To achieve a final status agreement, we must 
understand that the primary practical obstacle is the 
friction between the two nations. 
 As is true everywhere, where there are two 
nations, two religions or two languages with competing 
claims to the same land, there is friction and conflict. 
Countless examples of ethnic conflict around the world 
confirm this, whether in the Balkans, the Caucasus, 
Africa, the Far East or the Middle East. Where 
effective separation has been achieved, conflict has 
either been avoided or has been dramatically reduced 
or resolved. Consider the cases of the former Yugoslav 
republics, the split-up of Czechoslovakia and the 
independence of East Timor as cases in point. Thus, the 
guiding principle for a final status agreement must not 
be land-for-peace but rather, exchange of populated 
territory. Let me be very clear: I am not speaking about 
moving populations, but rather about moving borders 
to better reflect demographic realities. 
 This is not an extraordinary insight and is far less 
controversial than some may seek to claim. In fact, 
precisely this notion — that a mismatch between 
borders and nationalities is a recipe for conflict — has 
long been accepted as a virtual truism in the academic 
community. Leading scholars and highly respected 
research institutions have even coined the term “right-
sizing the State” to capture the idea that States and 
nations must be in balance in order to ensure peace. 
This is not a controversial political policy. It is an 
empirical truth. 
 But beyond empirical truth there is historical 
truth, namely, the almost 4,000 years during which the 
Jewish people were born in the land of Israel and 
developed the corpus of ethical and intellectual 
treasures that have been instrumental in the rise of 
Western civilization. The 2,000 years of forced exile 
and interim conquest by Byzantines, Arabs, 
Mamelukes, Ottomans and others cannot and never will 
impair the unbreakable bonds of the Jewish people to 
its homeland. Israel is not only where we are, it is who 
we are. 
 In closing, let me remind everyone in this Hall of 
the quote on the plaza across from the United Nations, 
words spoken in Jerusalem almost 3,000 years ago by 
the Jewish prophet Isaiah: 
 “They shall beat their swords into plowshares and 
their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not 
lift up sword against nation, neither shall they 
learn war any more.” (Isaiah 2:4) 
 Inspired by the deep wisdom embodied in these 
words, let us hope that the path to true peace 
prophesied by Isaiah will guide our two peoples, in two 
nation-States, living in peace and security.It is an honour to 
lead New Zealand’s delegation this year. The opening 
of the General Assembly’s new session is the best 
example there is of the capacity of the United Nations 
to bring us all together. Our discussions here will be 
wide-ranging, but inevitably settle on two main issues: 
global security and sustainable economic development.  
 We want to make our world safer, more secure 
and more prosperous. These goals will require strong 
collective action with a focus on practical outcomes. 
New Zealand is seeking every opportunity to 
contribute. We are a young, small and fair-minded 
country. We depend upon a United Nations that is 
effective and credible. 
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. In 
addition to our indigenous Maori population, we are a 
mix of people from Europe, Asia and the Pacific. Our 
links with Europe are built on history and tradition. 
Within Asia, we are developing ever-stronger economic 
and security relationships. Our future is closely tied to 
both of these regions. We have an equally strong focus 
on our closest neighbours in the South Pacific. New 
Zealand is a Pacific country. Auckland is the largest 
Pasifika city in the world, and a number of Pacific 
countries have more citizens living in New Zealand 
than at home. 
 The security and development of the region is 
New Zealand’s constant preoccupation. It is a matter of 
grave concern that the South Pacific is second only to 
sub-Saharan Africa in terms of lack of progress 
towards the achievement of some of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). We want to see the 
MDGs achieved, and we want to see the wider Pacific 
prosper through good governance and sustainable 
economic development. That is why New Zealand is 
increasingly deploying our development resources 
within its region, since that is where they are most 
needed and where they can be most effective. 
 The development challenges in the Pacific are 
extremely complex, with vulnerable economies and 
challenging environmental circumstances. New 
Zealand has increased and will continue to increase our 
overall level of development assistance, despite 
challenging times for our domestic economy. A higher 
percentage of that larger budget will be focused on our 
region. 
 But money alone is not enough; aid effectiveness 
and donor coordination are vital. Progress will also 
depend on good governance within the region. 
 Next year we will mark the fortieth anniversary 
of the Pacific Islands Forum, the central body for 
regional engagement in the Pacific, which held its first 
meeting in New Zealand in 1971. We will welcome 
leaders from around the region back to New Zealand 
next September to celebrate our achievements over 
40 years and to take stock of the challenges we must 
face in the future. 
 The past year has reinforced the need for better 
disaster management. Just three weeks ago, residents in 
Christchurch woke to the most destructive earthquake 
in New Zealand in 80 years. Miraculously, there was 
no loss of life, but the damage runs into billions of 
dollars and people’s lives and livelihoods were 
affected. Significant aftershocks are still affecting the 
 
 
51 10-54965 
 
population. But less than a month after the earthquake 
hit, roads and buildings have been repaired, tourism 
infrastructure is at almost full capacity, and people’s 
lives are being rebuilt. 
 Others have not been so lucky. The earthquakes 
in Haiti and Chile and the recent flooding in Pakistan 
are reminders of the devastating scale of such disasters. 
The Pacific has been hit hard, too. This month will 
mark the first anniversary of the Pacific tsunami that 
took the lives of 184 people in Samoa, American 
Samoa and Tonga. 
 These events and others demonstrate the 
importance of disaster preparedness, management and 
recovery. New Zealand’s experience with major 
earthquakes has taught us how to mitigate risks, 
enforce strong building codes, and implement effective 
recovery plans. But there will be lessons we should 
learn from this recent experience. We will work with 
the United Nations system, non-governmental 
organizations and other international agencies to 
ensure that those lessons are shared and help others to 
prepare. 
 While development and disaster management are 
crucial to our quest for a safer world, underpinning 
both is security. Peacekeeping is a key responsibility of 
the Organization. Indeed, it is its peacekeeping 
operations that shape perceptions of the United Nations 
for many people around the world. 
 New Zealand is committed to supporting global 
security and United Nations peacekeeping. That is why 
we have been engaged in peacekeeping and peace 
support operations since the 1940s. New Zealand’s 
soldiers, police, engineers, corrections and customs 
officers, doctors and other personnel are today 
involved in 12 operations that span the globe from 
Africa, Afghanistan and the Middle East to Asia and 
the Pacific. 
 One of the clearest examples of New Zealand’s 
commitment to the principles of collective 
responsibility is through the United Nations effort in 
Timor-Leste. Since 1999, New Zealand has been a part 
of every United Nations mission that has served in 
Timor-Leste. We have played a major role in the 
United Nations-sanctioned international military 
operations that restored order there in 1999 and again 
in 2006. Over 6,000 New Zealanders have served in 
Timor in the past decade — a significant undertaking 
for a country of only 4.4 million people. 
 Of course, helping ensure peace and stability in 
our region alone is not enough. New Zealanders are 
among those who have been affected by terrorism, 
killed in the attacks that took place just a few blocks 
away from here in September 2001, and more recently 
in Bali, in London and in Jakarta. 
 The need to respond decisively to those who 
perpetrate such atrocities is a key reason why New 
Zealand has led the provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamyan, Afghanistan, since 2003. We have redeployed 
our special forces to work alongside the Government of 
Afghanistan and the international community to ensure 
that that country does not return to being a safe haven 
for Al-Qaida. We must address the conditions in which 
terrorism thrives. We are increasing our development 
spending in Bamyan and recently placed the Provincial 
Reconstruction Team under civilian leadership for the 
first time. 
 New Zealand is also strongly supportive of 
peacekeeping reform. The expansion in peacekeeping 
since 1990 has been dramatic. Never before has this 
Organization deployed so many missions to such 
complex environments. This expansion has opened up 
discussion of the way the United Nations conducts its 
peacekeeping operations. Clear and achievable 
mandates are needed, progress needs to be better 
monitored, and efficiency needs to be improved. 
 We are also contributing to United Nations efforts 
to strengthen peacebuilding in practice, including the 
need for better participation of women in 
peacebuilding. Of course, the response of the United 
Nations to crises has not always been successful. It is 
for this reason that New Zealand has strongly 
supported the responsibility to protect (R2P). We were 
pleased to contribute to the proposed joint Special 
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide/R2P office and 
look forward to the more comprehensive 
implementation of R2P throughout the United Nations 
system. 
 Effective pursuit of these goals — countering 
terrorism and maintaining peace and security — 
demands coordinated, collective action. The United 
Nations is the best vehicle for that action. New Zealand 
has been, and remains, proud to be a part of that 
community of collective action. In line with that 
commitment, New Zealand is seeking a seat on the 
Security Council for the 2015-2016 term. In doing so, 
  
 
10-54965 52 
 
we will work with others here who want the world to 
be a safer and more prosperous place. 
 This year significant gains have been made in 
global disarmament. New Zealand welcomes the action 
plan adopted at this year’s Non-Proliferation Treaty 
Review Conference, the groundbreaking nuclear 
security summit, and the entry into force of the 
Convention on Cluster Munitions. These are tangible 
and practical successes. But we still face some 
significant challenges. New Zealand is concerned by 
the continuing inertia of the Conference on 
Disarmament. The Secretary-General’s High-level 
Meeting on disarmament this morning was a valuable 
step in acknowledging this problem and trying to find a 
way forward. 
 As a country that prides itself on sustainable 
development, New Zealand is also greatly concerned 
about global environmental issues. As well as working 
towards an outcome in Cancún, we are involved in 
practical projects for addressing climate change. One 
such project is the Global Research Alliance on 
Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Fourteen per cent of 
worldwide greenhouse-gas emissions come from 
agriculture. At the same time, there are projections that 
world food production needs to increase by 50 per cent 
in the next 20 years, and to double in the next 40 years, 
to feed a growing world. 
 Clearly, we need a scientific breakthrough to help 
meet the challenge of producing more food while 
reducing emissions. New Zealand formed the Alliance, 
which now includes more than 30 agricultural nations, 
to find ways to address this problem. Scientists and 
researchers are now linking up across the world to try 
to balance the need for increased agricultural 
production with the need to address climate change. 
This is just one example of how countries can come 
together to address climate change in a very real way. 
 When I was here a year ago, we were watching to 
see whether the world would be able to climb out of 
the global economic recession. Much progress has been 
made and key economic indicators are generally 
pointing in the right direction. The rapid and 
coordinated international response, including by the 
Group of 20, has been effective. The World Trade 
Organization’s rules-based trading system has held up 
well. But, like many countries, New Zealand is 
frustrated that the conclusion of the Doha Development 
Round still eludes us. 
 Over these last few days, especially in the context 
of discussion of progress towards the Millennium 
Development Goals, I have heard many fine words 
spoken in support of the world’s disadvantaged. I take 
this opportunity to remind those speakers and countries 
that the single most effective step that could be taken 
to advance the position of the world’s disadvantaged 
would be to create a framework within which they can 
trade themselves to a better future. 
 I want to strongly endorse President Obama’s 
statement, made yesterday, that there is no viable 
alternative to the resolution of conflict in the Middle 
East other than two States, Israel and Palestine, living 
side by side in peace and security. We believe that 
direct negotiations, with both parties at the table, are 
the only way to resolve the conflict. We congratulate 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu on 
having the courage to negotiate in very difficult 
circumstances. We ask that Israel heed the international 
community’s unanimous call to extend the moratorium 
on settlements and create the enabling atmosphere that 
will allow direct negotiations to continue. 
 We also agree with President Obama that 
resolution of the Middle East conflict is not just the 
responsibility of Israel and Palestine. Countries in the 
region especially, but also countries elsewhere, must 
work towards Middle East peace. New Zealand, as a 
friend of both Israel and Palestine, will play its part. I 
recently visited the Sinai, where a New Zealand officer 
has command of the Multinational Force and 
Observers. I was reminded that there has been peace 
between Israel and Egypt for more than 30 years, a 
prospect once unthinkable. With the commitment of the 
two parties and the support of the international 
community, Israel and Palestine can enjoy the same 
freedom from conflict. We all have a huge stake in 
achieving that objective. Resolution of the Palestinian 
question would tear out the fuse that threatens to ignite 
conflict in the Middle East and beyond. 
 So today we add our voice to that of President 
Obama and of others who believe that this dispute can, 
and must, be solved. And we call on all Members of 
the United Nations to lend their support to this process 
in the critical weeks ahead.The current, sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly has started with an unprecedented 
number of events covering the full range of the most 
topical international issues. It is encouraging that, in 
the light of the numerous challenges facing mankind, a 
positive unified platform for collective action has been 
taking shape, with the United Nations playing the 
central role. Having learned from the dramatic events 
of recent decades and having realized that attempts to 
cut the Gordian knot by force in violation of the 
Charter will only lead to deadlock, the international 
community has concluded that there is no alternative 
but to address political, economic and other problems 
through joint efforts based on international law. And 
the United Nations provides a universal platform to 
strengthen this positive trend in international relations.  
 The Security Council is a key instrument of this 
Organization to maintain international peace and 
security. The high-level Security Council meeting held 
on 23 September (S/PV.6389) reaffirmed its members’ 
intention to enhance that body’s efficiency, not only 
through direct involvement in conflict settlement but 
also by creating prerequisites for the non-recurrence 
and prevention of crises. This proves that the 
comprehensive approach to ensuring international 
security is gaining ground, as it reflects modern 
realities and is based on the principles and provisions 
of the United Nations Charter. 
 The United Nations faces unprecedented, serious 
and multifaceted tasks in the key area of peacekeeping. 
While paying tribute to the efforts and sacrifice of 
thousands of men and women Blue Helmets, joint 
efforts should continue to refine the theory and practice 
of peacekeeping under United Nations auspices and to 
improve the quality of planning and the conduct of 
peacekeeping operations with adequate political 
control by the Security Council. 
 It is encouraging that the United Nations is 
working towards this goal on a truly collective basis. 
Member States have quite a few constructive ideas on 
their table, which include Russia’s initiative to 
revitalize the Military Staff Committee in order to 
improve the military expertise of Security Council 
decisions. 
 This year has been marked by progress in nuclear 
disarmament. The 2010 Treaty between the United 
States of America and the Russian Federation on 
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of 
Strategic Offensive Arms, signed by the Presidents of 
Russia and the United States in Prague, is a real 
contribution by our two countries to strengthening 
international security and strategic stability. It is also 
the result of positive changes in the relations between 
Russia and the United States that have placed Russian-
American interaction in world affairs on a qualitatively 
new level.  
 We hope that the strong impetus provided by 
Moscow and Washington to the nuclear disarmament 
process will be followed similarly by all nations, 
primarily by nuclear-weapon States. 
 Pursuant to Russia’s policy towards strengthening 
the United Nations role in global security, disarmament 
and confidence-building, we intend to table three draft 
resolutions during the current General Assembly 
session: one on transparency and confidence-building 
measures in outer space activities, co-sponsored with 
China; a draft resolution on developments in the field 
of information and telecommunications in the context 
of international security; and a Russia-United States 
co-sponsored draft resolution on bilateral strategic 
offensive arms reductions and the new framework for 
strategic relations. We call for their adoption by 
consensus. 
 The universalization of the Treaty on the  
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its 
guaranteed strict implementation comprise the 
cornerstone of a strengthened international  
non-proliferation regime. In that context, the search 
must continue for an effective solution to the Iranian 
nuclear problem on the basis of NPT provisions and the 
norms of international Law. The Iranian side must 
ensure the requisite level of transparency and 
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA), which is acting on behalf of the 
international community with the Security Council’s 
support. 
 Clarifying the outstanding questions about the 
Iranian nuclear programme would not only meet the 
goal of strengthening the non-proliferation regime but 
would also quite obviously promote the interests of 
Iran. Russia sees no reasonable alternative to a political 
and diplomatic settlement of the Iranian nuclear 
 
 
31 10-55396 
 
problem through constructive dialogue between Tehran 
and the six countries involved. The meeting of the 
Foreign Ministers of the six countries in New York 
helped to consolidate the shared intention to ensure the 
earliest resumption of such a dialogue. We will 
continue to do our utmost to achieve this goal. 
 As far as the sanctions instrument is concerned, 
sanctions are not a goal in themselves. The objective of 
the sanctions regime established by the Security 
Council is to signal to Iran that it must fully cooperate 
with IAEA, and to give an impetus to the negotiating 
process. All members of the international community 
must show solidarity based on mutual responsibility. 
We strongly reject a situation in which unilateral 
decisions — including ex-territorial ones that undermine 
the very foundation of further joint efforts — are made 
with regard to sanctions in parallel to collective efforts 
by the United Nations Security Council. We must put 
an end to that practice, which runs counter to 
international law and has negative political effects. 
 Even more obvious, the economic and financial 
trade blockade of Cuba, whose lifting the General 
Assembly has demanded for a number of years, is 
clearly an anachronism. The codification of the 
principle of equal and indivisible security is 
indispensable to productive international efforts in this 
field, which is the precise goal of President 
Medvedev’s initiative to conclude a treaty on European 
security. The proposal targets the complete transition of 
Euro-Atlantic policy from its old Cold War agenda to a 
new one, as well as a firm legal foundation for the 
principle of indivisible security for all in the  
Euro-Atlantic region proclaimed in the 1990s. We 
welcome the substantive dialogue on this important 
Russian initiative, which has started in various 
international forums. 
 A comprehensive settlement in the Middle East 
would make a crucial contribution towards 
strengthened global stability. The parties must 
demonstrate political will and extend every effort to 
promote the success of the resumed direct Palestinian-
Israeli talks. The results of the ministerial Quartet 
meeting of major international mediators held on  
21 September demonstrated that appropriate support to 
the Israelis and Palestinians will continue, but the 
ultimate responsibility for a successful outcome rests 
with them. 
 In this connection, the decision by the Israeli 
authorities to not extend the moratorium on Israeli 
settlement activities has raised serious concern. A way 
out of the current impasse should be found so as to 
ensure that negotiations continue. Our proposal to hold 
an international conference on the Middle East in 
Moscow is aimed at advancing the Middle East 
settlement. This proposal has gained the support of all 
interested parties and the United Nations Security 
Council. If the direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue 
becomes stable, the preparations for the Moscow forum 
can get under way, which should also substantively 
examine the Syrian and Lebanese tracks, as well as the 
prospects for the multilateral aspects of the Middle 
East settlement. 
 The development of a comprehensive strategy to 
address the interconnected problems of the Middle East 
is on the agenda. It is necessary to continue working 
towards an international conference in 2012 on the 
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and 
other weapons of mass destruction and their means of 
delivery in the Middle East, pursuant to the decision of 
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
 Russia supports the international strategy for a 
comprehensive settlement and for post-conflict 
rehabilitation of Afghanistan adopted by the Kabul 
Conference, which envisages a stage-by-stage transfer 
of responsibility for the situation in that country to 
Afghan authorities, as effective governing structures 
are established in the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. 
The future of Afghanistan must be determined by the 
Afghan people themselves. The international 
community must continue to provide its assistance, 
with an important role being played by the United 
Nations. 
 Lasting stabilization in Afghanistan and 
throughout the region will be impossible without 
resolving the drug problem. The dimension of the 
danger posed by narcotics emanating from Afghanistan 
represents a clear threat to international peace and 
stability and requires more resolute actions throughout 
the entire chain of the production and proliferation of 
narcotics — from the destruction of drug crops to the 
suppression of precursor supplies, including drug 
traffickers on the sanction lists of the Security Council. 
It is also necessary to move to a new level of 
international cooperation. Russia’s initiative to 
establish financial and counter-narcotics security belts 
  
 
10-55396 32 
 
along the perimeter of Afghan’s borders is consistent 
with those goals. 
 The regional dimension of the long-term 
stabilization of Afghanistan is becoming ever more 
topical. To that end, we must fully engage the potential 
of relevant organizations that are actively working in 
close contact with Kabul on Afghan issues, including 
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 The settlement process in the Sudan is 
approaching an important milestone. As the date of 
referendum on the self-determination of the South of 
that country draws closer, the parties to the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement must redouble their 
efforts to overcome the problems that still divide them. 
We should also give new impetus to the Darfur 
settlement process. At stake is the stability of 
conditions in the Sudan and throughout the vast 
African continent. We welcome the constructive 
attitude demonstrated by the Sudanese and other 
participants in the high-level meeting on the Sudan that 
was held here recently. 
 In Somalia, the confrontation continues between 
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by the 
international community, and extremists and terrorist 
groups linked with Al-Qaida. The lack of a settlement 
on land is fuelling the problem of piracy off the coast 
of Somalia. A more resolute pursuit of the political 
process and stronger assistance to the peacekeeping 
operation of the African Union and further counter-
piracy efforts, including the criminal prosecution of 
pirates, are priorities in international efforts on the 
Somali track, as reiterated during the recent  
mini-summit on Somalia, which Russia fully supports. 
 The results of the Millennium Development 
Goals summit have reaffirmed the important role of the 
United Nations on development matters and must help 
mobilize political support and financial resources for 
the timely achievement of the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). That requires joint 
efforts by Governments, international financial and 
trade institutions, the private sector and civil society, 
based on the principles of global partnership and 
shared responsibility. 
 It is obvious that most global problems, including 
the achievement of the MDGs, cannot be resolved 
without engaging innovations, advanced technologies 
and modernization solutions. The same is valid for 
such challenges as climate change, energy and food 
security and the fight against diseases. The engagement 
of the enormous potential of the United Nations, its 
family and system of specialized agencies in this area 
will allow the Organization to become a catalyst in the 
establishment and development of multilateral 
modernization alliances. Russia is prepared to 
participate actively in that work. 
 To live up to expectations, the United Nations must 
continuously renew itself. The reform of the Organization 
is progressively moving forward. This year, the 
negotiations on strengthening system-wide coherence 
were completed successfully. In particular, the new 
important United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and 
the Empowerment of Women has been established. 
 Negotiations will continue at the current session 
of the General Assembly on the expansion of the 
composition of the Security Council. This is an 
extremely important issue on the reform agenda of the 
Organization, involving the interests of the 
overwhelming majority of States. For that reason, the 
final formula for Security Council reform should be 
based on compromise and the broadest possible 
agreement in the United Nations. This requirement is 
also fully applicable to all other aspects of United 
Nations reform. 
 This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the 
United Nations, as well as that of the end of the Second 
World War, from the ashes of which the world 
Organization was born. For the sake of the memory of 
the millions of victims and in order to prevent a 
repetition of such scourges, we must suppress attempts 
to falsify the events associated with that historic 
calamity. That is the aim of a well-known Russian 
initiative in the United Nations. We count on the 
broadest support for a draft resolution on the topic. 
 The United Nations is our common and unique 
Organization. It is up to all of us to determine how 
productive and really useful its future work will be for 
humankind. By pulling our efforts together, we will be 
able to renew the United Nations effectively and 
provide it with all the necessary resources. We are 
convinced that reasonable resources spent on that goal 
will bring tangible dividends to all members of the 
international community in the form of durable peace, 
security, cooperation and prosperity all over the globe.It is a great honour to address 
this Assembly for the second time, nearly two years 
after my election as President of the United States. We 
know this is no ordinary time for our people. We each 
come here with our own problems and priorities. But 
there are also challenges that we share in common as 
leaders and as nations. 
 We meet within an institution built from the 
rubble of war, designed to unite the world in pursuit of 
peace. And we meet within a city that for centuries has 
welcomed people from across the globe, demonstrating 
that individuals of every colour, faith and station can 
come together to pursue opportunity, build a 
community and live with the blessing of human liberty. 
 Outside the doors of this Hall, the blocks and 
neighbourhoods of this great city tell the story of a 
difficult decade. Nine years ago, the destruction of the 
World Trade Center signalled a threat that respected no 
boundary of dignity or decency. Two years ago this 
month, a financial crisis on Wall Street devastated 
American families on Main Street. These separate 
challenges have affected people around the world. Men 
and women and children have been murdered by 
extremists from Casablanca to London, from Jalalabad 
to Jakarta. The global economy suffered an enormous 
blow during the financial crisis, crippling markets and 
deferring the dreams of millions on every continent. 
Underneath these challenges to our security and 
prosperity lie deeper fears: that ancient hatreds and 
religious divides are once again ascendant; that a world 
which has grown more interconnected has somehow 
slipped beyond our control. 
 These are some of the challenges that my 
Administration has confronted since we came into 
office. And today, I would like to talk to the Assembly 
about what we have done over the last 20 months to 
meet these challenges; what our responsibility is to 
pursue peace in the Middle East; and what kind of 
world we are trying to build in this twenty-first 
century. 
 Let me begin with what we have done. I have had 
no greater focus as President than rescuing our 
economy from potential catastrophe. And in an age 
when prosperity is shared, we could not do this alone. 
So America has joined with nations around the world 
to spur growth and the renewed demand that could 
restart job creation. 
 We are reforming our system of global finance, 
beginning with Wall Street reform here at home, so that 
a crisis like this never happens again. And we made the 
Group of 20 the focal point for international 
coordination, because in a world where prosperity is 
more diffuse, we must broaden our circle of 
cooperation to include emerging economies —
economies from every corner of the globe. 
 There is much to show for our efforts, even as 
there is much work to be done. The global economy 
has been pulled back from the brink of a depression 
and is growing once more. We have resisted 
protectionism and are exploring ways to expand trade 
and commerce among nations. But we cannot — and 
will not — rest until these seeds of progress grow into 
a broader prosperity, not only for all Americans but for 
peoples around the world. 
 As for our common security, America is waging a 
more effective fight against Al-Qaida’ while winding 
down the war in Iraq. Since I took office, the United 
States has removed nearly 100,000 troops from Iraq. 
We have done so responsibly as Iraqis have 
transitioned to lead responsibility for the security of 
their country. We are now focused on building a lasting 
partnership with the Iraqi people while keeping our 
commitment to remove the rest of our troops by the 
end of next year. 
 
 
11 10-54827 
 
 While drawing down in Iraq, we have refocused 
on defeating Al-Qaida and denying its affiliates safe 
haven. In Afghanistan, the United States and our allies 
are pursuing a strategy to break the Taliban’s 
momentum and build the capacity of Afghanistan’s 
Government and security forces so that a transition to 
Afghan responsibility can begin next July. And from 
South Asia to the Horn of Africa, we are moving 
towards a more targeted approach — one that 
strengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist 
networks without deploying large American armies. 
 As we pursue the world’s most dangerous 
extremists, we are also denying them the world’s most 
dangerous weapons and pursuing the peace and 
security of a world without nuclear weapons. 
 Earlier this year, 47 nations embraced a work 
plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within 
four years. We have joined with Russia to sign the most 
comprehensive arms control treaty in decades. We have 
reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security 
strategy. And here, at the United Nations, we came 
together to strengthen the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). 
 As part of our effort on non-proliferation, I 
offered the Islamic Republic of Iran an extended hand 
last year and underscored that it has both rights and 
responsibilities as a member of the international 
community. I also said — in this Hall — that Iran must 
be held accountable if it failed to meet those 
responsibilities. And that is what we have done. 
 Iran is the only party to the NPT that cannot 
demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclear 
programme, and those actions have consequences. 
Through Security Council resolution 1929 (2010), we 
made it clear that international law is not an empty 
promise. 
 Now let me be clear once more: the United States 
and the international community seek a resolution to 
our differences with Iran, and the door remains open to 
diplomacy should Iran choose to walk through it. But 
the Iranian Government must demonstrate a clear and 
credible commitment and confirm to the world the 
peaceful intent of its nuclear programme.  
 As we combat the spread of deadly weapons, we 
are also confronting the spectre of climate change. 
After making historic investments in clean energy and 
efficiency at home, we helped forge an accord in 
Copenhagen that — for the first time — commits all 
major economies to reduce their emissions. We are 
keenly aware this is just a first step. And going 
forward, we will support a process in which all major 
economies meet our responsibilities to protect the 
planet while unleashing the power of clean energy to 
serve as an engine of growth and development. 
 America has also embraced unique 
responsibilities that come with our power. Since the 
rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we 
have pledged our assistance, and we should all support 
the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild. And 
when the earth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, 
we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today, we 
honour those from the United Nations family who lost 
their lives in the earthquake and commit ourselves to 
stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on 
their own two feet. 
 Amidst this upheaval, we have also been 
persistent in our pursuit of peace. Last year, I pledged 
my best efforts to support the goal of two States, Israel 
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, 
as part of a comprehensive peace between Israel and all 
of its neighbours. We have travelled a winding road 
over the last 12 months, with few peaks and many 
valleys. But this month I am pleased that we have 
pursued direct negotiations between Israelis and 
Palestinians in Washington, Sharm el-Sheikh and 
Jerusalem.  
 Now I recognize that many are pessimistic about 
this process. The cynics say that Israelis and 
Palestinians are too distrustful of each other, and too 
divided internally, to forge lasting peace. Rejectionists 
on both sides will try to disrupt the process with bitter 
words and with bombs and gunfire. Some say that the 
gaps between the parties are too big; the potential for 
talks to break down is too great; and that after decades 
of failure peace is simply not possible.  
 I hear those voices of scepticism. But I ask the 
Assembly to consider the alternative. If an agreement 
is not reached, Palestinians will never know the pride 
and dignity that comes with their own State. Israelis 
will never know the certainty and security that comes 
with sovereign and stable neighbours who are 
committed to coexistence. The hard realities of 
demography will take over. More blood will be shed. 
This Holy Land will remain a symbol of our 
differences, instead of our common humanity.  
  
 
10-54827 12 
 
 I refuse to accept that future. We all have a choice 
to make. Each of us must choose the path of peace. Of 
course, that responsibility begins with the parties 
themselves, who must answer the call of history. 
Earlier this month, at the White House, I was struck by 
the words of both the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu said, “I came here today to 
find an historic compromise that will enable both 
peoples to live in peace, security and dignity”. 
President Abbas said, “We will spare no effort and we 
will work diligently and tirelessly to ensure these 
negotiations achieve their cause”. 
 These words must now be followed by action, 
and I believe that both leaders have the courage to do 
so. But the road that they have to travel is exceedingly 
difficult, which is why I call upon Israelis and 
Palestinians — and the world — to rally behind the 
goal that these leaders now share.  
 We know that there will be tests along the way, 
and that one test is fast approaching. Israel’s settlement 
moratorium has made a difference on the ground and 
improved the atmosphere for talks. 
 And our position on this issue is well known. We 
believe that the moratorium should be extended. We 
also believe that talks should press on until completed. 
Now is the time for the parties to help each other 
overcome this obstacle. Now is the time to build the 
trust — and provide the time — for substantial 
progress to be made. Now is the time for this 
opportunity to be seized, so that it does not slip away.  
 Now, peace must be made by Israelis and 
Palestinians, but we each have a responsibility to do 
our part as well. Those of us who are friends of Israel 
must understand that true security for the Jewish State 
requires an independent Palestine — one that allows 
the Palestinian people to live with dignity and 
opportunity. And those of us who are friends of the 
Palestinians must understand that the rights of the 
Palestinian people will be won only through peaceful 
means — including genuine reconciliation with a 
secure Israel. 
 I know many in this Hall count themselves as 
friends of the Palestinians. These pledges of friendship 
must now be supported by deeds. Those who have 
signed on to the Arab Peace Initiative should seize this 
opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps 
towards the normalization that it promises Israel. 
 And those who speak on behalf of Palestinian 
self-government should help the Palestinian Authority 
politically and financially, and in doing so help the 
Palestinians build the institutions of their State. 
 Those who long to see an independent Palestine 
must also stop trying to tear down Israel. After 
thousands of years, Jews and Arabs are not strangers in 
a strange land. After 60 years in the community of 
nations, Israel’s existence must not be a subject for 
debate. 
 Israel is a sovereign State, and the historic 
homeland of the Jewish people. It should be clear to all 
that efforts to chip away at Israel’s legitimacy will be 
met by the unshakeable opposition of the United 
States. Efforts to threaten or kill Israelis will do 
nothing to help the Palestinian people. The slaughter of 
innocent Israelis is not resistance; it is injustice. And 
make no mistake: the courage of a man like President 
Abbas, who stands up for his people in front of the 
world under very difficult circumstances, is far greater 
than those who fire rockets at innocent women and 
children. 
 The conflict between Israelis and Arabs is as old 
as the United Nations. And we can come back here 
next year, as we have for the last 60 years, and make 
long speeches about it. We can read familiar lists of 
grievances. We can table the same resolutions. We can 
further empower the forces of rejectionism and hate. 
And we can waste more time by carrying forward an 
argument that will not help a single Israeli or 
Palestinian child achieve a better life. We can do that. 
 Or we can say that this time will be different — 
that this time we will not let terror or turbulence or 
posturing or petty politics stand in the way. This time 
we will think, not of ourselves, but of the young girl in 
Gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams or 
the young boy in Sderot who wants to sleep without the 
nightmare of rocket fire. 
 This time we should draw upon the teachings of 
tolerance that lie at the heart of the three great religions 
that see Jerusalem’s soil as sacred. This time we should 
reach for what is best within ourselves. If we do, when 
we come back here next year, we can have an 
agreement that will lead to a new State Member of the 
United Nations — an independent, sovereign State of 
Palestine living in peace with Israel. 
 
 
13 10-54827 
 
 It is our destiny to bear the burdens of the 
challenges that I have addressed — recession and war 
and conflict. And there is always a sense of urgency, 
even emergency, that drives most of our foreign 
policies. Indeed, after millennia marked by wars, this 
very institution reflects the desire of human beings to 
create a forum to deal with emergencies that will 
inevitably come. 
 But even as we confront immediate challenges, 
we must also summon the foresight to look beyond 
them and consider what we are trying to build over the 
long term. What is the world that awaits us when 
today’s battles are brought to an end? And, that is what 
I would like to talk about with the remainder of my 
time today. 
 One of the first actions of the General Assembly 
was to adopt the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights in 1948. This Declaration begins by stating that, 
“recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal 
and inalienable rights of all members of the human 
family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace 
in the world”.  
 The idea is a simple one — that freedom, justice 
and peace for the world must begin with freedom, 
justice and peace in the lives of individual human 
beings. For the United States, this is a matter of moral 
and pragmatic assessment. As Robert Kennedy said, 
“the individual man, the child of God, is the touchstone 
of value, and all society, groups, the state exist for his 
benefit”.  
 So we stand up for universal values because it is 
the right thing to do. But we also know from 
experience that those who defend these values for their 
people have been our closest friends and allies, while 
those who have denied those rights — whether terrorist 
groups or tyrannical Governments — have chosen to be 
our adversaries. 
 Human rights have never gone unchallenged — 
not in any of our nations, not in our world. Tyranny is 
still with us — whether it manifests itself in the 
Taliban killing girls who try to go to school, a North 
Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an 
armed group in Congo-Kinshasa that use rape as a 
weapon of war. 
 In times of economic unease, there can also be an 
anxiety about human rights. Today, as in past times of 
economic downturn, some put human rights aside for 
the promise of short-term stability or the false notion 
that economic growth can come at the expense of 
freedom. We see leaders abolishing term limits, we see 
crackdowns on civil society, we see corruption 
smothering entrepreneurship and good governance, we 
see democratic reforms deferred indefinitely. 
 As I said last year, each country will pursue a 
path rooted in the culture of its own people. Yet 
experience shows us that history is on the side of 
liberty; that the strongest foundation lies in open 
economies, open societies, and open Governments. To 
put it simply, democracy, more than any other form of 
government, delivers for our citizens. And I believe 
that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the 
borders between nations are blurred. 
 America is working to shape a world that fosters 
this openness. For the rot of a closed or corrupt 
economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation 
of human beings.All of us want the right to educate our 
children, to make a decent wage, to care for the sick, 
and to be carried as far as our dreams and deeds will 
take us. But that depends upon economies that tap the 
power of our people, including the potential of women 
and girls. That means letting entrepreneurs start a 
business without paying a bribe and Governments that 
support opportunity instead of stealing from their 
people. And that means rewarding hard work, instead 
of reckless risk-taking. 
 Yesterday, I put forward a new development 
policy that will pursue these goals, recognizing that 
dignity is a human right and global development is in 
our common interest. America will partner with nations 
that offer their people a path out of poverty. And 
together, we must unleash growth that powers by 
individuals and merging markets in all parts of the 
globe. 
 There is no reason why Africa should not be an 
exporter of agriculture, which is why our food security 
initiative is empowering farmers. There is no reason 
why entrepreneurs should not be able to build new 
markets in every society, which is why I hosted a 
summit on entrepreneurship earlier this spring, because 
the obligation of Government is to empower 
individuals, not to impede them. 
 The same holds true for civil society. The arc of 
human progress has been shaped by individuals with 
the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside 
of government that insisted upon democratic change 
  
 
10-54827 14 
 
and by free media that held the powerful accountable. 
We have seen that from the South Africans who stood 
up to apartheid, to the Poles of Solidarity, to the 
mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the 
Dirty War, to Americans who marched for the rights of 
all races, including my own. 
 Civil society is the conscience of our 
communities and America will always extend our 
engagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of 
Government. And we will call out those who suppress 
ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless. 
We will promote new tools of communication so 
people are empowered to connect with one another 
and, in repressive societies, to do so with security. We 
will support a free and open Internet, so individuals 
have the information to make up their own minds. And 
it is time to embrace and effectively monitor norms 
that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee 
its expansion within and across borders. 
 Open society supports open government, but it 
cannot substitute for it. There is no right more 
fundamental than the right to choose your leaders and 
determine your destiny. Now, make no mistake: the 
ultimate success of democracy in the world will not 
come because the United States dictates it; it will come 
because individual citizens demand a say in how they 
are governed. 
 There is no soil where this cannot take root, just 
as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation. 
Later this fall, I will travel to Asia. And I will visit 
India, which peacefully threw off colonialism and 
established a thriving democracy of over a billion 
people. 
 I will continue to Indonesia, the world’s largest 
Muslim-majority country, which binds together 
thousands of islands through the glue of representative 
government and civil society. I will join the Group-of-
20 meeting on the Korean peninsula, which provides 
the world’s clearest contrast between a society that is 
dynamic and open and free, and one that is imprisoned 
and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an 
ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary 
development through democracy. 
 Each of these countries gives life to democratic 
principles in its own way. And even as some 
Governments roll back reform, we also celebrate the 
courage of a President in Colombia who willingly 
stepped aside, or the promise of a new constitution in 
Kenya.  
 The common thread of progress is the principle 
that government is accountable to its citizens. And the 
diversity in this Hall makes clear — no one country 
has all the answers, but all of us must answer to our 
own people. 
 In all parts of the world, we see the promise of 
innovation to make government more open and 
accountable. And now we must build on that progress. 
And when we gather back here next year, we should 
bring specific commitments to promote transparency; 
to fight corruption; to energize civic engagement; to 
leverage new technology so that we strengthen the 
foundations of freedom in our own countries, while 
living up to the ideals that can light the world. 
 This institution can still play an indispensable 
role in the advance of human rights. It is time to 
welcome the efforts of UN Women to protect the rights 
of women around the world. 
 It is time for every Member State to open its 
elections to international monitors and increase the 
United Nations Democracy Fund. It is time to 
invigorate United Nations peacekeeping, so that 
missions have the resources necessary to succeed, and 
so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented and 
justice is enforced — because neither dignity nor 
democracy can thrive without basic security.  
 It is time to make this institution more 
accountable as well, because the challenges of the new 
century demand new ways of serving our common 
interests. 
 The world that America seeks is not one we can 
build on our own. For human rights to reach those who 
suffer the boot of oppression, we need your voices to 
speak out. In particular, I appeal to those nations that 
emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the 
second half of the last century — from South Africa to 
South Asia; from Eastern Europe to South America. Do 
not stand idly by, do not be silent, when dissidents 
elsewhere are imprisoned and protesters are beaten, 
recall your own history. Because part of the price of 
our own freedom is standing up for the freedom of 
others.  
 That belief will guide America’s leadership in 
this twenty-first century. It is a belief that has seen us 
through more than two centuries of trial, and it will see 
 
 
15 10-54827 
 
us through the challenges we face today — be they war 
or recession; conflict or division. 
 So even as we have come through a difficult 
decade, I stand here before you confident in the 
future — a future where Iraq is governed by neither a 
tyrant nor a foreign Power, and Afghanistan is freed 
from the turmoil of war; a future where the children of 
Israel and Palestine can build the peace that was not 
possible for their parents; a world where the promise of 
development reaches into the prisons of poverty and 
disease; a future where the cloud of recession gives 
way to the light of renewal, and the dream of 
opportunity is available to all.  
 This future will not be easy to reach. It will not 
come without setbacks, nor will it be quickly claimed. 
But the founding of the United Nations itself is a 
testament to human progress. Remember, in times that 
were far more trying than our own, our predecessors 
chose the hope of unity over the ease of division and 
made a promise to future generations that the dignity 
and equality of human beings would be our common 
cause. 
 It falls to us to fulfil that promise. And though we 
will be met by dark forces that will test our resolve, 
Americans have always had cause to believe that we 
can choose a better history; that we need only to look 
outside the walls around us. For through the citizens of 
every conceivable ancestry who make this city their 
own, we see living proof that opportunity can be 
accessed by all, that what unites us as human beings is 
far greater than what divides us, and that people from 
every part of this world can live together in peace.My 
delegation joins previous speakers in expressing our 
congratulations to Mr. Joseph Deiss on his election as 
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth 
session. We want to take this opportunity to assure him 
of our full cooperation and to wish him a very 
successful and rewarding term. I also take this 
opportunity to thank Mr. Ali Treki for the excellent 
work he did in steering this Assembly during his tenure 
as President during its sixty-fourth session. 
 The theme of the sixty-fifth session of the 
General Assembly — “Reaffirming the central role of 
the United Nations in global governance” — resonates 
with what our global citizen, Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela, said about this body on the occasion of its 
fiftieth anniversary: 
 “The United Nations has to reassess its role, 
redefine its profile and reshape its structures. It 
should truly reflect the diversity of our universe 
and ensure equity among the nations in the 
  
 
10-55109 26 
 
exercise of power within the system of 
international relations, in general, and the 
Security Council, in particular.” (A/50/PV.37, 
p. 6) 
My delegation supports the choice of this theme, and 
we wish to reiterate our belief in the centrality of the 
United Nations and the system of multilateralism. 
 Despite the challenges that face humanity in the 
twenty-first century, the relevance of the United 
Nations as a multilateral mechanism through which a 
myriad of complex world affairs can be administered 
and resolved cannot be overemphasized. Those 
challenges compel us more than ever before to 
strengthen the United Nations. South Africa is 
committed to working with other Member States to 
achieve the full potential of the United Nations to 
address the urgent challenges facing the international 
community by making it more relevant, more 
responsive to the diversity of humankind and more 
representative. 
 The creation of the United Nations was one of the 
notable successes of the twentieth century, and thanks 
to its existence the world has been spared another war 
on the scale and magnitude of the First and Second 
World Wars. The exponential growth in the 
membership of the Organization over the years, from 
51 Members in 1945 to 192 today, clearly demonstrates 
the confidence that the peoples of the world have 
placed in the United Nations and the ideals contained 
in its Charter. 
 The universal membership of the United Nations 
gives it the legitimacy to be at the centre of efforts to 
address global challenges. However, the question is 
whether the United Nations has leveraged that diversity 
of its membership as a source of strength and acted 
decisively against any tendency that runs contrary to its 
fundamental values and founding principles. 
 The answer to this is yes because, in the past, the 
United Nations played an invaluable role in the 
worldwide process of decolonization, transforming the 
political landscape of the world and bringing much-
cherished freedom and independence to the peoples of 
Africa, Asia and Latin America. The Organization was 
instrumental in bringing about the demise of the 
universally despised apartheid system in our own 
country, South Africa. 
 When the Organization recognized the right to 
development as a human right, it gave voice and hope 
to those who know the face of poverty. When the 
Organization has sent its troops to far-flung places to 
keep peace among neighbours who should be living 
together, it has again underscored the reason for which 
it was established. Amid all the challenges, the United 
Nations has been relevant and responsive to our 
diverse interests. 
 Five years ago, at the World Summit, we agreed 
that, if the Organization were to continue to play its 
central role in global governance effectively, there was 
a need to strengthen and reposition it to deal with the 
challenges of the twenty-first century.  We believe that 
the revitalization of the General Assembly remains one 
of the cornerstones of the United Nations reform 
agenda. The General Assembly is the chief 
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of 
the United Nations and plays a critical role in the 
process of standard-setting and the codification of 
international law. Its decisions are taken by a collective 
among equals for the common good. 
 We will support measures that are aimed at 
enhancing the effectiveness of the General Assembly, 
especially regarding its role in the maintenance of 
international peace and security. Indeed, we witnessed 
with satisfaction how, on several occasions, the 
General Assembly acted promptly when the Security 
Council was unwilling or unable to respond to grave 
developments in the aftermath of the conflict in Gaza 
in 2009. 
 Indeed, no transformation of the United Nations 
could be complete without the fundamental reform of 
the Security Council. South Africa believes that the 
objective of the reform should be to create a Security 
Council that is truly representative of the membership 
and effectively responsive to international crises, as 
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. Indeed, 
it remains a travesty of justice that Africa, which 
accounts for a large portion of the work of the Council, 
is not represented in the permanent category. Thus, 
deliberations about us carry on without us. 
 The world should be free of weapons of mass 
destruction, in accordance with our undertakings on 
total disarmament. In that regard, South Africa 
welcomes the recently agreed programme of work of 
the Conference on Disarmament. 
 
 
27 10-55109 
 
 While the right to development and freedom from 
want are central to the work of the United Nations, we 
have just ended the High-level Plenary Meeting to 
review our performance in achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals and agreed that more needs to be 
done to act on commitments already made by the 
international community in that regard. 
 The people of Haiti have a story to tell about how 
best the international community can respond in unison 
and effectively to a nation in distress. 
 A speedy and satisfactory conclusion of the Doha 
Round of the World Trade Organization, which 
promised so much for the developing South, 
unfortunately remains a dream yet to be fulfilled. At 
the same time, the global economic crisis has 
highlighted the point that many of us have always 
made about the need to work for an international 
financial architecture that is sensitive to the 
development needs of the South. 
 The contribution of the Group of 20 (G-20) is a 
welcome development in that regard, and we believe 
that the Group should complement and reinforce the 
good work of the United Nations and not act as an 
alternative. In its composition, the G-20 will also need 
to mirror the rich diversity of humankind by making 
sure that all regions of the world, in particular Africa, 
are well represented. We look forward to the full 
implementation of the undertakings made to transform 
the international financial architecture, including the 
reform of the Bretton Woods institutions, as a step 
towards building a world system founded on equity and 
social justice. 
 Environmental issues, including climate change, 
have also become high on the priorities of the 
international agenda. South Africa is fully committed 
to a multilateral outcome on the basis of the Bali Plan 
of Action, with a two-track negotiated and legally 
binding outcome. We are convinced that the 
Copenhagen Accord provides political guidance for 
future negotiations. 
 Accordingly, we should work together to ensure 
that the forthcoming meeting of the sixteenth session 
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Mexico 
takes bold and concrete steps to address climate change 
and its effects. For our part, South Africa will have the 
opportunity to host the seventeenth session of the 
Conference of the Parties in December 2011, on the 
eve of the end of the first commitment period of the 
Kyoto Protocol. 
 Peace and stability are one of the preconditions 
for bringing about an Africa of the new beginning that 
the Chairperson of the African Union, His Excellency 
President Wa Mutharika of Malawi, spoke of on the 
first day of the general debate (see ). The 
United Nations has been an important partner to Africa, 
working with us through the African Union, whether in 
Somalia, the Sudan or the Democratic Republic of 
Congo. South Africa is encouraged by the commitment 
shown by the international community in trying to 
assist the both the Government of the Sudan and 
Southern Sudan as they prepare for the upcoming 
referendum in January 2011. 
 The people of Zimbabwe also need the helping 
hand of the international community in implementing 
their Global Political Agreement. The African Union 
and the Southern African Development Community 
speak for us, too, in calling for the lifting of sanctions 
against Zimbabwe. We will continue to work with the 
peoples of Zimbabwe, Madagascar and Burundi, 
among others, in their efforts to build and consolidate 
peace and democracy in their respective countries. 
 In the case of Western Sahara, South Africa 
remains concerned about the continuing impasse, 
which stands in the way of a solution that will result in 
the people of Western Sahara exercising their 
inalienable right to self-determination. We count on the 
United Nations, especially the Security Council, to 
continue to make decisions that enable us to decisively 
deal with the challenges of peace and security on our 
continent. 
 The United Nations should see Africa as a partner 
in the maintenance of international peace and the 
management of conflicts, and accordingly do more to 
strengthen the working relationship between the 
Security Council and the African Union Peace and 
Security Council. In this respect, South Africa will 
continue to support all international efforts to help the 
people of Palestine and Israel in their endeavour to find 
lasting peace, leading to the establishment of a viable 
Palestinian State, on the basis of the 1967 borders and 
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side 
in peace and security with Israel. 
 We are at one with the call made by several 
delegations for the lifting of the embargo on the 
Republic of Cuba. 
  
 
10-55109 28 
 
 We have converged here year after year to make 
strong statements on Palestine, the embargo on Cuba 
and the independence of the Western Sahara. The 
ultimate test of the relevance of the United Nations 
will therefore be in bringing closure to all these long 
outstanding issues in a manner that is consistent with 
our decisions and the collective will of nations 
represented in this Organization. 
In conclusion, we were also privileged recently to 
be the stage, and Africa the theatre, of the 2010 
Fédération internationale de football association World 
Cup tournament. Our people spoke for us during that 
soccer event in how they embraced each other and in 
their diversity of many nations, consistent with the 
spirit of ubuntu, which simply means “I am because 
you are”. They gave us hope and confirmed the faith 
we have in our belief that a better world is possible. 
The role of sport in development and in advancing 
peace can never be underestimated. As States, we can 
best respond to this message from our people by 
making sure that the United Nations, in playing its role 
in the global system, is more relevant, more inclusive 
and more representative. 
 Looking ahead, South Africa is honoured to have 
been endorsed by the African Union as a candidate for 
the Security Council non-permanent membership for 
the period 2011-2012. We stand ready to continue to 
contribute to the achievement of peace and security in 
the world.