I 
wish to begin by congratulating Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz 
Al-Nasser on having assumed the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident 
that, with his outstanding ability and great experience, 
he will fulfil his lofty mission. I also wish to thank 
Mr. Deiss for his contribution as President at the 
previous session. I further wish to take this opportunity 
to warmly congratulate the Republic of South Sudan on 
becoming the 193rd member of the United Nations 
family.  
 The first decade of the twenty-first century is 
now behind us. During that decade, the trend towards a 
multipolar world and economic globalization gained 
momentum. Countries became increasingly 
interdependent. Revolutions in science and technology 
brought profound transformations to human society. 
However, various traditional and non-traditional 
security threats and global challenges were intertwined 
with those changes, and the world was far from a 
peaceful place.  
 As the second decade of the new century begins, 
the world has entered an extraordinary historical stage 
in its pursuit of peace and development, and continues 
to undergo profound and complex changes. Uncertainty 
and instability are increasing despite the generally 
peaceful international environment. Development is 
becoming an increasingly serious issue, and promoting 
common development has become a more important 
and pressing task than ever before. 
 Global development is now at a new critical 
juncture. Global recovery remains fragile, international 
financial markets are volatile and the pursuit of 
sustainable development faces daunting challenges. 
The world economy therefore has to meet the crucial 
test of maintaining growth. Some countries in West 
Asia and North Africa are in continual political 
turmoil. Terrorist threats are spreading and global 
challenges growing. The international community faces 
a critical test in maintaining stability.  
 The gap in development between the South and 
the North is as wide as ever. The number of people 
living in absolute poverty has increased by 64 million 
owing to the international financial crisis. Nearly 
1 billion people suffer from starvation. Urgent action is 
needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 
It is imperative to step up international cooperation to 
help the least developed countries (LDCs) meet the 
basic needs of their people. In the face of these 
challenges, we share an important mission to achieve 
common development, and we also have rare new 
opportunities.  
 Economic globalization has made the interests of 
countries more closely interconnected. Ensuring 
security through cooperation and promoting 
development through stability has become our shared 
desire. Countries are addressing development 
challenges in innovative ways. To overcome the crisis, 
developed countries have taken steps to improve their 
fiscal conditions, adopted stimulus measures and 
accelerated economic structural adjustment. 
Developing countries as a whole have maintained good 
growth momentum. In particular, the rapid growth in 
some emerging economies has driven the growth of the 
world economy.  
 Progress has been made in the reform of the 
global economic governance structure, and various 
regional cooperation mechanisms are expanding. 
Efforts to accelerate the development of a green 
economy and explore new modes of sustainable growth 
have created new momentum and space for common 
development. Faced with new opportunities and 
challenges, we should work as a team to overcome our 
difficulties and pursue mutual benefit and common 
development. This is the responsibility and mission 
that history bestows upon all of us. To fulfil our 
mission, we need to take the following steps.  
 We should foster sound momentum for global 
economic recovery. The underlying impact of the 
international financial crisis has yet to dissipate, and 
economic recovery is still fragile and uneven. We 
should intensify consultation and coordination, and 
send a strong message of solidarity and win-win 
cooperation so as to strengthen international 
confidence in global recovery and growth. We should 
work for a fair, just, inclusive and orderly international 
monetary and financial system, and promote the voice 
and representation of emerging markets and developing 
countries.  
 China supports the transition of the Group of 
20 (G-20) from a short-term crisis response mechanism 
to a long-term mechanism of economic governance. 
The G-20 should play a bigger role in global economic 
governance and in promoting the full recovery and 
growth of the world economy.  
  
 
11-51384 42 
 
 We support the efforts of emerging markets to 
explore new modes of international economic 
cooperation. We strongly oppose protectionism in all 
its forms and call for strengthening the multilateral 
trading regime. The concerns of the least developed 
countries should be addressed, and efforts made to 
make the Doha Round achieve its development 
objectives. 
 We should lay the political foundation for 
cooperative development. All countries, big or small, 
strong or weak, rich or poor, are equal members of the 
international community, and their equal right to 
development should be protected. Mutual respect and 
equality are the basic norms governing international 
relations and constitute an important guarantee for 
common development. In the current context, it is of 
particular and practical importance to adhere to the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations, to uphold the authority and role of the United 
Nations, to observe in good faith the principle of 
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and to 
promote democracy in international relations.  
 We should respect the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of all countries. The internal affairs of each 
country should be decided by its own people. We 
oppose interference in other countries’ internal affairs 
by whatever means and under whatever pretext.  
 The diversity of the world is a valuable asset for 
the development of human society. It should be seen as 
a positive factor that allows countries to learn from one 
another, and should not be used as an excuse for the 
big to bully the small or the rich to ride roughshod over 
the poor in international relations. We should respect 
the right of each country to pursue the development 
path of its choice and we should respect the diversity 
of civilizations. We should seek common progress by 
drawing on one another’s strength with an open and 
inclusive mind, pursuing common ground while 
preserving differences. 
 We should foster a security environment 
conducive to stability and development. History has 
repeatedly shown that stability and development go 
hand in hand. Without stability, there can be no 
development; without development, there can be no 
stability. In keeping with the purposes and principles of 
the United Nations Charter, we should always use 
peaceful means to settle international disputes and 
hotspot issues. We should oppose the wilful use or 
threat of force, terrorism, separatism and extremism in 
all their forms, and we should uphold the common 
security of humankind. 
 China respects the independent choice of the 
people of the Sudan and South Sudan, and hopes that 
the new-born country of South Sudan will enjoy 
stability and development. The international 
community should continue to support and encourage 
the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their outstanding 
issues appropriately through dialogue and consultation, 
pursue amicable relations and common development, 
and uphold regional peace and stability. China has 
encouraged the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their 
dispute through peaceful negotiation and has worked 
hard to advance the peace process between them. We 
support the proper settlement of the Darfur issue. We 
will continue to work with the international community 
to play a constructive role in advancing regional peace, 
stability and development. 
 China has consistently supported the just cause of 
establishing an independent Palestinian State, and 
supports Palestine’s membership in the United Nations. 
We support efforts to achieve a two-State solution 
through political negotiation so as to establish, on the 
basis of the 1967 borders, an independent Palestinian 
State that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem 
as its capital. We believe that progress should be made 
in parallel in the peace talks between Syria and Israel 
and Lebanon and Israel, with an ultimate view to 
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in 
the Middle East along with peaceful coexistence 
between the Arab countries and Israel. We hope that 
the international community and the parties concerned 
will make unremitting efforts to this end and sustain 
the Middle East peace process. 
 China is greatly concerned about the turbulence 
in West Asia and North Africa. We stand for the 
principle of non-interference. We respect and support 
the efforts of countries in those regions to 
independently handle their internal affairs, and we 
respect their aspirations. We hope that the parties 
concerned will resolve their differences through 
political dialogue and speedily restore stability and 
order in their respective countries.  
 Libya has now entered a critical transition from a 
state of war and turmoil to national reconstruction. 
China respects the choice of the Libyan people and 
recognizes the National Transitional Council (NTC) as 
 
 
43 11-51384 
 
the governing authority of Libya and the representative 
of its people. We hope that, under the leadership of the 
NTC, the parties in Libya will launch an inclusive 
process of political transition through which they will 
maintain ethnic harmony and national unity, restore 
stability as soon as possible and begin economic 
reconstruction. China supports the leading role of the 
United Nations in Libya’s post-conflict reconstruction, 
and urges the speediest possible operationalization of 
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.  
 China is also greatly concerned about 
developments in Syria. We hope that parties in Syria 
will exercise restraint, avoid all violence, further 
bloodshed and conflict, and act quickly to ease 
tensions. We believe that a Syria-led, inclusive political 
process aimed at promoting reform through dialogue 
and consultation is the right way to resolve the current 
crisis in Syria. The international community should 
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial 
integrity of Syria, and address the Syrian issue 
cautiously so as to prevent further turbulence and 
repercussions on regional peace. 
 China welcomes the positive developments on the 
Korean peninsula. We believe that dialogue and 
consultation are the only effective way to address the 
issues of the peninsula. The Six-Party Talks are an 
effective mechanism for advancing the denuclearization 
of the Korean peninsula and for upholding peace and 
stability both on the peninsula and in North-East Asia.  
 China has worked hard to promote peace through 
dialogue, and has played a unique role in easing 
tensions and maintaining peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula. China welcomes the recent 
resumption of dialogue between the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, 
as well as between the Democratic People’s Republic 
of Korea and the United States. We hope that the 
parties concerned will seize the opportunity, remain 
engaged in dialogue and work for an early resumption 
of the Six-Party Talks. 
 We should promote balanced development 
between the South and the North. The uneven 
development between South and North is the biggest 
imbalance in the global economy. Without balanced 
development, there can hardly be sustainable 
development. Unless underdeveloped countries shake 
off poverty and grow their economies, there can be no 
common global prosperity.  
 Achieving the Millennium Development Goals on 
a global scale and on schedule is an urgent and arduous 
task. Developed countries should honour their 
commitments on official development assistance, open 
their markets, reduce and cancel debt, and their step up 
financial and technological support to developing 
countries. International financial institutions should 
use their resources to help developing countries, and 
particularly the LDCs, on a priority basis. Developing 
countries, on their part, should explore growth models 
that are conducive to development and poverty 
alleviation in order to achieve a higher level of 
development. 
 Food security has emerged as a major challenge. 
The Horn of Africa is suffering from massive famine 
triggered by the most severe drought in 60 years. The 
international community should scale up assistance, 
stabilize the price of food and other commodities, and 
help developing countries enhance their capacity for 
autonomous development so that all countries and 
regions can enjoy the benefits of common 
development. 
 The world witnessed major development, 
transformation and adjustment in the first decade of the 
twenty-first century. During this period, China enjoyed 
sustained and fast development, and its relations with 
the outside world underwent profound changes. 
China’s achievements in development, and its possible 
future course, have become a focus of international 
attention. Over the past 10 years, China’s economy 
continued to grow, and its people’s living standards 
rose markedly, thanks to the hard work of the Chinese 
people. Today, China has become the world’s second-
largest economy, largest exporter, second-largest 
importer and largest emerging market. The basic living 
needs of China’s 1.3 billion people are being 
adequately met, and the number living in absolute 
poverty has fallen drastically. 
 On the other hand, the difficulties China faces in 
terms of development should not be ignored. We 
remain a developing country with a large population, a 
weak economic foundation and serious imbalances and 
lack of coordination in our development. China will 
have to make persistent and strenuous efforts to 
achieve its development goals. Guided by our recently 
adopted twelfth five-year plan for economic and social 
development, we will pursue scientific development, 
accelerate the shift in our growth model, advance 
scientific and technological innovation and increase 
  
 
11-51384 44 
 
reforms and openness designed to promote long-term, 
steady and fast economic development, as well as 
social harmony and progress. The world will see a 
more open China, with more sustainable development 
and greater social harmony. 
 China’s development has brought real benefits to 
the Chinese people and contributed to global 
development and prosperity. During the past 10 years, 
China imported close to, on average, $750 billion 
worth of goods annually, creating more than 14 million 
jobs for the relevant countries and regions. At the end 
of the twelfth five-year period in 2015, China’s total 
economic output will be around $8.6 trillion. It is 
expected that China will import about $10 trillion in 
goods in the next five years, which will further boost 
world economic growth. China needs the world in 
order to be able to continue to develop, and China’s 
development will in turn contribute more to the shared 
development of the world as a whole. 
 As a developing country, China is committed to 
enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation with other 
developing countries, based on equality, and to 
enhancing its efforts to provide them with assistance 
and support. China has cancelled 380 debts incurred by 
50 heavily indebted poor countries and LDCs, and will 
phase in zero-tariff treatment for 95 per cent of exports 
from the African LDCs with which China has 
diplomatic relations. We have completed more than 
2,100 projects, including building schools and 
hospitals, in other developing countries, and trained 
150,000 professionals in various fields for them. In 
sympathy with the pain of the countries and people in 
the Horn of Africa hit by famine, China has decided to 
provide those countries with RMB443.2 million in 
emergency food assistance and cash for purchasing 
food to help them overcome the famine. 
 China has made notable efforts to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals. As it continues to 
develop, China will create more opportunities for 
world peace, development and cooperation. To advance 
common development, we must foster a sound 
international environment. Over the years, China has 
been dedicated to creating a peaceful international 
environment in which it can develop. At the same time, 
it has contributed to enhancing world peace through its 
own development. China has actively assumed 
international responsibilities as its capacity permits, 
and has worked to promote the peaceful settlement of 
issues in troubled areas.  
 China participates actively in international 
peacekeeping operations; with a total of more than 
19,000 personnel deployed in 28 United Nations 
peacekeeping missions, China is the largest contributor 
of United Nations peacekeeping personnel among 
Security Council permanent members. China has 
provided assistance in cash and kind to countries hit by 
earthquakes and tsunamis, and has sent rescue teams to 
carry out humanitarian relief operations in the affected 
areas. China is actively involved in the fight against 
piracy and in other areas of international cooperation. 
All these efforts have contributed to maintaining world 
peace and stability. 
 The tide of history is surging forward. In the next 
decade, peace, development and cooperation will 
remain trends of the times, and China will not waver in 
its pursuit of development and progress. Peaceful 
development is the strategic choice that China has 
made to build a modern, strong and prosperous country 
and to make a greater contribution to the progress of 
human civilization. China will stay on that path, 
pursuing an independent, peaceful foreign policy and a 
win-win strategy of opening up its society. 
 We are committed to achieving a better life for 
the Chinese people and greater development and 
prosperity for all humankind. We will achieve those 
goals through hard work, reforms and innovation, and 
by conducting long-term friendly exchanges and 
establishing equality-based, win-win cooperation with 
other countries. A prosperous, harmonious and stable 
China that lives up to its responsibilities will make a 
greater contribution to the prosperity and stability of 
the world and the common development of humankind. 
Let us work together to deepen cooperation and 
achieve development by sharing opportunities and 
meeting challenges together, and thus build a 
harmonious world of lasting peace and common 
prosperity.Seldom has 
people’s yearning for freedom, dignity and self-
determination played such a dominant role as it has this 
year. Until now, we have experienced globalization 
 
 
49 11-51384 
 
first and foremost through the ever-greater integration 
of the world economy. Today, we see that globalization 
means so much more; that it has also brought about a 
globalization of values. Those are the values enshrined 
in the United Nations Charter, the inalienable rights 
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. 
 In North Africa and in the Arab world, millions of 
people have shaken off the shackles of decades of 
oppression. They want freedom, democracy and human 
rights, as well as better lives for themselves and their 
families. That road is anything but easy. A new 
political system must mature in order to become stable. 
That takes time and patience. However, even the 
longest road begins with the very first step. This is a 
year of momentous steps. 
 We have not forgotten the moving images of 
people who won dignity and self-respect by their own 
efforts, the proud faces on Bourguiba Boulevard in 
Tunis and in Tahrir Square in Cairo. Those people want 
to shape their own future, and their yearning is by no 
means limited to the Arab world. In Belarus, too, 
people long for an end to repression and tyranny and 
for the opportunity to fully develop their individual 
personalities. 
 With the fall of the Berlin Wall and reunification 
more than 20 years ago, Germany experienced for 
itself the joy of a peaceful revolution. Today we have a 
fundamental interest in the success of the political 
awakening in the southern Mediterranean region. We 
Germans offer our support for the reforms in Morocco 
and Jordan, the political awakening in Egypt and 
Tunisia, and the fresh start in Libya following the 
overthrow of the dictator. 
 Every country and every society will find its own 
way into the modern world, either through revolution 
or through reform. We want to provide advice and 
support. We want to help create an independent 
judiciary, a pluralistic media landscape, and a vibrant 
civil society. We want to help people come to terms 
with their past and we want to support the 
constitutional process. Above all, however, we want to 
assist in the crucial process of building a new social 
and economic order, for we all know that the success of 
social change largely hinges on economic success. 
People who take to the streets for freedom and self-
determination must see first-hand that they, too, can 
succeed with the help of their ideas, their creativity and 
their commitment. 
 Germany is therefore working not only for close 
partnerships but for increased market access. We want 
to foster change through increased trade. We are 
offering investments, especially in the small and 
medium-sized enterprises that form the backbone of an 
open and successful society. Most important of all, 
however, will be to offer young people education and 
training so that they can make the most of their 
opportunities. That is of key importance to successful 
transitions and fresh starts in those countries. 
 The courageous men and women of Syria deserve 
a clear sign of our solidarity. The Syrian Government 
has responded to the legitimate demands of the Syrian 
people with brutal force. Germany will continue to 
press for a Security Council resolution. This is not only 
about showing solidarity with the Syrian people; it is 
also about the credibility of the international 
community. If the repression continues, we Europeans 
will further tighten sanctions against the regime. The 
Syrian people should be free to shape their own future. 
 This week has been dominated by the unresolved 
conflict in the Middle East. On Friday here in New 
York, President Abbas expressed the Palestinians’ 
expectations and understandable frustration with the 
lack of progress made (see ). On the same 
day, Prime Minister Netanyahu reaffirmed Israel’s 
justified desire to exist in peace within secure borders 
(see ). Both sides have legitimate interests. 
However, these interests are certainly not 
irreconcilable. They can be overcome if the parties 
involved are willing to do so. 
 Germany is backing a two-State solution. We 
support a Palestinian State that will allow the 
Palestinians to live in dignity and self-determination 
and that is independent, sovereign, contiguous and 
democratic, as well as politically and economically 
viable. Over the past few years, we have been heavily 
involved in the practical development of this statehood 
by helping to build an administration, infrastructure 
and vocational training, as well as politically, in the 
German-Palestinian Steering Committee. And we do 
not want that State to be founded sometime in the 
distant and indeterminate future. 
 Let there be no doubt, however, that the security 
of Israel is and will continue to be part of the raison 
d’être of the Federal Republic of Germany. Peace 
  
 
11-51384 50 
 
between Israelis and Palestinians is possible. A 
Palestinian State is possible. Two States existing 
peacefully side by side are possible. However, they can 
be achieved only through negotiations. The statement 
issued by the Middle East Quartet on Friday identified 
the milestones along the way. Germany worked hard 
for that Quartet statement and staunchly supports it. 
 The confrontation of words here in New York 
must not be allowed to lead to an escalation in violence 
in the Middle East. I therefore call on both sides, 
Palestinians and Israelis, to enter into direct 
negotiations without delay. On Friday, the two sides 
reaffirmed their desire for a negotiated peace. The task 
now is to channel the energy and pressure of recent 
days into a constructive process. The two sides have 
been called on to come forward within three months 
with comprehensive proposals on territory and security, 
and to refrain from all provocative actions. The 
international community will continue to support the 
difficult road to peace. This includes the Moscow 
conference as part of the negotiating timetable for the 
coming months. 
 I would like to express my appreciation to all 
who have worked so hard in the past few days to create 
this opportunity for a constructive solution. As a 
European, I would like to extend my special thanks to 
the European Union’s High Representative, Lady 
Ashton. Let us make use of the impetus provided by 
the intensive efforts here in New York for the benefit of 
the people of Israel and the Palestinian territories. 
 The international community has worked 
tirelessly for years to ensure that Afghanistan ceases to 
harbour a threat to international peace and security. 
Many, indeed too many people have already lost their 
lives as a result of that threat. On 5 December in Bonn, 
under Afghanistan’s chairmanship, we will discuss the 
way forward. The Conference will focus on three major 
issues. The first is the complete handover of 
responsibility for security. This summer saw the start 
of a process whereby the Afghans are to gradually 
assume responsibility for security in their country by 
2014. This is a responsible handover of responsibility. 
 Secondly, the international community will 
remain engaged in Afghanistan after 2014. Afghanistan 
will continue to need economic initiatives and more 
regional cooperation to help strengthen its sovereignty. 
The New Silk Road initiative, which we launched here 
in New York last week, is intended to serve this aim.  
 Thirdly, Afghanistan’s internal reconciliation and 
support from States in the region are critical to lasting 
peace. The brutal murder of former President Rabbani 
shows that the reconciliation process will continue to 
suffer setbacks. Nevertheless, it must and will go on. 
Germany will play its part on the road to Bonn. 
 While people are seizing the opportunity to build 
a better future for themselves in freedom and self-
determination in a growing number of countries around 
the world, millions in the Horn of Africa are struggling 
to survive. The United Nations has played a valuable 
role in providing swift humanitarian assistance. 
Germany is doing everything in its power in this and 
many other crises to alleviate the suffering. 
 The collapse of State authority and the impact of 
climate change are aggravating the already disastrous 
situation. Germany will continue to be in the vanguard 
of the fight against climate change. As with 
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, as well as 
the protection of human rights, the fight against 
climate change is an integral element of preventive 
diplomacy. It is part of a farsighted peace policy. 
 By the end of this year, our planet will have more 
than 7 billion inhabitants. In that world, Germany will 
place its hopes in a strong United Nations as a forum 
for political consensus-building, a source of rules with 
international legitimacy, and a player in the crisis 
regions of this world. The United Nations Charter and 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights offer more 
people than ever before the direction and inspiration 
they need to strive for a cooperative world order and a 
fairer global community. 
 However, the United Nations has to adapt to our 
changing world. Only then will the decisions made 
here gain political force, effectiveness and acceptance. 
New centres of power are emerging in global politics. 
Their economic dynamism has prompted them to 
demand political participation. The sixty-fifth session 
of the General Assembly considered United Nations 
reform, but no real progress has been achieved so far. 
We welcome the fact that the new President intends to 
again personally champion this reform. We will do 
everything we can to him. 
 In September 38 years ago, two German States 
were admitted to the United Nations. At that time, my 
predecessor in office, Walter Scheel, stated before the 
Assembly: 
 
 
51 11-51384 
 
 “Where there is a question of international 
cooperation, of preserving peace and of 
protecting the rights of man, there the Federal 
Republic of Germany will always be found. If 
there is anything we have learned from our own 
bitter experience it is this: man is the measure of 
all things”. 
 Man is the measure of all things. Germany 
remains committed to this principle.When we 
met in this very place in September last year, who 
among us could have imagined that in barely one year 
the world, already shaken by an unprecedented 
economic crisis, would undergo such change? Within a 
few months, the Arab Spring gave rise to immense 
hope. 
 The Arab peoples, too long crushed by 
oppression, were able to raise their heads and claimed 
the right to be free at last. They fought back against the 
violence and brutality with their bare hands. To those 
who proclaimed that the Arab Muslim world was by 
nature hostile to democracy and human rights, the 
young Arabs produced the most cogent denial. 
 We do not have the right to disappoint the hope of 
the Arab peoples. We do not have the right to destroy 
their dreams. For shattering the dreams of those 
peoples would vindicate the fanatics who have not 
stopped pitting Islam against the West by stirring up 
hatred and violence everywhere. 
 That appeal for justice shook the world, and the 
world cannot respond to that call for justice by 
perpetuating an injustice. That miraculous spring of the 
 
 
23 11-50692 
 
Arab peoples imposes on us the moral and political 
obligation at last to find a solution to the Middle East 
conflict. We cannot wait any longer. The method used 
to date — I weigh my words carefully — has failed. So 
we must change the method. 
 We must stop believing that a single country — 
whether the largest or a small group of countries — can 
resolve so complex a problem. Too many large actors 
have been sidelined for our efforts to succeed. I mean 
that no one can believe that the peace process can 
succeed without Europe, without all the permanent 
members of the Security Council and without the Arab 
States that have already chosen peace. A collective 
approach has become indispensable in order to create 
trust and to provide guarantees to each of the parties. 
 Peace will indeed be made by the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, and by no one else. No one can expect to 
impose it on them. But we must help them.  
 The method no longer works. Let us together 
acknowledge that setting preconditions for negotiation 
is to condemn ourselves to failure. Preconditions are 
the opposite of negotiation. If we wish to enter into 
negotiation, which is the only possible path for peace, 
there must be no preconditions. 
 Let us change the method. All the elements of a 
solution are known — the Madrid Conference of 1991, 
President Obama’s speech of 19 May, the Road Map, 
the Arab Peace Initiative and the parameters agreed by 
the European Union. So, let us stop endlessly 
discussing the parameters and allow negotiation to 
begin in line with a concrete and ambitious timetable. 
Sixty years without one centimetre’s progress — does 
that not compel us to change the method and time 
frame to one month to resume discussions, six months 
to reach agreement on borders and security, and one 
year to reach a definitive settlement? 
 As of this autumn, France proposes hosting a 
donor conference so that the Palestinians can complete 
the construction of their future State. France wishes to 
say that we must not immediately seek the perfect 
solution, because there are no perfect solutions. Let us 
choose the path of compromise, which is neither 
renunciation nor repudiation, but which allows us to 
move forward, step by step. 
 Thus, for 60 years the Palestinians have been 
waiting for their State. Has the time not come to give 
them hope? For 60 years, Israel has suffered from not 
being able to live in peace. For 60 years, the question 
of the peaceful coexistence of the two peoples — 
Palestinian and Israeli — has continued to fester. We 
can no longer wait to take the path of peace. Let us put 
ourselves in the place of the Palestinians. Is it not 
legitimate that they claim their State? Of course it is. 
And who does not see that creating a democratic, 
viable and peaceful Palestinian State would be, for 
Israel, the best guarantee of its security? 
 Let us put ourselves in the place of the Israelis. Is 
it not legitimate that, after 60 years of war and attacks, 
they demand guarantees of that peace, so long awaited? 
Of course it is. I say that forcefully. If anyone 
anywhere in the world were to threaten the existence of 
Israel, France would immediately and wholeheartedly 
stand alongside Israel. Threats made against a State 
Member of the United Nations are unacceptable, and 
they will not be accepted. 
 Today, we are facing a very difficult choice. Each 
of us knows — and let us stop with hypocrisy and one-
off diplomacy — that full recognition of the status of a 
State Member of the United Nations cannot be attained 
at once. The first reason for that is the lack of trust 
between the main parties. But let us tell the truth: who 
can doubt that a veto in the Security Council will 
engender a cycle of violence in the Middle East? Who 
can doubt that? 
 Must we therefore exclude an intermediate stage? 
Why not envisage offering Palestine the status of 
United Nations Observer State? That would be an 
important step forward. After 60 years of immobility, 
which has paved the way for extremists, we would be 
giving hope to the Palestinians by making progress 
towards final status. 
 To show their determined commitment to a 
negotiated peace, the Palestinian authorities should, as 
part of that approach, reaffirm Israel’s right to exist 
and to its security. They should commit to avoiding 
using this new status to resort to actions that are 
incompatible with the pursuit of negotiations. 
 We have but one alternative — immobility and 
negotiations that go nowhere or an intermediate 
solution that would give hope to the Palestinians with 
the status of an Observer State.  
 In parallel, Israel must observe the same restraint. 
It must abstain from any actions that would prejudge 
the final status.  
  
 
11-50692 24 
 
 The ultimate goal must be mutual recognition of 
two nation-States for two peoples established on the 
basis of the 1967 lines with agreed and equivalent 
exchanges of land.  
 The General Assembly, which has a power to do 
so, should decide to move ahead, leave behind the fatal 
trap of paralysis, missed appointments and short-lived 
attempts to relaunch the process. Let us change our 
approach. Let us change our state of mind. Each should 
try to understand the reasoning, sufferings and fears of 
the other. Each must open its eyes and be ready to 
make concessions. 
 In conclusion, I would like to say to the 
Palestinian people with the deep and sincere friendship 
I hold for them: “Think of the Israeli mothers grieving 
for their family members killed in terrorist attacks. 
They feel the same pain as the Palestinian mothers 
confronted with the brutal death of one of theirs”. 
 I would like to say to the Israeli people with the 
deep and sincere friendship I hold for them: “Listen to 
what the young people of the Arab Spring are saying: 
‘Long live freedom!’ They are not crying ‘Down with 
Israel’. You cannot remain immobile when this wind of 
freedom and democracy is blowing in your region”. 
 I say with deep and sincere friendship for these 
two peoples who have suffered so much that the time 
has come to build peace for the children of Palestine 
and for the children of Israel. But it would be a great 
shame if the General Assembly did not seize the 
opportunity of the reawakening of the Arab peoples to 
democracy to settle a problem that brings unhappiness 
to these two peoples, who are in any event condemned 
to live alongside each other. If we take a compromise 
solution, we will rebuild trust and we will give people 
hope. 
 I say that with the utmost gravity to the 
representatives of all nations. We must assume an 
historic responsibility. It is the General Assembly of 
the United Nations that must keep this appointment 
with History. 
 Let us reassure Israel and give hope to the 
Palestinian people. The solution is on the table. Let us 
take this compromise solution over deadlock. Deadlock 
might satisfy everyone here, but it will create violence, 
bitterness and opposition that will imperil the 
resurgence of the Arab peoples. To that, France says 
that the tragedy must cease for a simple reason: it has 
gone on for too long. 
It is an honour 
to address the General Assembly for the first time, and 
it is a particular honour to do so as such momentous 
events unfold in the Arab world. Last week I was in 
Tripoli and Benghazi. I saw the hunger of a people 
eager to get on with reclaiming their country, writing 
themselves a new chapter of freedom and democracy. 
This has been the most dramatic episode of what has 
been called the Arab Spring. 
 My argument today is that Libya and the Arab 
Spring show that the United Nations needs a new way 
of working, because the Arab Spring is a massive 
opportunity to spread peace, prosperity, democracy 
and, vitally, security, but only if we really seize the 
opportunity.  
 So the events of this year present a challenge to 
all of us — a challenge to Europe to show it can reform 
its aid and trade strategy to be truly progressive; a 
challenge to the African Union, to meet the 
opportunities of this century with the same courage 
that won liberation in the last; a challenge to the 
Israelis and Palestinians, to take the bold steps to come 
to the table and make lasting peace; a challenge to Iran 
and to Syria, to give their peoples the freedoms they 
deserve; and a challenge to the United Nations. 
 One can sign every human rights declaration in 
the world, but if one stands by and watches people 
being slaughtered in their own country when one could 
 
 
25 11-50865 
 
act, then what are those signatures really worth? The 
United Nations has to show that we can be not just 
united in condemnation, but united in action, acting in 
a way that lives up to the United Nations founding 
principles and meets the needs of peoples everywhere. 
 The peoples of the Arab world have made their 
aspirations clear. They want transparency and 
accountability of Government, an end to corruption, 
the fair and consistent rule of law, the chance to get a 
job and to have a stake in how their country is run, the 
freedom to communicate and the chance to participate 
in shaping society as citizens with rights and 
responsibilities. 
 No one says that achieving those ambitions will 
be easy. There will be false starts and wrong turns 
along the way, not least where countries have inherited 
sectarian and regional divisions, weak political parties, 
State institutions enfeebled by misuse and a politics 
distorted by the false choice between repression on the 
one hand and Islamist extremism on the other. 
 The long process of developing a new and 
accountable Government is just beginning. And across 
the region, we cannot guarantee that the process of 
reform is irreversible. But let us be clear. These 
developments present a great opportunity for many 
who have long been sold short by their Governments, 
and there is an opportunity and responsibility for all of 
us, too. 
 Just as after 1989 we helped those who tore down 
the Berlin Wall to build robust democracies and market 
economies, just as in 1994 we welcomed South Africa 
back into the commonwealth of nations when it chose 
the path of reconciliation and democracy instead of 
racial conflict, so now in 2011, as people in North 
Africa and the Middle East stand up and give voice to 
their hopes for more open and democratic societies, we 
have an opportunity, and, I would say, a responsibility 
to help them. 
 Now the mistake we often make in the West is to 
think that because the people in this region want 
democracy, they will want it in the same way and with 
the same outcomes that we do. We should not be trying 
to impose Western values or a single template on the 
region. Democracy is a process, not an event. 
Participatory Government involves so much more than 
just the simple act of voting. The Assembly heard not 
long ago from President Ahmadinejad. He did not 
remind us that he runs a country where they may have 
elections, of a sort, but they also repress freedom of 
speech. They do everything they can to avoid the 
accountability of a free media. They violently prevent 
demonstrations. And yes, they detain and torture those 
who argue for a better future. So we should never 
pretend that having elections is enough. The building 
blocks of democracy have to be patiently developed 
from the grass roots up. The process will be different in 
every country. And it is not for us to dictate how Arab 
nations should respond to those challenges, or to 
lecture them about how to do it. But there is an 
important opportunity for us to help, and we must seize 
it.  
 There are important lessons from what has 
happened in Libya. The Libyans liberated themselves. 
Ordinary Libyans from all walks of life came together 
and showed incredible resilience and bravery as they 
rose up and drove out Al-Qadhafi. The people of 
Benghazi, the brave fighters of Misurata, the people of 
Zawiyah, the warriors from the Nafusa Mountains, all 
of them showed incredible courage in liberating their 
country. The National Transitional Council, which 
demonstrated great leadership, not least as Tripoli fell, 
urged people to avoid reprisals and to look to the 
future — a message that still holds true today.  
 That revolution truly belongs to the Libyan 
people. The United Nations played a vital role 
authorizing international action. But let us be clear; the 
United Nations is no more effective than the nation 
States that come together to enforce its will. And on 
this occasion a coalition of nations across the Western 
and Arab world had the will to act. In doing so, they 
stopped Benghazi from joining Srebrenica and Rwanda 
in history’s painful roll call of massacres that the world 
failed to prevent. Today, Tripoli and Benghazi are 
cities transformed. Where there was fear, now there is 
hope and an optimism and belief that are truly 
inspiring.  
 But there are challenges ahead, not just in Libya 
but all across the region. Economies in the region have 
underperformed when compared with their peers. In 
1960, Egypt’s gross domestic product per capita was 
comparable with Korea’s. Today it has fallen to around 
just one fifth of the size. Across the region, some 
countries dependent on oil revenues, and others held 
back by heavy State control have failed to diversify 
and create jobs in productive new sectors and failed to 
connect themselves to the economies of the region and 
the wider world.  
  
 
11-50865 26 
 
 Indeed, less than four per cent of North African 
trade is within the region, making it the least integrated 
neighbourhood in our world. And the promise of 
economic reform has not been fulfilled. Too often 
people were told economic reform would bring them 
market economies with greater freedom to start up 
businesses, to trade, to grow and to create wealth. But 
it did not. It brought them corrupt and crony 
capitalism. Now the future is for the people of this 
region to determine, but I would urge them not to reject 
something they have never had — a genuine, open, fair 
and transparent market economy, which has proved the 
world over to be the best way to create jobs and 
wealth. And the need for economic success is vital, 
because this is a region where 60 per cent of the 
population is under 25, and youth unemployment is 
nearly double the world average. 
 It is a region that must create 50 million new jobs 
by 2020 just to keep pace with its population; that 
means 700,000 new jobs every year in Egypt alone. 
And these jobs should not be just for men. Let us be 
honest. It is not just the men of the region who want a 
job and a voice. The unemployment rate for Egyptian 
women is more than three times that of men. And it is 
not only the economy where they are denied the chance 
to play a fuller role. It is society and politics and 
culture too. But look at the crowds in Freedom Square 
and we see it is the women too, finding their voices, 
showing clearly that they want to play a part in 
building their future. 
 So, in this historic period, when the voice of this 
region is finally being heard, there is now a unique 
opportunity for women to fulfil their ambitions too. 
This is not just in the interests of women. It is in the 
interests of those countries as a whole. Let us be clear. 
You cannot build strong economies, open societies and 
inclusive political systems if you lock out women. So 
the Arab Spring will not succeed if the opportunities 
that are opening up are denied to half of the 
population.  
 Now, of course, the actions we take to support the 
people in each country must be tailored to that country, 
with respect for its particular culture, history and 
tradition. What is right for Libya will not necessarily 
be right for everywhere else. But the international 
community has found its voice in Libya, and we must 
not now lose our nerve. We must have the confidence 
to speak out and act as necessary to support those who 
seek new freedoms.  
 In the European Union, it is time to ensure that 
the billions of euros we spend in this region each year 
are used to support reform that will meet the 
aspirations of the people. And there should be no more 
excuses for denying the people of the region fair access 
to our markets, including in agriculture. Here at the 
United Nations, we have a responsibility to stand up 
against regimes that persecute their people. We need to 
see reform in Yemen. And above all, on Syria, it is time 
for the members of the Security Council to act. We 
must now adopt a credible resolution, threatening 
tough sanctions. 
 Of course we should always act with care when it 
comes to the internal affairs of a sovereign State. But 
we cannot allow this to be an excuse for indifference in 
the face of a regime that, week after week, arrests, 
intimidates, tortures and kills people who are 
peacefully trying to make their voices heard.  
 The voice of the African Union is vital too. Africa 
has rightly challenged the world to meet its aid 
commitments. I am proud that Britain will meet its 
commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross national 
income from 2013. And all the countries that made 
promises at Gleneagles and elsewhere must meet those 
promises too. In the case of Britain, it means we have 
been able to provide £124 million of emergency aid to 
3 million people facing starvation in the Horn of 
Africa. But at the same time, Africa must meet its 
responsibilities too.  
 Many will find it hard to understand why 
countries in southern Africa which fought so hard to 
throw off oppression themselves, have been so slow to 
respond to the Arab Spring. Of course, I recognize that 
many have long been committed to non-intervention. 
But my argument is that where action is necessary, 
legal and right, to fail to act is to fail those who need 
our help. So it is welcome that the African Union is 
taking steps to recognize the National Transitional 
Council in Libya, as many African countries have 
already done. Africa’s responsibility now is to embrace 
and support Libya’s new, inclusive and democratic 
future. And this must include ensuring that those 
wanted for serious crimes are brought to justice, and 
that the wealth stolen from the Libyan people is 
returned to them.  
 We all have a responsibility to the Palestinians 
too. A key part of the Arab Spring is the right of 
Palestinians to have a viable State of their own, living 
 
 
27 11-50865 
 
in peace, alongside a safe and secure State of Israel. 
And I strongly support this. There has been much 
speculation about what will happen here this week. Let 
us be clear about one fact. No resolution can, on its 
own, substitute for the political will necessary to bring 
peace. Peace will only come when Palestinians and 
Israelis sit down and talk to each other, make 
compromises, build trust and agree. So our role must 
be to support this, to defeat those who embrace 
violence, to stop the growth of settlements and to 
support Palestinians and Israelis alike to make peace.  
 But the opportunity in Libya and elsewhere in the 
region is not just about achieving a more open society, 
prosperity and the building blocks of democracy for 
their own sake — it is about security too. Some have 
argued that stability in the Arab world can only be 
achieved by the tight control of strong authoritarian 
regimes and that reform is a threat to stability. In fact, 
the opposite is true. Reform is the basis of long-term 
stability. Authoritarianism threatens it.  
 While there is never a justification for resorting 
to terror, if people’s hunger for a job and a voice are 
denied, there is a real risk that the frustration and the 
alienation they feel will cause them to be drawn to 
more violent and extremist responses. That is not just a 
problem for one region. It is a problem for all of us. 
Here, in this great city, where 10 years ago, people of 
90 different nationalities were killed in the most 
horrific terrorist attack in history, we must recognize 
that political and economic reform in the Middle East 
is not just good in its own right, but that it is also a key 
part of how, in the end, we will defeat Al-Qaida.  
 Of course, we must meet terrorist activity with a 
strong and resolute security response. Al-Qaida and its 
offshoots must know that they will have no safe hiding 
place to plot or recruit young men to train as terrorists. 
But in the long term, we must defeat not only the 
terrorists, but the extremist ideology that feeds them. 
Al-Qaida’s poisonous ideology has thrived on 
repression. Democracy is what it fears most. People are 
not in Tahrir Square in Cairo and Freedom Square in 
Libya for an Islamist caliphate, but for a job, a voice 
and a future. And we must heed their call, for their 
freedom and for the security of us all.Allow me at the outset to 
congratulate Mr. Al-Nasser on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. I wish to assure 
him of India’s full cooperation in the conduct of the 
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly. 
 It is also my great pleasure to welcome in our 
midst the new State of South Sudan. 
 We meet during this session of the General 
Assembly at a time of great uncertainty and profound 
change. Until a few years ago, the world had taken for 
granted the benefits of globalization and global 
interdependence. Today we are being called upon to 
cope with the negative dimensions of those very 
phenomena. Economic, social and political events in 
different parts of the world have coalesced, and their 
adverse impact is now being felt across countries and 
continents. 
 The world economy is in trouble. The shoots of 
recovery which were visible after the economic and 
financial crisis of 2008 have yet to blossom. In many 
respects, the crisis has deepened even further. 
 The traditional engines of the global economy, 
including the United States, Europe and Japan, which 
are also the sources of global economic and financial 
stability, are today faced with continued economic 
slowdown. Recessionary trends in those countries are 
affecting confidence in world financial and capital 
markets. These developments are bound to have a 
negative impact on developing countries, which also 
have to bear the additional burden of inflationary 
pressures. 
 There has been unprecedented social and political 
upheaval in West Asia, the Gulf and North Africa. The 
peoples of those regions are demanding the right to 
shape their own future. Energy and food prices are 
once again spiralling and introducing fresh instability, 
especially for developing countries. 
 The Palestinian question remains unresolved and 
a source of great instability and violence. India is 
steadfast in its support for the Palestinian people’s 
struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable and united 
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, 
living within secure and recognizable borders side by 
side and at peace with Israel. We look forward to 
welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of the United 
Nations. 
 Terrorism continues to rear its ugly head and take 
a grievous toll of innocent lives. New threats to 
international security have emerged. At a time when 
the world needs more international commerce, the sea 
lanes of communication across the Indian Ocean are 
under siege. Acts of piracy are being carried out with 
impunity from lands that are beyond the writ of any 
functioning State or international accountability. 
 Iniquitous growth, inadequate job and education 
opportunities and the denial of basic human freedoms 
are leading to a growing radicalization of the youth, 
intolerance and extremism. 
  
 
11-51360 10 
 
 We have no choice but to meet these challenges 
head-on. We will succeed if we adopt a cooperative 
rather than a confrontational approach. We will 
succeed if we embrace once again the principles on 
which the United Nations was founded: 
internationalism and multilateralism. More importantly, 
we will succeed if our efforts have legitimacy and are 
pursued not just within the framework of the law but 
also in the spirit of the law. 
 The observance of the rule of law is as important 
in international affairs as it is within countries. 
Societies cannot be reordered from outside through 
military force. People in all countries have the right to 
choose their own destiny and decide their own future. 
 The international community has a role to play in 
assisting in the processes of transition and institution-
building, but the idea that prescriptions should be 
imposed from outside is fraught with danger. 
 Action taken under the authority of the United 
Nations must respect the unity, territorial integrity, 
sovereignty and independence of individual States. 
Correspondingly, governments are duty-bound to their 
citizens to create conditions that enable them to freely 
determine their pathways to development. This is the 
essence of democracy and fundamental human 
freedoms. 
 There are many other things that we can do. We 
must address the issue of the deficit in global 
governance. We need a stronger and more effective 
United Nations. We need a United Nations that is 
sensitive to the aspirations of everyone, rich or poor, 
big or small. For this, the United Nations and its 
principal organs, the General Assembly and the 
Security Council, must be revitalized and reformed. 
 The reform and expansion of the Security 
Council are essential if it is to reflect contemporary 
reality. Such an outcome will enhance the Council’s 
credibility and effectiveness in dealing with global 
issues. Early reform of the Security Council must be 
pursued with renewed vigour and urgently enacted. 
 We should not allow the global economic 
slowdown to become a pretext for building walls 
around ourselves through protectionism or erecting 
barriers to the movement of people, services and 
capital. Effective ways and means must be deployed to 
promote the coordination of the macroeconomic 
policies of the major economies. The reform of the 
governance systems of international financial 
institutions should be pursued with speed and 
efficiency. 
 The development agenda must be brought firmly 
back to centre stage in United Nations priorities. We 
need a much more determined effort to ensure 
balanced, inclusive and sustainable development for 
the benefit of vast sections of humanity. Each of us can 
contribute to this task, but we can achieve far more if 
we act in partnership. 
 In the past few decades, India has lifted tens of 
millions of its people out of abject poverty. We are in a 
position to feed our population better, educate them 
better and widen their economic choices. However, we 
still have a very long way to go. 
 We wish to accelerate the pace of India’s 
transformation in partnership with the international 
community. A fast-growing India can expand the 
boundaries of the global economy. A democratic, plural 
and secular India can contribute to tolerance and 
peaceful coexistence among nations. 
 Developing countries need investment, 
technology and market access for their products. They 
need assistance in the areas of education, health, 
women’s empowerment and agriculture. During the 
recently held fourth United Nations Conference on the 
Least Developed Countries Conference in Istanbul in 
May 2011, India strengthened its partnership with the 
least developed countries through significantly 
enhanced lines of credit and assistance in capacity-
building. 
 We should pay particular attention to Africa. 
Africa’s richest resources are not its minerals but its 
people. We must empower them and open the doors for 
them to human advances through technology, education 
and skills development. 
 At the second India-Africa Forum Summit in 
Addis Ababa earlier this year, India offered lines of 
credit worth $5 billion and an additional $700 million 
in grant assistance for human resource development, 
technology transfer and building new institutions. 
 The United Nations should lead efforts in the area 
of food security. We need more cooperation in 
agricultural technologies, water conservation, land 
usage and productivity, and stability in commodity 
prices. 
 
 
11 11-51360 
 
 Developing countries need a peaceful external 
environment in which to grow. The fight against 
terrorism must be unrelenting. There cannot be 
selective approaches in dealing with terrorist groups or 
the infrastructure of terrorism. Terrorism has to be 
fought across all fronts. In South Asia there are 
encouraging signs of cooperation in the area of 
security, as exemplified in India’s cooperation with 
Bangladesh. Such cooperation is adding to the security 
of both our countries. 
 However, the recent assassination of 
Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani in Kabul is a chilling 
reminder of the designs of the enemies of peace in 
Afghanistan. It is essential that the process of nation-
building and reconciliation in that country succeed. 
This is vital for ensuring peace and security in the 
region. India will play its part in helping the people of 
Afghanistan build a better future for themselves, just as 
we are doing in other countries in South Asia. We will 
do so because prosperity and stability in our region are 
indivisible. 
 We wish to see an open, inclusive and transparent 
architecture of regional cooperation in the Asia-Pacific 
region and peaceful settlement of disputes. I call upon 
the United Nations to evolve a comprehensive and 
effective response to the problem of piracy in the Red 
Sea and off the coast of Somalia. As a littoral State of 
the Indian Ocean, India is ready to work with other 
countries in that regard. Simultaneously, the 
international community should continue with efforts 
to restore stability in Somalia. We have joined 
international efforts to provide humanitarian assistance 
to the countries afflicted with severe famine and 
drought in the Horn of Africa, specifically Somalia, 
Kenya and Djibouti. 
 Nuclear proliferation continues to be a threat to 
international security. The action plan put forward by 
former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world provides, even 
today, a concrete road map for achieving nuclear 
disarmament in a time-bound, universal, 
non-discriminatory, phased and verifiable manner. I 
commend the United Nations for its efforts in focusing 
world attention on nuclear safety. Our plans for 
utilizing nuclear power to meet our energy needs hinge 
on full satisfaction of our concerns about the safety of 
nuclear energy. We have undertaken a thorough review 
of the safety of our nuclear plants. 
 The perspectives I have outlined to the Assembly 
are those that have guided our actions in the Security 
Council since India became a non-permanent member 
of the Council in January. There are still millions of 
people living in poverty across the world. Their plight 
has worsened, through no fault of theirs, due to the 
global economic and financial crisis of recent years. 
The actions of Governments around the world are 
therefore under close scrutiny. It is vitally important 
that through our actions and deeds we renew the 
people’s faith in the Charter and objectives of the 
United Nations. I am confident that we can do this 
through acts of statesmanship, foresight and collective 
effort. India stands ready to play its part in this noble 
endeavour.Israel has extended its 
hand in peace from the moment it was established 
63 years ago. On behalf of Israel and the Jewish 
people, I extend that hand again today. I extend it to 
the people of Egypt and Jordan, with renewed 
friendship for neighbours with whom we have made 
peace. I extend it to the people of Turkey, with respect 
and goodwill. I extend it to the people of Libya and 
Tunisia, with admiration for those trying to build a 
democratic future. I extend it to the other peoples of 
North Africa and the Arabian peninsula, with whom we 
want to forge a new beginning. I extend it to the people 
of Syria, Lebanon and Iran, with awe at the courage of 
those fighting brutal repression.  
 Most especially, I extend my hand to the 
Palestinian people, with whom we seek a just and 
lasting peace. 
 In Israel, our hope for peace never wanes. Our 
scientists, doctors and innovators apply their genius to 
improving the world of tomorrow. Our artists and our 
writers enrich the heritage of humanity. Now, I know 
that this is not exactly the image of Israel that is often 
portrayed in this Hall. After all, it was here in 1975 that 
the age-old yearning of my people to restore our 
national life in our ancient biblical homeland was 
branded, shamefully, as racism. It was right here in 
1980 that the historic peace agreement between Israel 
and Egypt was not praised, but denounced. It is here, 
year after year, that Israel is unjustly singled out for 
condemnation. It is singled out for condemnation more 
often than all the nations of the world combined. 
Twenty-one out of 27 relevant General Assembly 
resolutions condemn Israel, the one true democracy in 
the Middle East.  
 This is an unfortunate part of the United Nations 
institution. It is the theatre of the absurd. It not only 
casts Israel as the villain, it often casts real villains in 
leading roles. Al-Qadhafi’s Libya chaired the 
Commission on Human Rights. Saddam’s Iraq headed 
the Conference on Disarmament.  
 One might say that is the past. Well, here is what 
is happening now — right now, today. Hizbullah-
controlled Lebanon now presides over the Security 
Council. This means, in effect, that a terror 
organization presides over the body entrusted with 
guaranteeing the world’s security. One could not make 
this up. Here in the United Nations, automatic 
majorities can decide anything. They can decide that 
the sun rises in the west. They can also decide — they 
have decided — that the Western Wall in Jerusalem, 
Judaism’s holiest place, is occupied Palestinian 
territory. 
 Yet, even here in the General Assembly, the truth 
can sometimes break through. In 1984, when I was 
appointed Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I 
 
 
37 11-51185 
 
visited the great rabbi of Lubavitch. He said to me — 
and I do not want anyone here to be offended, because 
from personal experience of serving here, I know there 
are many honourable men and women, many capable 
and decent people, serving their nations here — but 
here is what the rebbe said to me. He said, “You will be 
serving in a house of many lies”. And then he said, 
“Remember that, even in the darkest place, the light of 
a single candle can be seen far and wide”. Today I hope 
that the light of truth will shine, if only for a few 
minutes, in a Hall that for too long has been a place of 
darkness for my country.  
 As Israel’s Prime Minister, I did not come here to 
win applause. I came here to speak the truth. The truth 
is that Israel wants peace. The truth is that I want 
peace. The truth is that in the Middle East, at all times 
but especially during these turbulent days, peace must 
be anchored in security. The truth is that we can 
achieve peace not through United Nations resolutions, 
but only through direct negotiations between the 
parties. The truth is that so far the Palestinians have 
refused to negotiate. The truth is that Israel wants 
peace with a Palestinian State, but the Palestinians 
want a State without peace. The truth is that the 
Assembly should not let that happen. 
 When I first came here 27 years ago, the world 
was divided between East and West. Since then, the 
Cold War ended, great civilizations have risen from 
centuries of slumber, hundreds of millions have been 
lifted out of poverty, countless more are poised to 
follow, and the remarkable thing is that, so far, this 
monumental historic shift has largely occurred 
peacefully.  
 Yet a malignancy is now growing between East 
and West that threatens the peace of all. It seeks not to 
liberate, but to enslave; not to build, but to destroy. 
That malignancy is militant Islam. It cloaks itself in the 
mantle of a great faith, yet it murders Jews, Christians 
and Muslims alike with unforgiving impartiality. On 
11 September 2001, it killed thousands of Americans 
and left the twin towers in smouldering ruins. Last 
night, I laid a wreath on the 9/11 memorial. It was 
deeply moving. However, as I was going there, one 
thing echoed in my mind: the outrageous words of the 
President of Iran at this rostrum yesterday. He implied 
that 9/11 was an American conspiracy. Some left this 
Hall; everyone should have. 
 Since 9/11, militant Islamists have slaughtered 
countless other innocents in London and Madrid, in 
Baghdad and Mumbai, in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, and 
in every part of Israel. I believe that the greatest danger 
facing our world is that this fanaticism will arm itself 
with nuclear weapons, and that is precisely what Iran is 
trying to do. Can we imagine that man who ranted here 
yesterday armed with nuclear weapons? 
 The international community must stop Iran 
before it is too late. If Iran is not stopped, we will all 
face the spectre of nuclear terrorism, and the Arab 
Spring could soon become an Iranian winter. That 
would be a tragedy. Millions of Arabs have taken to the 
streets to replace tyranny with liberty, and no one 
would benefit more than Israel if those committed to 
freedom and peace would prevail. 
 That is my fervent hope, but as the Prime 
Minister of Israel, I cannot risk the future of the Jewish 
State on wishful thinking. Leaders must see reality as it 
is, not as it ought to be. We must do our best to shape 
the future, but we cannot wish away the dangers of the 
present. 
 The world around Israel is definitely becoming 
more dangerous. Militant Islam has already taken over 
Lebanon and Gaza. It is determined to tear apart the 
peace treaties between Israel and Egypt and between 
Israel and Jordan. It has poisoned many Arab minds 
against Jews and Israel, and against America and the 
West. It opposes not the policies of Israel but the 
existence of Israel. 
 Now, some argue that if we want to slow down 
the spread of militant Islam, especially in these 
turbulent times, Israel must hurry to make concessions, 
including territorial compromises. And this theory 
sounds simple. Basically it goes like this: leave the 
territory and peace will be advanced. The moderates 
will be strengthened; the radicals will be kept at bay. 
And do not worry about the pesky details of how Israel 
will actually defend itself; international troops will do 
the job. 
 These people say to me constantly, “Just make a 
sweeping offer, and everything will work out”. There is 
only one problem with that theory. We have tried it and 
it has not worked. In 2000, Israel made a sweeping 
peace offer that met virtually all the Palestinian 
demands. Chairman Arafat rejected it. The Palestinians 
then launched a terror attack that claimed 1,000 Israeli 
lives. 
  
 
11-51185 38 
 
 In 2008, Prime Minister Olmert afterwards made 
an even more sweeping offer. President Abbas did not 
even respond to it. But Israel did more than just make 
sweeping offers. We actually left territory. We 
withdrew from Lebanon in 2000 and from every square 
inch of Gaza in 2005. That did not calm the militant 
Islamic storm that threatens us. It only brought the 
storm closer and made it stronger. Hizbullah and 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets against our cities 
from the very territories we had vacated.  
 When Israel left Lebanon and Gaza, the 
moderates did not defeat the radicals; the moderates 
were devoured by the radicals. And I regret to say that 
international troops, including those of the United 
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the European 
Union Border Assistance Mission in Gaza, did not stop 
the radicals from attacking Israel. 
 We left Gaza hoping for peace. We did not freeze 
the settlements in Gaza; we uprooted them. We did 
exactly what the theory says. We got out, went back to 
the 1967 borders and dismantled the settlements. I do 
not think people remember how far we went to achieve 
this. We uprooted thousands of people from their 
homes. We pulled children out of their schools and 
their kindergartens. We bulldozed synagogues. We 
even moved loved ones from their graves. And then, 
having done all that, we gave the keys of Gaza to 
President Abbas. 
 The theory says that it should have all worked 
out, and that President Abbas and the Palestinian 
Authority could now build a peaceful state in Gaza. We 
all remember that the entire world applauded our 
withdrawal as an act of great statesmanship and a bold 
act of peace. But we did not get peace. We got war. We 
got Iran, which, through its proxy, Hamas, promptly 
kicked out the Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian 
Authority collapsed in a day — in one day.  
 President Abbas just said from this rostrum that 
the Palestinians are armed only with their hopes and 
dreams. Yes, they are armed with their hopes, dreams 
and 10,000 missiles and Grad rockets supplied by Iran, 
not to mention the river of lethal weapons now flowing 
into Gaza from the Sinai, from Libya and from 
elsewhere. 
 Thousands of missiles have already rained down 
on our cities. So it might be understand, given all this, 
why Israelis rightly ask, “What is to prevent this from 
happening again in the West Bank?” Most of the major 
cities in the south of our country are within a few 
dozen kilometres from Gaza, but in the centre of the 
country opposite the West Bank, our cities are a few 
hundred metres or at most a few kilometres from the 
edge of the West Bank. 
 So I want to ask: Would anyone here bring danger 
so close to their cities and families? Would they act so 
recklessly with the lives of their citizens? Israel is 
prepared to have a Palestinian State in the West Bank, 
but we are not prepared to have another Gaza there. 
And that is why we need to have real security 
arrangements, which the Palestinians simply refuse to 
negotiate with us. 
 Israelis remember the bitter lessons of Gaza. 
Many of Israel’s critics ignore them. They 
irresponsibly advise Israel to go down this same 
perilous path again. We read what these people say and 
it is as if nothing happened. They just repeat the same 
advice and the same formulas as though none of this 
happened. And these critics continue to press Israel to 
make far-reaching concessions without first assuring 
Israel’s security. They praise those who unwittingly 
feed the insatiable crocodile of militant Islam as bold 
statesmen. They cast as enemies of peace those of us 
who insist that we must first erect a sturdy barrier to 
keep the crocodile out, or at the very least jam an iron 
bar between its gaping jaws. 
 So in the face of the labels and the libels, Israel 
must heed better advice. It is better to receive bad press 
than a good eulogy, and better still would be a fair 
press whose sense of history extends beyond breakfast 
and that recognizes Israel’s legitimate security 
concerns. I believe that in serious peace negotiations, 
these needs and concerns can be properly addressed, 
but they will not be addressed without negotiations.  
 And the needs are many, because Israel is such a 
tiny country. Without Judea and Samaria — the West 
Bank — Israel is all of nine miles wide. I want to put 
that in perspective for all of us in this city. It is about 
two-thirds the length of Manhattan. It is the distance 
between Battery Park and Columbia University. And 
let us not forget that the people who live in Brooklyn 
and New Jersey are considerably nicer than some of 
Israel’s neighbours.  
 So how does one protect such a tiny country, 
surrounded by people sworn to its destruction and 
armed to the teeth by Iran? Obviously, one cannot 
defend it from within that narrow space alone. Israel 
 
 
39 11-51185 
 
needs greater strategic depth, and that is exactly why 
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) did not require 
Israel to leave all of the territories it captured in the 
Six-Day War. It talked about withdrawal from 
territories to secure and defensible boundaries. And to 
defend itself, Israel must therefore maintain a long-
term Israeli military presence in critical strategic areas 
in the West Bank. 
 I explained this to President Abbas. He answered 
that if a Palestinian State was to be a sovereign 
country, it could never accept such arrangements. Why 
not? The United States has had troops in Japan, 
Germany and South Korea for more than a half a 
century. Britain has an air base in Cyprus. France has 
forces in three independent African nations. None of 
those States claim that they are not sovereign countries.  
 There are many other vital security issues that 
also must be addressed. Take the issue of airspace. 
Again, Israel’s small dimensions create huge security 
problems. The United States can be crossed by jet 
airplane in six hours. To fly across Israel, it takes three 
minutes. So is Israel’s tiny airspace to be chopped in 
half and given to a Palestinian State not at peace with 
Israel?  
 Our major international airport is a few 
kilometres from the West Bank. Without peace, will 
our planes become targets for anti-aircraft missiles 
placed in the adjacent Palestinian State? And how will 
we stop the smuggling into the West Bank? It is not 
merely the West Bank; it is the West Bank mountains, 
which dominate the coastal plain below where most of 
Israel’s population sits. How could we prevent the 
smuggling into those mountains of missiles that could 
be fired at our cities?  
 I bring up these problems because they are not 
theoretical problems. They are very real, and for 
Israelis, they are life-and-death matters. All of these 
potential cracks in Israel’s security have to be sealed in 
a peace agreement before a Palestinian State is 
declared, not afterwards, because if it is left until 
afterwards they will not be sealed. And these problems 
will explode in our face and explode the peace.  
 The Palestinians should first make peace with 
Israel and then get their State. But I also want to say 
this. After such a peace agreement is signed, Israel will 
not be the last country to welcome a Palestinian State 
as a new Member of the United Nations. We will be the 
first.  
 There is one more thing. Hamas has been 
violating international law by holding our soldier Gilad 
Shalit captive for five years. They have not allowed 
even one Red Cross visit. He is held in a dungeon, in 
darkness, against all international norms. Gilad Shalit 
is the son of Aviva and Noam Shalit. He is the 
grandson of Zvi Shalit, who escaped the Holocaust by 
coming to the land of Israel as a boy in the 1930s. 
Gilad Shalit is the son of every Israeli family. Every 
nation represented here should demand his immediate 
release. If we want to adopt a resolution about the 
Middle East today, that is the resolution we should 
adopt.  
 Last year in Israel at Bar-Ilan University, and this 
year in the Knesset and the United States Congress, I 
laid out my vision for peace, in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State. Yes, the 
Jewish State. After all, this is the body that recognized 
the Jewish State 64 years ago. Now, does the Assembly 
not think that it is about time that Palestinians did the 
same?  
 The Jewish State of Israel will always protect the 
rights of all of its minorities, including the more than 
1 million Arab citizens of Israel. I wish I could say the 
same thing about a future Palestinian State, for as 
Palestinian officials made clear the other day — in 
fact, I think they did so right here in New York — the 
Palestinian State would not allow any Jews. They 
would be Jew-free — Judenrein. That is ethnic 
cleansing. There are laws today in Ramallah that make 
the selling of land to Jews punishable by death. That is 
racism. And the Assembly knows which laws this 
evokes.  
 Israel has no intention whatsoever of changing 
the democratic character of our State. We just do not 
want the Palestinians to try to change the Jewish 
character of our State. We want them to give up the 
fantasy of flooding Israel with millions of Palestinians.  
 President Abbas just stood here and said that the 
settlements lie at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflicts. Well, that is odd. Our conflict was raging for 
nearly half a century before there was a single Israeli 
settlement in the West Bank. So, if what President 
Abbas is saying was true, then I guess that the 
settlements he is talking about are Tel Aviv, Haifa, 
Jaffa and Be?er Sheva. Maybe that is what he meant the 
other day when he said that Israel had been occupying 
  
 
11-51185 40 
 
Palestinian land for 63 years. He did not say from 
1967; he said from 1948.  
 I hope that somebody will bother to ask him this 
question, because it illustrates a simple truth. The core 
of the conflict is not the settlements; the settlements 
are a result of the conflict. The settlements are an issue 
that has to be addressed and resolved in the course of 
negotiations. But the core of the conflict has always 
been, and unfortunately remains, the refusal of the 
Palestinians to recognize a Jewish State within any 
border.  
 I think it is time that the Palestinian leadership 
recognize what every serious international leader from 
Lord Balfour and David Lloyd George in 1917, to 
President Truman in 1948, to President Obama just two 
days ago right here, has recognized — that Israel is the 
Jewish State.  
 I would ask President Abbas to stop walking 
around this issue, recognize the Jewish State, and make 
peace with us. In such a genuine peace, Israel is 
prepared to make painful compromises. We believe that 
the Palestinians should be neither the citizens of Israel 
nor its subjects. They should live in a free State of their 
own. But they should be ready, like us, for 
compromise. And we will know that they are ready for 
compromise and peace when they start taking Israel’s 
security requirements seriously and when they stop 
denying our historical connection to our ancient 
homeland. I often hear them accuse Israel of Judaizing 
Jerusalem. That is like accusing America of 
Americanizing Washington, D.C., or the British of 
Anglicizing London. Why are we called Jews? Because 
we come from Judea.  
 In my office in Jerusalem, there is an ancient 
seal. It is a signet ring of a Jewish official from the 
time of the Bible. The seal was found right next to the 
Western Wall and it dates back 2,700 years to the time 
of King Hezekiah. Now, the name of a Jewish official 
is inscribed on the ring in Hebrew. His name was 
Netanyahu. That is my last name. My first name, 
Benjamin, can be traced back a 1,000 years to 
Benjamin — Binyamin — the son of Jacob, who was 
also known as Israel. Jacob and his 12 sons roamed 
these same hills of Judea and Samaria 4,000 years ago, 
and there has been a continuous Jewish presence in the 
land ever since.  
 Those Jews who were exiled from our land — 
Jews in Spain, on the eve of their expulsion; Jews in 
Ukraine, fleeing the pogroms; Jews fighting in the 
Warsaw Ghetto, as the Nazis were circling around it — 
never stopped dreaming of coming back. They never 
stopped praying, they never stopped yearning. They 
whispered: “Next year in Jerusalem. Next year in the 
promised land”.  
 As the Prime Minister of Israel, I speak for a 
hundred generations of Jews who were dispersed 
throughout the lands and suffered every evil under the 
sun, but who never gave up hope of restoring their 
national life in the one and only Jewish State.  
 I continue to hope that President Abbas will be 
my partner in peace. I have worked hard to advance 
that peace. The day I came into office, I called for 
direct negotiations without preconditions. President 
Abbas did not respond. I outlined a vision of peace of 
two States for two peoples. He still did not respond. I 
removed hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints to 
ease freedom of movement in the Palestinian areas. 
This facilitated fantastic growth in the Palestinian 
economy. But again, there was no response. I took the 
unprecedented step of freezing new building in the 
settlements for 10 months. No Prime Minister had done 
that before, ever. Once again, I hear applause, but there 
was no response. No response.  
 In the past few weeks, American officials have 
put forward ideas to restart peace talks. There were 
things in those ideas about borders that I did not like. 
There were things there about the Jewish State that I 
am sure the Palestinians did not like. But despite all of 
my reservations, I was willing to move forward on 
those American ideas. Why does President Abbas not 
join me? We have to stop negotiating about the 
negotiations. Let us just get on with it. Let us negotiate 
peace.  
 I spent years defending Israel on the battlefield. I 
spent decades defending Israel in the court of public 
opinion. President Abbas has dedicated his life to 
advancing the Palestinian cause. Must this conflict 
continue for generations, or will we enable our children 
and our grandchildren to speak in the years ahead of 
how we found a way to end it? That is what we should 
aim for, and that is what I believe we can achieve.  
 In two and a half years, President Abbas and I 
have met in Jerusalem only once, even though my door 
has always been open to him. If he wishes, I will come 
to Ramallah. Actually, I have a better suggestion. We 
have both just flown thousands of miles to New York. 
 
 
41 11-51185 
 
Now we are in the same city; we are in the same 
building. So let us meet here today, at the United 
Nations. Who is there to stop us? What is there to stop 
us? If we genuinely want peace, what is there to stop 
us from meeting today and beginning peace 
negotiations? 
 I suggest that we talk openly and honestly. Let us 
listen to one another. Let us, as we say in the Middle 
East, talk dugri. That means “straightforward”. I will 
tell him my needs and concerns; he will tell me his. 
And with God’s help, we will find the common ground 
of peace.  
 There is an old Arab saying that one cannot 
applaud with one hand. Well, the same is true of peace. 
I cannot make peace alone. I cannot make peace 
without an interlocutor. President Abbas, I extend my 
hand — the hand of Israel — in peace. I hope that he 
will grasp that hand. We are both the sons of Abraham. 
My people call him Avraham; his people call him 
Ibrahim. We share the same patriarch. We dwell in the 
same land. Our destinies are intertwined. Let us realize 
the vision of Isaiah: “The people who walk in darkness 
will see a great light”. (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 9:2). Let 
that light be the light of peace.As we say in Maori, 
to all peoples and to all voices, greetings, greetings, 
greetings to all. 
 I speak at the end of a period of intense United 
Nations dialogue and engagement. This year’s general 
debate provides unparalleled opportunities to reaffirm 
the unique multilateral role of the United Nations. And 
there has been much to debate. The events set in 
motion by a single Tunisian street vendor have 
transformed much of the Middle East and North Africa. 
People have displayed extraordinary courage in 
claiming their rights and freedoms. The transition from 
dictatorship to democracy will not be easy; it will not 
be quick; but it must be achieved. 
 For others, the struggle continues. We still look 
for change in Yemen; we still look for change in Syria. 
Other challenges are highlighted by this debate. We 
heard from the President of South Africa and others 
how the global community must move swiftly to avert 
humanitarian disaster in the Horn of Africa. 
 We heard from the President of Nigeria how 
terror networks threaten international peace and 
security, and from the President of Tanzania about 
growing piracy on Africa’s eastern coast, from Somalia 
to Mozambique. We heard calls from the Indonesian 
Foreign Minister for bold measures to avert a renewed 
global financial crisis, and we heard from the President 
of Brazil about the challenge of empowering women to 
participate in political decision-making. 
 As this debate has demonstrated, much more 
remains to be done. Lives have also been wrenched by 
natural disasters in many countries, including my own. 
On 22 February 2011, we experienced what my Prime 
Minister called New Zealand’s darkest day. An 
earthquake struck Christchurch, our second-largest 
city. A total of 181 people were killed, a loss we share 
with 15 other countries whose citizens also died. We 
were humbled by the support we received, and, once 
again, I thank those who gave that help. 
  
 
11-51681 32 
 
 Despite that disaster and the literally thousands of 
aftershocks that have followed, New Zealanders remain 
resilient and optimistic. Christchurch is being rebuilt. 
Our economy is bouncing back and the country is 
returning to normal, not least by currently hosting the 
Rugby World Cup, a celebration of a game we love, in 
the country we love.  
 Despite some cause for economic optimism, the 
events of just the past week suggest that the world still 
faces what we have long feared: a second and even 
more disastrous decline into a double-dip recession. 
We do not relish the prospect of being dragged into 
another recession that is not of our own making. We 
caution others larger than ourselves against repeating 
the mistakes of the 1930s, when autarkic protectionism 
only deepened the Depression and led to war. 
 Instead, a successful conclusion of the Doha 
Round is one of the keys to prosperity, particularly for 
those of the global South. The February Christchurch 
earthquake was followed by the devastation wrought 
on our close friend and neighbour Japan. I reiterate our 
heartfelt sympathy to Japan, so steadfast in its support 
for New Zealand in our time of need. Those disasters, 
and others elsewhere, reinforced the importance of 
effective disaster preparedness, response and recovery. 
 New Zealand will work with the United Nations, 
non-governmental organizations and international 
agencies so that the lessons learned from Christchurch 
are shared with others so that those in regions as 
vulnerable as ours can be better prepared. Indeed, in 
those regions, disaster preparedness is no desktop 
exercise; it is a matter of survival. 
 Likewise, for our Pacific neighbours, another 
high risk, climate change, is no abstract threat, 
confined to thousands of pages of reports and esoteric 
debate; it is a fundamental question of existence. For 
the Pacific, climate change is a grave and present threat 
to livelihoods, security and well-being. 
 The Secretary-General experienced those 
challenges first-hand when he visited several Pacific 
States, including one post-conflict society, and another 
whose people see, on a daily basis, the dangers of 
rising oceans. He experienced real vulnerability when 
he saw that his hotel room, in addition to the towels 
and the telephone, was equipped with a lifejacket. And 
he saw the impact of rising oceans on the viability and 
survival of many communities when his plane had to 
be “wheels up” from the country’s airport — its major 
link with the world — before the tide came in. 
 Much more of that, and whole populations will be 
on the move, as they will be in other regions of the 
world as well, and that will have with implications for 
regional and international stability and security. Faced 
with that, it is self-evident that all relevant 
international forums, including the Security Council, 
must play their part in addressing the challenge. That 
means taking urgent and effective action on emissions 
reduction. It means strengthening adaptation in 
developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable. 
And it means acknowledging and planning for the 
security implications before they become threats to 
regional and international security. 
 This year’s Durban meeting must set us on the 
road to full implementation of the Cancun agreements. 
New Zealand is committed, both through the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
negotiations and its active assistance in the Pacific and 
elsewhere, to integrate adaptation and mitigation 
measures into its development activities. 
 New Zealand also initiated the Global Research 
Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Supported 
by more than 30 countries, the Alliance seeks to ensure 
that reducing agricultural emissions does not 
compromise global food security. 
 Increased agricultural productivity — the ability 
of many countries to feed themselves — is one of the 
great achievements of recent decades. Constraining 
agricultural production would put much of the world’s 
population at risk, and no country will do that. We 
must therefore maintain investment in agricultural 
research, so that productivity and efficiency gains can 
continue, but with fewer greenhouse-gas emissions. 
That is what the Global Alliance is all about.  
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. We are 
indigenous Maori; we are European; and we are the 
many peoples from the Asia-Pacific region and 
elsewhere who now call New Zealand home. We are 
also proud to be part of the Pacific Islands Forum, the 
foremost regional body. For 40 years, it has been 
central to the region’s efforts to address its own 
problems, be they the special development challenges 
of small, isolated, vulnerable island States, or halting 
and healing the impacts of violent conflict. It has done 
that in the time-honoured Pacific way, through 
 
 
33 11-51681 
 
respectful dialogue and cooperation and then through 
joint action. 
 Three weeks ago, at the Forum’s fortieth 
anniversary meeting in Auckland, Pacific leaders 
honoured that legacy by agreeing on measures aimed at 
converting Pacific potential into Pacific prosperity. 
 The themes of their discussions will resonate in 
other regions: strong, sustainable economic growth, 
protecting vulnerable populations and ensuring that 
they are healthy and educated and that they can have 
long lives. 
 A key focus of that meeting was the alarming 
incidence of non-communicable diseases, a scourge 
that is rapidly encircling the globe. Almost half of all 
New Zealand deaths relate to cancer and heart disease, 
but the situation is even more critical in many Pacific 
island countries, where diabetes in particular 
approaches epidemic proportions. We thank those who 
brought that cause here to the United Nations, 
particularly the countries members of the Caribbean 
Community. 
 With the 2012 United Nations Conference on 
Sustainable Development (Rio+20) very much in mind, 
Pacific Forum leaders also focused on sustainable 
development. Rio+20 will be an opportunity to assess 
the progress made since the 1992 Conference, take its 
agenda forward and highlight best practices. For 
example, New Zealand’s aid programme includes 
energy, agriculture and tourism initiatives that promote 
sustainable development. 
 Pacific peoples were navigating their ocean, the 
world’s largest, at a time when others were still 
confined to their coastal waters. New Zealand Maori 
call the Pacific the ocean guarded by the god Kiwa. 
Our region is uniquely dependent on its ocean. For 
those who call the Pacific home, the “green economy” 
is in reality a blue economy. Our ocean underpins 
livelihoods, food security and economic development. 
That is why Pacific leaders have focused on ensuring 
its sustainable development, management and 
conservation. That is why they made addressing 
acidification, pollution and illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing urgent matters. That is why our 
leaders want us to work towards integrated ocean 
management, with our own Pacific Oceanscape 
framework as a very good model. And that is why they 
called for Rio+20 to recognize the Pacific’s economic 
and environmental significance, and its contribution to 
sustainable development. At Rio+20, we will seek the 
support of the United Nations for that blue economy. 
 We work to protect the health of people and their 
environment, but we must also enhance collective 
security by advancing the disarmament agenda. Over 
the coming year, we must focus on the full 
implementation of the action plan agreed at the 2010 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As coordinator 
for the New Agenda Coalition, a group of non-nuclear-
weapon States committed to a nuclear-weapon-free 
world, New Zealand will soon introduce a draft 
resolution highlighting the work that will be required 
to achieve its implementation during the coming 
review cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons. We commend that draft resolution 
for the Assembly’s consideration. 
 There have been gains over the past year with 
respect to conventional disarmament, but we have yet 
to see the results of those achievements. There has 
been pleasing progress towards an arms trade treaty, 
but hard work remains. Next year’s Diplomatic 
Conference must deliver a treaty establishing the 
highest possible common international standards for 
conventional arms transfers. 
 We must also maintain focus on small arms and 
light weapons, which for many regions are their 
weapons of mass destruction. The year 2011 marks the 
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Programme of 
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit 
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its 
Aspects. There has been much to celebrate, including 
the first Open-Ended Meeting of Governmental Experts 
on the implementation of the Programme of Action, 
which I had the honour of chairing in May. But next 
year’s Review Conference must work to ensure that the 
Programme delivers on its potential for keeping 
communities safe from such weapons. 
 To deal with all of that, we need a strong, nimble 
and effective United Nations, and we need a Security 
Council that reflects geopolitical realities — realities 
that have changed since 1945. Today, some States 
might credibly seek a fuller, longer-term Council role. 
New Zealand supports change that acknowledges those 
realities. 
 But most United Nations Members are not major 
or emerging Powers, they are small States. They too 
are crucial to the universality and legitimacy of the 
  
 
11-51681 34 
 
United Nations; they too must contribute at the Council 
table. Let me put it simply: if we reform the Security 
Council to provide a fuller, longer-term role for 
emerging Powers, we must also ensure a role for small 
States. Speaking as a small State, I say that we are the 
United Nations. And so we agreed with the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago when he said 
that the smallness of a country is not a deterrent to the 
realization of big dreams (see ), and with 
the Prime Minister of Cape Verde, who told us that 
small States must have a greater voice in international 
decision-making (see ). 
 There are real risks if we cannot achieve genuine 
Security Council reform. Emerging Powers will be 
denied a role consistent with their global significance, 
and small States will continue to be squeezed out of 
positions of responsibility. It is in everyone’s interests 
that the Security Council be more representative. As 
we saw earlier this year with respect to Libya, the 
Council is an extraordinarily powerful instrument for 
maintaining international peace and security. But with 
extraordinary power comes extraordinary responsibility — 
responsibility that must be exercised with regard for the 
views of all countries, large and small. 
 The Council must also build on its partnerships 
with regional groups, such as the African Union, which 
increasingly plays a critical role in maintaining 
regional and global peace and security. Recognizing 
the importance of closer relations with Africa, we are 
encouraging New Zealand investment in and trade with 
Africa, supporting peace and security and providing 
development assistance. Last week, we increased our 
diplomatic engagement by appointing a dedicated 
ambassador to the African Union and the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 
 New Zealand is proud of its history of active 
contribution right across the United Nations agenda. 
We have a strong record as an independent and  
 
principled voice advocating collective security and the 
rule of law. We take an even-handed approach to 
security issues, as has been shown by our voting record 
and our tangible contributions to peace processes. We 
take seriously our international responsibilities. 
 That is why, in 2004, we announced that we 
would seek a non-permanent Security Council seat for 
the 2015-2016 term. Nearly 20 years have passed since 
New Zealand’s last time on the Council. The time is 
right for us to again bring the fresh, independent 
perspective of a small Asia-Pacific country to the 
Council. That candidature, which I confirm here today, 
is based on the belief that States, large and small, have 
a place at the Council table. Modern New Zealand was 
founded on a compact, a treaty-based partnership with 
its indigenous Maori people. That, and our diversity, 
means a unique history and perspective on promoting 
tolerance and conflict resolution; a perspective that we 
have previously brought, to good effect, to the Council 
table, and which we will bring again. 
 For the United Nations, 2011 has been a truly 
historic year. The Organization has quickly responded 
to change in the Middle East and North Africa. It 
stands ready to provide post-conflict support, and not 
just in Libya. It has been critical to relief in the Horn 
of Africa. Its essential role in State recognition has 
been at global centre stage. Even the most cynical, the 
most jaded, have had to relearn that the United Nations 
is at the epicentre of much that happens, and much that 
matters. We need the United Nations. We need it to 
address the woes of the world and to consolidate its 
successes. Its fundamental importance stems from its 
universality, its legitimacy and its mechanisms to 
confront challenges. Its effectiveness depends on its 
ability to adapt as those challenges emerge and on its 
ability to address them together. Member States, large 
and small, come together in that collective endeavour. 
New Zealand, as always, stands ready to play its part.This year the session of the General 
Assembly is opening at a time when international 
relations are in a state of turbulence. The Middle East 
and North Africa have gone through a period of large-
scale changes, and the situation is volatile in certain 
other parts of the world. We have not yet been able to 
put the global economy back on the track of 
progressive sustainable development. The increasing 
number of alarming factors has been accompanied by 
an exacerbation of social, inter-ethnic and intercultural 
conflicts as well as outbreaks of extremism. 
 Just as a ship caught in adverse weather 
conditions needs a united crew and a compass to find 
the right course, the international community today 
needs in particular to deploy joint efforts to respond to 
common challenges and set clear guidelines to 
strengthen global governance mechanisms. We are 
convinced that such guidelines should include, first and 
foremost, the rule of international law; clear, strict and 
responsible reliance on the fundamental principles of 
the Charter of the United Nations; and the will to 
implement a positive unification agenda. 
 The United Nations remains a pillar of 
international relations and equitable multilateral 
cooperation in the interests of all States. It has a unique 
legitimacy and the necessary authority to respond 
adequately to the variety of contemporary risks and 
threats. It is the United Nations that should continue to 
provide political, legal and moral leadership in dealing 
with global challenges, to establish equitable principles 
and standards of interaction, to monitor their 
implementation and to render necessary assistance and 
support for the States that need it. 
 Ten years ago on September 11, a horrible 
terrorist attack was committed in this city. We are 
convinced that it is necessary to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation in countering international terrorism on 
both the global and regional levels. However, the 
additional mechanisms to be created in this area should 
be incorporated in our common work within the United 
Nations, with due account taken of its central 
coordinating role in combating terrorism. 
 Wide international cooperation is needed to keep 
the situation in the global economic and financial 
system under control. One can hardly deny the 
importance of the role that the Group of Twenty (G-20) 
plays in the post-crisis recovery of the world economy. 
Today, it is important to finalize the process of 
reforming the global financial and economic 
architecture and to implement everything we have 
agreed on, rather than to stop halfway. The efficiency 
of these efforts will only grow if the G-20 strengthens 
its dialogue with the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies.  
 A significant contribution to the reform of the 
global economy and finance is being made by 
BRICS — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — a global-scale association of five major, 
rapidly growing economies that reflects the realities of 
the evolving multipolar world. BRICS does not aim at 
confrontation with anyone. Its goal is to enhance 
productive multilateral collaboration to address the 
urgent problems of the contemporary world. 
 Sustainable development requires a reliable 
supply of energy resources for the global economy. 
Russia has proposed drafting a convention on 
international energy security that would cover all 
aspects of global energy cooperation, taking into 
account the balance of interests of all actors in the 
international market. We call for the start of the 
practical preparation of this document. 
 As in economics, the logic of joint consolidated 
actions should prevail in matters of security and the 
elimination of surplus weapons worldwide. Russia and 
the United States made another important step towards 
nuclear disarmament when they signed the Treaty on 
Strategic Offensive Arms and began its 
implementation. Its practical realization will allow us 
to make sure that the Treaty is effective and viable and 
  
 
11-51670 16 
 
to see how its fundamental principles are implemented. 
We call on all States with nuclear weapons capability 
to join the Russian-American efforts. We believe that 
further progress in nuclear arms reductions is possible 
only on a multilateral basis. 
 Moreover, progress in this area is inseparable 
from coordinated efforts to move forward on all 
aspects of strengthening international security and 
strategic stability. This includes development of 
universally acceptable approaches to missile defence 
issues, an accounting on the impact of strategic 
conventional arms, prevention of the weaponization of 
space and elimination of qualitative and quantitative 
imbalances in conventional arms. 
 The deployment of strategic missile defence 
elements in various parts of the world alters the overall 
configuration of international security. It is not enough 
to make statements that the increase in global missile 
defence capabilities would not undermine the basics of 
strategic stability. The issue is far too serious. We need 
solid legal guarantees that missile defence potential 
will actually be adequate to the declared objectives and 
will not disrupt global and regional balances. This 
holds equally true for both Europe and the Asia-Pacific 
region, where the missile defence factor is beginning to 
affect the strategic environment. 
 It is of primary importance for us to prevent the 
undermining of the non-proliferation regime. We call 
for universalization of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons, strengthening of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system and 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. Russia has been one of the main 
initiators of the proposal to convene in 2012 a 
conference on establishing a zone free of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery in the 
Middle East and is now working intensively, together 
with its partners, on the preparations for this important 
forum. 
 The early resolution of the nuclear problems of 
Iran and the Korean Peninsula would contribute to the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. We see 
no alternative to their political and diplomatic 
settlement and to taking concrete steps to create the 
conditions for the resumption of negotiations. We call 
on all partners to address these tasks with utmost 
responsibility. 
 The situation around Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi-1 
nuclear power plant has highlighted the need to 
improve the international legal framework in order to 
ensure the safety of nuclear power facilities. The 
Russian Federation has made proposals to enhance the 
mechanisms of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and 
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and to strengthen the relevant IAEA norms. 
We urge support for these initiatives. 
 In the age of new telecommunications 
technologies, international information security has 
become a challenge that requires coordinated efforts by 
the international community. Reliable protection of the 
field of information from malicious and criminal 
attacks is the goal of the initiative that Russia and its 
partners are promoting at the United Nations. During 
this session, we will put forward proposals on 
developing specific rules of conduct in this area. 
 In a polycentric world, an effective international 
architecture can be created only if it rests on regional 
building blocks. The enhancing of global governance at 
the regional level and the increasing role of regional 
organizations are an integral part of modern 
international relations. Integration associations and 
organizations in the Commonwealth of Independent 
States area contribute to these processes. The Eurasian 
Economic Community, with its $10 billion anti-crisis 
fund, operates in the financial and economic sphere. A 
customs union between Russia, Kazakhstan and 
Belarus has been created, and single economic space is 
taking shape with a view to establishing a Eurasian 
union. 
 The Collective Security Treaty Organization 
(CSTO) is a key tool for ensuring stability within the 
area of its responsibility. The signing of the joint 
declaration on cooperation between the United Nations 
Secretariat and the CSTO secretariat in March 2011 
was a major step in the collaboration between these 
two organizations, primarily in the field of 
peacekeeping. We are ready to start working on its 
practical modalities. Russia consistently calls for 
interaction between regional organizations, under the 
auspices of the United Nations, to strengthen global 
stability on the basis of the solid legal framework of 
the Charter. 
 Priority should be given to equal and indivisible 
security, predictability, transparency and mutual 
respect, taking into account one other’s interests. This 
 
 
17 11-51670 
 
is exactly the aim of Russian President Medvedev’s 
initiative to sign a treaty on European security. Its 
practical implementation would allow us to finally put 
a period to the post-cold war era, to establish a 
universal and clear framework for a reliable solution to 
such issues as missile defence and arms control, and to 
create a common space of security and development 
without dividing lines. 
 Achieving equal and indivisible security is an 
urgent issue for the Asia-Pacific region, with the 
Russian Far East and Eastern Siberia as integral parts. 
The joint initiative launched by the leaders of China 
and Russia in September 2010 is aimed at creating a 
comprehensive architecture for security and 
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region on a bloc-free 
legal basis. We could move closer to this goal by 
promoting a network of multilateral diplomacy, an idea 
that has been supported by the members of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 Progress in the settlement of regional conflicts 
would contribute to a more stable international 
environment. Today, special attention is given to the 
developments in the Arab world.  
 Russia condemns the use of violence against 
civilians and supports the aspirations of Arab peoples 
for the revival of their States and their democratic 
development and social and economic prosperity. At 
the same time, actions by the outside forces must be 
based on full respect for international law and be 
instrumental to the search for a political settlement 
between the authorities and the opposition. The 
attempts to go beyond the Security Council mandate 
are unacceptable, since they undermine its authority 
and compound the suffering of innocent civilians. 
 In this context, it seems quite pertinent that States 
and regional organizations commit themselves to 
strictly complying with the existing norms of 
international law, including humanitarian law, in order 
to protect civilians during armed conflict. This step, 
which further enhances the existing legal basis of 
international relations, would contribute to the 
strengthening of regional and global security in its 
modern, multidimensional interpretation. 
 The leading role in elaborating modalities for 
post-conflict resolution in Libya must be played by the 
United Nations and in particular the Security Council. 
That is precisely the goal of Security Council 
resolution 2009 (2011) of 16 September 2011, which 
established the United Nations Support Mission in 
Libya. We believe that it is time to take additional 
steps, including the lifting of the no-fly zone. 
 As for Syria, it is inadmissible to boycott 
proposals for a national dialogue, stir up confrontation 
and provoke violence, while neglecting the reforms — 
late in coming, but still achievable — proposed by 
President Al-Assad. It is important to encourage the 
authorities and the opposition to start negotiations and 
agree on the future of their country. We hope that the 
League of Arab States will make the necessary efforts. 
 The situation in the Middle East could be 
significantly improved by progress in the negotiation 
process, on the basis of the main parameters defined 
and recorded in Security Council resolutions, the 
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace 
Initiative, and reiterated in the Quartet ministerial 
statement of 23 September. The only viable basis for a 
settlement is the coexistence of Palestinian and Israeli 
States in peace and security. We support the 
Palestinians’ application to the Security Council and 
welcome the readiness reiterated by the President of 
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Abbas, to hold 
talks with Israel on the basis of the existing 
international legal framework. 
 We encourage the Cypriot communities to 
continue negotiations under United Nations auspices to 
achieve a comprehensive, just and viable settlement on 
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
 We call upon all parties to the Nagorno-Karabakh 
settlement process to take advantage of the additional 
opportunities arising from the efforts made in the 
context of Russia’s mediation. We will promote 
confidence-building and ceasefire enforcement 
measures within the framework of the Troika of the 
co-Chairs of the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group, together with 
American and French partners. 
 We hope that the decision taken in Moscow on 
22 September on resuming official talks on a 
Transdniestrian settlement will encourage the parties to 
seek ways to arrive at mutually acceptable agreements. 
 We are strongly committed to doing our utmost to 
prevent a repetition of a scenario involving the use of 
force in the Caucasus, as happened in August 2008 as a 
result of a reckless venture by the ruling regime in 
Tbilisi. Russia is ready to act as a guarantor of 
  
 
11-51670 18 
 
arrangements on the non-use of force between 
Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, taking into 
account the earlier relevant statements made by the 
leaders of these three parties. We would welcome it if 
the United States and the European Union made similar 
commitments. As guarantors, we would be ready to 
take steps to prevent the resumption of violence in the 
region and, in the case of the wrongful use of force by 
either side, to work towards an early resolution of the 
situation on the basis of the existing norms of 
international law. 
 Russia is providing significant support for the 
efforts to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. At the 
same time, we call on the International Security 
Assistance Force to more effectively fight the growing 
Afghan drug threat. Central Asia and Russia are 
already facing a “heroin aggression”, while the profits 
from drug trafficking are being used as the main source 
of financing the clandestine extremist underground in 
the region. The fight against this evil should be 
uncompromising, and it should target the entire drug 
business chain. 
 The problems on the African continent should be 
a focus of continuous attention on the part of the 
United Nations. Such attention should include 
development assistance as well as efforts to overcome 
the current humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa 
and resolve the numerous ongoing conflicts, while 
maintaining the leading role of the African Union. 
 The eradication of piracy remains a priority. It is 
necessary to accelerate the establishment of an 
international anti-piracy court mechanism in the 
region, in accordance with the Security Council 
resolution adopted on the initiative of Russia. 
 Experience has shown that pressure and unilateral 
sanctions cannot be a cure-all in addressing various 
conflict situations; they only complicate efforts to 
resolve them. We urge that an end be put to any actions 
that circumvent the Security Council. We also call for 
the lifting of the blockade of Cuba. Cooperation rather 
than isolation should be the method for settling 
conflicts in the twenty-first century. 
 The ongoing transformation in contemporary 
international relations makes it a priority task on the 
global agenda to expand intercultural, interreligious 
and inter-civilization dialogue in order to devise 
approaches to the problems of the modern world that 
are based on shared values. The degradation of 
fundamental moral values leads to the degradation of 
society. The recent tragic events in Norway, riots in 
Great Britain, protests by young people in other 
countries, and calls to suppress Christian minorities in 
the Middle East and North Africa — all of those events 
are the result of a deterioration in moral and ethical 
values. There can be no freedom without responsibility 
and no democracy without self-restraint. There is a 
clear and urgent need to counter the threats posed by 
nationalism, ethnic and religious intolerance. We 
therefore reiterate the importance of the recent High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly to 
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of 
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and 
related intolerance. 
 Attempts to falsify or revise history are 
inadmissible, all the more so given that we are marking 
the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Nuremberg Tribunal 
verdict. Political correctness and talk of freedom of 
speech cannot serve as a cover when, in certain 
European countries, people who brought disgrace upon 
themselves by cooperating with the Nazis are being 
talked and written about in an increasingly elevated 
tone. Russia will never forget the countless military 
crimes committed by Hitler and his associates in our 
land and throughout Europe during the years of the 
Nazi aggression. 
 The rapid changes taking place in the world make 
it imperative to strengthen the role of the United 
Nations and to adapt it to contemporary realities while 
preserving — naturally — its inter-State character and 
the immutability of its Charter principles. A 
fundamental element of the Organization’s renewal is 
the reform of the Security Council. We support a 
solution that is based upon the broadest possible 
agreement. 
 The world community faces many challenges, 
and the United Nations, as a major mechanism for 
global regulation, is today in demand as never before. 
Together we will find practical ways to effectively 
overcome the threats of the twenty-first century.It is a great honour for me to 
be here today. I would like to talk to the General 
Assembly about a subject that is at the heart of the 
United Nations — the pursuit of peace in an imperfect 
world. 
 War and conflict have been with us since the 
beginning of civilization. But in the first part of the 
twentieth century, the advance of modern weaponry led 
to death on a staggering scale. It was that killing that 
  
 
11-50692 10 
 
compelled the founders of this body to build an 
institution that was focused not just on ending one war, 
but on averting others; a union of sovereign States that 
would seek to prevent conflict while also addressing its 
causes. 
 No American did more to pursue that objective 
than President Franklin Roosevelt. He knew that a 
victory in war was not enough. As he said at one of the 
very first meetings on the founding of the United 
Nations, “We have got to make not merely peace, but a 
peace that will last”. 
 The men and women who built this institution 
understood that peace is more than the absence of war. 
A lasting peace — for nations and individuals — 
depends upon a sense of justice and opportunity; of 
dignity and freedom. It depends upon struggle and 
sacrifice; on compromise and on a sense of common 
humanity. 
 One delegate to the San Francisco Conference, 
which led to the creation of the United Nations, put it 
well: 
 “Many people have talked as if all we had to do 
to get peace was to say loudly and frequently that 
we loved peace and hated war. Now we have 
learned that no matter how much we love peace 
and hate war, we cannot avoid having war 
brought upon us if there are convulsions in other 
parts of the world”. 
 The fact is, peace is hard, but our people demand 
it. Over nearly seven decades, even as the United 
Nations helped avert a third world war, we still live in 
a world scarred by conflict and plagued by poverty. 
Even as we proclaim our love for peace and hatred of 
war, there are still convulsions in our world that 
endanger us all. 
 I took office at a time of two wars for the United 
States. Moreover, the violent extremists who drew us 
into war in the first place — Osama bin Laden and his 
Al-Qaida organization — remained at large. Today, we 
have set a new direction. 
 At the end of this year, America’s military 
operation in Iraq will be over. We will have a normal 
relationship with a sovereign nation that is a member 
of the community of nations. That equal partnership 
will be strengthened by our support for Iraq — for its 
Government and its security forces, for its people and 
their aspirations. 
 As we end the war in Iraq, the United States and 
our coalition partners have begun a transition in 
Afghanistan. Between now and 2014, an increasingly 
capable Afghan Government and security forces will 
step forward to take responsibility for the future of 
their country. As they do, we are drawing down our 
own forces, while building an enduring partnership 
with the Afghan people. 
 So let there be no doubt: the tide of war is 
receding. When I took office, roughly 180,000 Americans 
were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. By the end of 
this year, that number will be cut in half, and it will 
continue to decline. This is critical for the sovereignty 
of Iraq and Afghanistan, and to the strength of the 
United States as we build our nation at home. 
 Moreover, we are poised to end these wars from a 
position of strength. Ten years ago, there was an open 
wound and twisted steel; a broken heart in the centre of 
this city. Today, as a new tower is rising at Ground 
Zero, it symbolizes New York’s renewal, even as 
Al-Qaida is under more pressure than ever before. Its 
leadership has been degraded. Osama bin Laden, a man 
who murdered thousands of people from dozens of 
countries, will never endanger the peace of the world 
again. 
 Yes, this has been a difficult decade. But today 
we stand at a crossroads of history, with the chance to 
move decisively in the direction of peace. To do so we 
must return to the wisdom of those who created this 
institution.  
 The founding Charter of United Nations calls 
upon us, to unite our strength to maintain international 
peace and security. Article 1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights reminds us that, “All 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in 
rights”. Those bedrock beliefs — in the responsibility 
of States and the rights of men and women — must be 
our guide. 
 In that effort, we have reason to hope. This year 
has been a time of extraordinary transformation. More 
nations have stepped forward to maintain international 
peace and security. More individuals are claiming their 
universal right to live in freedom and dignity. 
 Think about it. One year ago, when we met here 
in New York, the prospect of a successful referendum 
in South Sudan was in doubt. But the international 
community overcame old divisions to support the 
 
 
11 11-50692 
 
agreement that had been negotiated to give South 
Sudan self-determination. Last summer, as a new flag 
went up in Juba, former soldiers laid down their arms, 
men and women wept with joy and children finally 
knew the promise of looking to a future that they will 
shape. 
 One year ago, the people of Côte d’Ivoire 
approached a landmark election. When the incumbent 
lost and refused to respect the results, the world 
refused to look the other way. United Nations 
peacekeepers were harassed, but they did not leave 
their posts. The Security Council, led by the United 
States, Nigeria and France, came together to support 
the will of the people. Côte d’Ivoire is now governed 
by the man who was elected to lead. 
 One year ago, the hopes of the people of Tunisia 
were suppressed. But they chose the dignity of 
peaceful protest over the rule of an iron fist. A vendor 
lit a spark that took his own life, but ignited a 
movement. In the face of a crackdown, students spelled 
out the word freedom. The balance of fear shifted from 
the ruler to those whom he ruled. Now the people of 
Tunisia are preparing for elections that will move them 
one step closer to the democracy that they deserve. 
 One year ago, Egypt had known one President for 
nearly 30 years. But for 18 days, the eyes of the world 
were glued to Tahrir Square, where Egyptians from all 
walks of life — men and women, young and old, 
Muslim and Christian — demanded their universal 
rights. We saw in those protesters the moral force of 
non-violence that has lit the world from Delhi to 
Warsaw, from Selma to South Africa — and we knew 
that change had come to Egypt and to the Arab world. 
 One year ago, the people of Libya were ruled by 
the world’s longest-serving dictator. But faced with 
bullets and bombs and a dictator who threatened to 
hunt them down like rats, they showed relentless 
bravery. We will never forget the words of the Libyan 
who stood up in those early days of the revolution and 
said, “Our words are free now”. It is a feeling one 
cannot explain. Day after day, in the face of bullets and 
bombs, the Libyan people refused to give back that 
freedom. And when they were threatened by the kind 
of mass atrocity that often went unchallenged in the 
past century, the United Nations lived up to its Charter. 
The Security Council authorized all necessary 
measures to prevent a massacre. The Arab League 
called for that effort. Arab nations joined a NATO-led 
coalition that halted Al-Qadhafi’s forces in their tracks. 
 In the months that followed, the will of the 
coalition proved unbreakable, and the will of the 
Libyan people could not be denied. Forty-two years of 
tyranny were ended in six months. From Tripoli to 
Misurata to Benghazi — today, Libya is free. 
Yesterday, the leaders of a new Libya took their 
rightful place beside us, and this week the United 
States is reopening our embassy in Tripoli. 
 This is how the international community is 
supposed to work — nations standing together for the 
sake of peace and security, and individuals claiming 
their rights. Now, all of us have a responsibility to 
support the new Libya and the new Libyan 
Government as they confront the challenge of turning 
this moment of promise into a just and lasting peace 
for all Libyans. 
 So this has been a remarkable year. The 
Al-Qadhafi regime is over. Gbagbo, Ben Ali and 
Mubarak are no longer in power. Osama bin Laden is 
gone, and the idea that change could come only 
through violence has been buried with him. Something 
is happening in our world. The way things have been is 
not the way that they will be. The humiliating grip of 
corruption and tyranny is being pried open. Dictators 
are on notice. Technology is putting power into the 
hands of the people. Youth are delivering a powerful 
rebuke to dictatorship and rejecting the lie that some 
races, some peoples, some religions and some 
ethnicities do not desire democracy. The promise 
written down on paper — “all human beings are born 
free and equal in dignity and rights” — is closer at 
hand. 
 But let us remember: Peace is hard. Peace is hard. 
Progress can be reversed. Prosperity comes slowly. 
Societies can split apart. The measure of our success 
must be whether people can live in sustained freedom, 
dignity and security. And the United Nations and its 
Member States must do their part to support those 
basic aspirations. And we have more work to do. 
 In Iran, we have seen a Government that refuses 
to recognize the rights of its own people. As we meet 
here today, men, women and children are being 
tortured, detained and murdered by the Syrian regime. 
Thousands have been killed, many during the holy time 
of Ramadan. Thousands more have poured across 
Syria’s borders. The Syrian people have shown dignity 
  
 
11-50692 12 
 
and courage in their pursuit of justice, protesting 
peacefully, standing silently in the streets and dying for 
the same values that this institution is supposed to 
stand for. And the question for us is clear: Will we 
stand with the Syrian people or with their oppressors? 
 Already, the United States has imposed strong 
sanctions on Syria’s leaders. We supported a transfer of 
power that would be responsive to the Syrian people. 
And many of our allies have joined in this effort. But 
for the sake of Syria — and the peace and security of 
the world — we must speak with one voice. There is 
no excuse for inaction. Now is the time for the Security 
Council to sanction the Syrian regime and to stand with 
the Syrian people. 
 Throughout the region, we will have to respond 
to the calls for change. In Yemen, men, women and 
children gather by the thousands in towns and city 
squares every day with the hope that their 
determination and spilled blood will prevail over a 
corrupt system. America supports those aspirations. We 
must work with Yemen’s neighbours and our partners 
around the world to seek a path that allows for a 
peaceful transition of power from President Saleh, and 
a movement to free and fair elections as soon as 
possible. 
 In Bahrain, steps have been taken towards reform 
and accountability. We are pleased with that, but more 
is required. America is a close friend of Bahrain, and 
we will continue to call on the Government and the 
main opposition bloc — al-Wifaq — to pursue a 
meaningful dialogue that brings peaceful change that is 
responsive to the people. We believe the patriotism that 
binds Bahrainis together must be more powerful than 
the sectarian forces that would tear them apart. It will 
be hard, but it is possible. 
 We believe that each nation must chart its own 
course to fulfil the aspirations of its people. America 
does not expect to agree with every party or person 
who expresses themselves politically, but we will 
always stand up for the universal rights that were 
embraced by this Assembly. Those rights depend on 
elections that are free and fair, governance that is 
transparent and accountable, respect for the rights of 
women and minorities, and justice that is equal and 
fair. That is what our people deserve. Those are the 
elements of peace that can last. 
 Moreover, the United States will continue to 
support, with greater trade and investment, those 
nations that transition to democracy, so that freedom is 
followed by opportunity. We will pursue deeper 
engagement with Governments, but also with civil 
society — students and entrepreneurs, political parties 
and the press. We have banned those who abuse human 
rights from travelling to our country and we have 
sanctioned those who trample on human rights abroad. 
And we will always serve as a voice for those who 
have been silenced. 
 Now, I know, particularly this week, that for 
many in this Hall, there is one issue that stands as a test 
of these principles and a test of American foreign 
policy, and that is the conflict between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians. 
 One year ago, I stood at this podium and I called 
for an independent Palestine. I believed then, and I 
believe now, that the Palestinian people deserve a State 
of their own, but what I also said is that a genuine 
peace can be realized only between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians themselves. One year later, despite 
extensive efforts by America and others, the parties 
have not bridged their differences. Faced with this 
stalemate, I put forward a new basis for negotiations in 
May of this year. That basis is clear. It is well known to 
all of us here. Israelis must know that any agreement 
provides assurances for their security. Palestinians 
deserve to know the territorial basis of their State. 
 I know that many are frustrated by the lack of 
progress; I assure them that I am too. But the question 
is not the goal that we seek. The question is: How do 
we reach that goal? And I am convinced that there is no 
shortcut to the end of a conflict that has endured for 
decades. Peace is hard work. Peace will not come 
through statements and resolutions at the United 
Nations. If it were that easy, it would have been 
accomplished by now. Ultimately, it is the Israelis and 
the Palestinians who must live side by side. Ultimately, 
it is the Israelis and the Palestinians — not us — who 
must reach agreement on the issues that divide them: 
on borders and on security, on refugees and on 
Jerusalem. 
 Ultimately, peace depends upon compromise 
among people who must live together long after our 
speeches are over, long after our votes have been 
tallied. That is the lesson of Northern Ireland, where 
ancient antagonists bridged their differences. That is 
the lesson of the Sudan, where a negotiated settlement 
led to an independent State. And that is and will be the 
 
 
13 11-50692 
 
path to a Palestinian State — negotiations between the 
parties. 
 We seek a future where Palestinians live in a 
sovereign State of their own, with no limit to what they 
can achieve. There is no question that the Palestinians 
have seen that vision delayed for too long. It is 
precisely because we believe so strongly in the 
aspirations of the Palestinian people that America has 
invested so much time and so much effort in the 
building of a Palestinian State and in the negotiations 
that can deliver a Palestinian State. 
 But understand this as well: America’s 
commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. Our 
friendship with Israel is deep and enduring. And so we 
believe that any lasting peace must acknowledge the 
very real security concerns that Israel faces every 
single day. 
 Let us be honest with ourselves: Israel is 
surrounded by neighbours that have waged repeated 
wars against it. Israel’s citizens have been killed by 
rockets fired at their houses and suicide bombs on their 
buses. Israel’s children come of age knowing that 
throughout the region other children are taught to hate 
them. Israel, a small country of less than 8 million 
people, looks out at a world where leaders of much 
larger nations threaten to wipe it off of the map. The 
Jewish people carry the burden of centuries of exile 
and persecution and fresh memories of knowing that 
6 million people were killed simply because of who 
they are. Those are facts. They cannot be denied. 
 The Jewish people have forged a successful State 
in their historic homeland. Israel deserves recognition. 
It deserves normal relations with its neighbours. And 
friends of the Palestinians do them no favours by 
ignoring that truth, just as friends of Israel must 
recognize the need to pursue a two-State solution with 
a secure Israel next to an independent Palestine. 
 That is the truth. Each side has legitimate 
aspirations, and that is part of what makes peace so 
hard. And the deadlock will be broken only when each 
side learns to stand in the other’s shoes and each side 
can see the world through the other’s eyes. That is 
what we should be encouraging. That is what we 
should be promoting. 
 This body — founded as it was out of the ashes 
of war and genocide, and dedicated as it is to the 
dignity of every single person — must recognize the 
reality that is lived by the Palestinians and the Israelis 
alike. The measure of our actions must always be 
whether they advance the right of Israeli and 
Palestinian children to live lives of peace and security 
and dignity and opportunity. And we will succeed in 
that effort only if we can encourage the parties to sit 
down, to listen to each other and to understand each 
other’s hopes and each other’s fears. That is the project 
to which America is committed. There are no shortcuts. 
And that is what the United Nations should be focused 
on in the weeks and months to come. 
 Even as we confront these challenges of conflict 
and revolution, we must also recognize — and we must 
also remind ourselves — that peace is not just the 
absence of war. True peace depends on creating the 
opportunity that makes life worth living. And to do 
that, we must confront the common enemies of 
humanity: nuclear weapons and poverty, ignorance and 
disease. Those forces corrode the possibility of lasting 
peace and together we are called upon to confront 
them. 
 To lift the spectre of mass destruction, we must 
come together to pursue the peace and security of a 
world without nuclear weapons. Over the past two 
years, we have begun to walk down that path. Since 
our Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., 
nearly 50 nations have taken steps to secure nuclear 
materials from terrorists and smugglers. Next March, a 
summit in Seoul will advance our efforts to lock down 
all of them. The New START Treaty between the 
United States and Russia will cut our deployed arsenals 
to the lowest level in half a century, and our nations are 
pursuing talks on how to achieve even deeper 
reductions. America will continue to work for a ban on 
the testing of nuclear weapons and the production of 
fissile material needed to make them. 
 And so we have begun to move in the right 
direction. And the United States is committed to 
meeting our obligations. But even as we meet our 
obligations, we have strengthened the treaties and 
institutions that help stop the spread of those weapons. 
And to do so, we must continue to hold accountable 
those nations that flout them. 
 The Iranian Government cannot demonstrate that 
its programme is peaceful. It has not met its obligations 
and it rejects offers that would provide it with peaceful 
nuclear power. North Korea has yet to take concrete 
steps towards abandoning its weapons and continues 
  
 
11-50692 14 
 
belligerent action against the South. There is a future 
of greater opportunity for the people of those nations if 
their Governments meet their international obligations. 
But if they continue down a path that is outside 
international law, they must be met with greater 
pressure and isolation. That is what our commitment to 
peace and security demands. 
 To bring prosperity to our people, we must 
promote the growth that creates opportunity. In this 
effort, let us not forget that we have made enormous 
progress over the past several decades. Closed societies 
gave way to open markets. Innovation and 
entrepreneurship have transformed the way we live and 
the things that we do. Emerging economies from Asia 
to the Americas have lifted hundreds of millions of 
people from poverty. It is an extraordinary 
achievement.  
 And yet, three years ago, we were confronted 
with the worst financial crisis in eight decades. And 
that crisis proved a fact that has become clearer with 
each passing year. Our fates are interconnected. In a 
global economy, nations will rise or fall together. 
 Today, we confront the challenges that have 
followed on the heels of that crisis. Around the world 
recovery is still fragile. Markets remain volatile. Too 
many people are out of work. Too many others are 
struggling just to get by. We acted together to avert a 
depression in 2009. We must take urgent and 
coordinated action once more. 
 Here in the United States, I have announced a 
plan to put Americans back to work and jump-start our 
economy, at the same time as I am committed to 
substantially reducing our deficits over time. 
 We stand with our European allies as they 
reshape their institutions and address their own fiscal 
challenges. For other countries, leaders face a different 
challenge as they shift their economy towards more 
self-reliance, boosting domestic demand while slowing 
inflation. So we will work with emerging economies 
that have rebounded strongly so that rising standards of 
living create new markets that promote global growth. 
That is what our commitment to prosperity demands. 
 To combat the poverty that punishes our children, 
we must act on the belief that freedom from want is a 
basic human right. The United States has made it a 
focus of our engagement abroad to help people to feed 
themselves. And today, as drought and conflict have 
brought famine to the Horn of Africa, our conscience 
calls on us to act. Together, we must continue to 
provide assistance and support organizations that can 
reach those in need. And together, we must insist on 
unrestricted humanitarian access so that we can save 
the lives of thousands of men and women and children. 
Our common humanity is at stake. Let us show that the 
life of a child in Somalia is as precious as any other. 
That is what our commitment to our fellow human 
beings demands. 
 To stop disease that spreads across borders, we 
must strengthen our system of public health. We will 
continue the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and 
malaria. We will focus on the health of mothers and of 
children. And we must come together to prevent and 
detect and fight every kind of biological danger — 
whether it is a pandemic like H1N1 or a terrorist threat 
or a treatable disease. 
 This week, America signed an agreement with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) to affirm our 
commitment to meeting that challenge. And today, I 
urge all nations to join us in meeting the WHO goal of 
making sure all nations have core capacities to address 
public health emergencies in place by 2012. That is 
what our commitment to the health of our people 
demands. 
 To preserve our planet, we must not put off action 
that climate change demands. We have to tap the power 
of science to save those resources that are scarce. And 
together, we must continue our work to build on the 
progress made in Copenhagen and Cancún, so that all 
the major economies represented here today follow 
through on the commitments that were made. Together, 
we must work to transform the energy that powers our 
economies and support others as they move down that 
path. That is what our commitment to the next 
generation demands. 
 To make sure our societies reach their potential, 
we must allow our citizens to reach theirs. No country 
can afford the corruption that plagues the world like a 
cancer. Together, we must harness the power of open 
societies and open economies. That is why we have 
partnered with countries across the globe to launch a 
new partnership on open Government that helps ensure 
accountability and helps to empower citizens. No 
country should deny people their rights to freedom of 
speech and freedom of religion, but also no country 
should deny people their rights because of whom they 
 
 
15 11-50692 
 
love, which is why we must stand up for the rights of 
gays and lesbians everywhere. 
 No country can realize its potential if half its 
population cannot reach theirs. This week, the United 
States signed a new declaration on women’s 
participation. Next year, we should each announce the 
steps we are taking to break down the economic and 
political barriers that stand in the way of women and 
girls. That is what our commitment to human progress 
demands. 
 I know there is no straight line to that progress, 
no single path to success. We come from different 
cultures, and carry with us different histories. But let 
us never forget that even as we gather here as Heads of 
different Governments, we represent citizens who share 
the same basic aspirations to live with dignity and 
freedom, to get an education and pursue opportunity, to 
love our families and love and worship our God, to live 
in the kind of peace that makes life worth living. 
 It is the nature of our imperfect world that we are 
forced to learn these lessons over and over again. 
Conflict and repression will endure so long as some 
people refuse to do unto others as we would have them 
do unto us. Yet that is precisely why we have built 
institutions like this — to bind our fates together, to 
help us recognize ourselves in each other — because 
those who came before us believed that peace is 
preferable to war, and freedom is preferable to 
suppression, and prosperity is preferable to poverty. 
That is the message that comes not from capitals, but 
from citizens, from our people. 
 When the cornerstone of this very building was 
put in place, President Truman came here to New York 
and said, “The United Nations is essentially an 
expression of the moral nature of man’s aspirations” — 
the moral nature of man’s aspirations. As we live in a 
world that is changing at a breathtaking pace, that is a 
lesson that we must never forget. 
 Peace is hard, but we know that it is possible. So, 
together, let us be resolved to see that it is defined by 
our hopes and not by our fears. Together, let us make 
peace — but a peace, most importantly, that will last.On behalf of the Government 
and the people of South Africa, I wish to extend our 
sincere congratulations to Ambassador Nassir 
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election as President of the 
General Assembly. We wish him a successful tenure in 
the stewardship of this body and assure him of our 
delegation’s full support. We also congratulate his 
predecessor, Mr. Joseph Deiss, for the diligent manner 
in which he guided the work of the Assembly at its 
sixty-fifth session. 
 I would further like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his re-appointment as 
Secretary-General. 
 It is also an honour for South Africa to welcome 
the Republic of South Sudan to the community of 
nations as the 193rd State Member of the United 
Nations. 
 This month, the United States and the world 
marked the tenth anniversary of the horrendous 
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, which affected 
the United States and 89 other countries. That horrific 
incident united the international community and 
strengthened its resolve to cooperate in the fight 
against terrorism. We pay our respects to the victims of 
the tragedy and their families. We reaffirm our 
commitment to working with other Member States to 
eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
 The theme of this session — “The role of 
mediation in the settlement of disputes by peaceful 
means” — is timely and well chosen. The Charter of 
the United Nations mandates the Organization to 
utilize mediation as one of the tools to prevent and 
resolve conflicts across the globe. The role of 
mediation as a tool for the settlement of disputes has 
renewed relevance today, given the number of conflicts 
in the world. We should defend the independence and 
impartiality of the United Nations and promote the 
principles of its Charter during conflicts and crises. 
The United Nations should never take sides in any 
conflict but should always maintain its impartiality. 
The United Nations must not allow itself to be used by 
any country, regardless of its history or size. All 
citizens of the world should feel confident and secure 
in the knowledge that the United Nations is above all 
partisan interests and serves only those of the citizens 
of the globe. 
 We are of the view that regional organizations 
play a crucial role in the resolution of conflicts and in 
regional mediation processes. The Charter of the 
United Nations itself provides for the role of regional 
organizations in cooperation with the United Nations. 
This role of the regions must always be enforced and 
enhanced, and not undermined. In our continent, the 
African Union (AU) continues to play a significant role 
in mediation and the resolution of conflicts, trying at 
 
 
23 11-50702 
 
all times to produce African solutions to African 
problems, of course with the support of the world. 
 This year, the world witnessed the so-called Arab 
Spring in North Africa and the Middle East. With 
regard to the situation in Libya, the AU played a 
crucial role in seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis, 
in line with its mandate of working for peace and 
stability in the continent. However, it is a matter of 
record now that the AU efforts were never given a 
chance. Military actions were preferred over peaceful 
means. 
 Nonetheless, the AU continues to be seized with 
the Libyan conflict, as it should be. South Africa, 
through the AU and the United Nations, will work with 
the National Transitional Council, the representative of 
the Libyan people, as it proceeds to form an inclusive 
transitional Government that will take the Libyan seat 
in the African Union. During this period of working 
towards normalcy in Libya, we call for a cessation of 
hostilities and an end to the NATO aerial 
bombardment. We also call for the lifting of the no-fly 
zone, whose imposition was necessary for the 
protection of civilians. 
 The proliferation of arms in Libya is a major 
concern. The transitional Government will need to be 
supported in addressing this security issue. It may pose 
a serious challenge affecting the entire subregion if it is 
not adequately attended to. We also urge the new 
Libyan authorities to ensure the protection of migrant 
workers, especially those from sub-Saharan African 
countries, who number approximately 2.5 million. 
Immediate measures should be taken to put an end to 
the killing, arbitrary arrest and detention of migrant 
workers and black Libyans. 
 We will fully support the people of Libya as they 
go through the transition towards a new, united and 
democratic Libya that protects human rights, human 
dignity and freedom. 
 South Africa continues to support international 
efforts to assist the people of Palestine and Israel to 
find lasting peace. The decades-old struggle of the 
Palestinian people for a sovereign State of their own 
has now reached a turning point. The Palestinian 
Authority, backed by the League of Arab States, has 
stated its intention to seek United Nations membership 
for the State of Palestine. South Africa fully supports 
this position. It is a decisive step towards achieving 
lasting peace, economic cooperation and prosperity for 
the millions of people in the Middle East, and we urge 
that it be viewed favourably. 
 We also support the ongoing struggle for self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara. We 
urge the international community to support their quest 
for freedom, human rights and dignity. 
 We reiterate our call for the lifting of the 
economic and financial embargo against the people of 
Cuba in order to help them gain their economic 
freedom. 
 All Member States have a duty to safeguard the 
future and relevance of the United Nations. Recent 
international developments have made more urgent our 
efforts to intensify the reform agenda of the United 
Nations, particularly the Security Council, as well as 
the Bretton Woods institutions. No reform can be 
complete without the substantive reform of the 
Security Council, whose membership must be 
consistent with the principle of equitable geographical 
representation. In this regard, we reiterate our call for 
Africa to be represented in the category of permanent 
membership of the Security Council. 
 South Africa is preparing to welcome the 
international community and all stakeholders to the 
seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and to the seventh Meeting of the Parties to the 
Kyoto Protocol, in November and December this year. 
The success of the Conference is highly dependent on 
the willingness of all parties to reach an agreement. It 
does not depend on South Africa alone. As leaders, we 
are accountable to the global citizenry, the ordinary 
people that suffer daily from the impacts of climate 
change. They hold high expectations of their leaders to 
be responsible and to find effective solutions to the 
threat that climate change poses to their livelihood, 
quality of life, dignity and, in many cases, their very 
survival. We dare not fail them. 
 We are witnessing the catastrophic effects of 
famine in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Our 
response should not be left to the United Nations alone; 
it requires united action from all of us. South Africa 
has been humbled to contribute in a small way to the 
alleviation of human suffering. The people of Somalia 
still need more support, and we urge the world to focus 
its attention more sharply on Somalia and its 
neighbours in the Horn of Africa. 
  
 
11-50702 24 
 
 It is commendable that the Millennium 
Development Goals and their realization by 2015 
continue to feature on the agenda of the General 
Assembly. We now have four years to go before we 
reach the target date. It is clear that many of the Goals 
will not be attained on time, particularly in 
sub-Saharan Africa. We call on the international 
community and the United Nations to redouble efforts 
to assist countries that are lagging. 
 At this session, we will be commemorating the 
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban 
Declaration and Programme of Action — the outcome 
document of the World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance, which was held in Durban in 2001. Racism 
and racial discrimination continue to pose a challenge 
to humankind and to negate the principles of the 
Charter of the United Nations. We should continue to 
work together to eradicate the scourge of racism. 
 On 8 January 2012, the African National 
Congress (ANC), the oldest liberation movement in 
Africa, will mark 100 years of existence since its 
establishment in 1912. The ANC spearheaded the 
struggle against racial oppression, colonialism and 
apartheid in South Africa. It inspired many in the 
African continent to fight for their freedom and 
independence from colonialism. 
 The United Nations declared apartheid a crime 
against humanity and in that way endorsed the struggle 
against racial oppression in our country. The centenary 
of the ANC recognizes the immense contribution of the 
United Nations and the international community in 
working to eradicate racism and racial discrimination 
in the world. We will, tomorrow, host a symposium on 
South Africa’s contribution to the fight against racism 
and racial discrimination. 
 Working together, let us remain committed to 
multilateralism and cooperation in this session of the 
General Assembly and beyond, and promote the 
realization of a more equitable and just world.I 
wish to begin by congratulating Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz 
Al-Nasser on having assumed the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident 
that, with his outstanding ability and great experience, 
he will fulfil his lofty mission. I also wish to thank 
Mr. Deiss for his contribution as President at the 
previous session. I further wish to take this opportunity 
to warmly congratulate the Republic of South Sudan on 
becoming the 193rd member of the United Nations 
family.  
 The first decade of the twenty-first century is 
now behind us. During that decade, the trend towards a 
multipolar world and economic globalization gained 
momentum. Countries became increasingly 
interdependent. Revolutions in science and technology 
brought profound transformations to human society. 
However, various traditional and non-traditional 
security threats and global challenges were intertwined 
with those changes, and the world was far from a 
peaceful place.  
 As the second decade of the new century begins, 
the world has entered an extraordinary historical stage 
in its pursuit of peace and development, and continues 
to undergo profound and complex changes. Uncertainty 
and instability are increasing despite the generally 
peaceful international environment. Development is 
becoming an increasingly serious issue, and promoting 
common development has become a more important 
and pressing task than ever before. 
 Global development is now at a new critical 
juncture. Global recovery remains fragile, international 
financial markets are volatile and the pursuit of 
sustainable development faces daunting challenges. 
The world economy therefore has to meet the crucial 
test of maintaining growth. Some countries in West 
Asia and North Africa are in continual political 
turmoil. Terrorist threats are spreading and global 
challenges growing. The international community faces 
a critical test in maintaining stability.  
 The gap in development between the South and 
the North is as wide as ever. The number of people 
living in absolute poverty has increased by 64 million 
owing to the international financial crisis. Nearly 
1 billion people suffer from starvation. Urgent action is 
needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 
It is imperative to step up international cooperation to 
help the least developed countries (LDCs) meet the 
basic needs of their people. In the face of these 
challenges, we share an important mission to achieve 
common development, and we also have rare new 
opportunities.  
 Economic globalization has made the interests of 
countries more closely interconnected. Ensuring 
security through cooperation and promoting 
development through stability has become our shared 
desire. Countries are addressing development 
challenges in innovative ways. To overcome the crisis, 
developed countries have taken steps to improve their 
fiscal conditions, adopted stimulus measures and 
accelerated economic structural adjustment. 
Developing countries as a whole have maintained good 
growth momentum. In particular, the rapid growth in 
some emerging economies has driven the growth of the 
world economy.  
 Progress has been made in the reform of the 
global economic governance structure, and various 
regional cooperation mechanisms are expanding. 
Efforts to accelerate the development of a green 
economy and explore new modes of sustainable growth 
have created new momentum and space for common 
development. Faced with new opportunities and 
challenges, we should work as a team to overcome our 
difficulties and pursue mutual benefit and common 
development. This is the responsibility and mission 
that history bestows upon all of us. To fulfil our 
mission, we need to take the following steps.  
 We should foster sound momentum for global 
economic recovery. The underlying impact of the 
international financial crisis has yet to dissipate, and 
economic recovery is still fragile and uneven. We 
should intensify consultation and coordination, and 
send a strong message of solidarity and win-win 
cooperation so as to strengthen international 
confidence in global recovery and growth. We should 
work for a fair, just, inclusive and orderly international 
monetary and financial system, and promote the voice 
and representation of emerging markets and developing 
countries.  
 China supports the transition of the Group of 
20 (G-20) from a short-term crisis response mechanism 
to a long-term mechanism of economic governance. 
The G-20 should play a bigger role in global economic 
governance and in promoting the full recovery and 
growth of the world economy.  
  
 
11-51384 42 
 
 We support the efforts of emerging markets to 
explore new modes of international economic 
cooperation. We strongly oppose protectionism in all 
its forms and call for strengthening the multilateral 
trading regime. The concerns of the least developed 
countries should be addressed, and efforts made to 
make the Doha Round achieve its development 
objectives. 
 We should lay the political foundation for 
cooperative development. All countries, big or small, 
strong or weak, rich or poor, are equal members of the 
international community, and their equal right to 
development should be protected. Mutual respect and 
equality are the basic norms governing international 
relations and constitute an important guarantee for 
common development. In the current context, it is of 
particular and practical importance to adhere to the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations, to uphold the authority and role of the United 
Nations, to observe in good faith the principle of 
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and to 
promote democracy in international relations.  
 We should respect the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of all countries. The internal affairs of each 
country should be decided by its own people. We 
oppose interference in other countries’ internal affairs 
by whatever means and under whatever pretext.  
 The diversity of the world is a valuable asset for 
the development of human society. It should be seen as 
a positive factor that allows countries to learn from one 
another, and should not be used as an excuse for the 
big to bully the small or the rich to ride roughshod over 
the poor in international relations. We should respect 
the right of each country to pursue the development 
path of its choice and we should respect the diversity 
of civilizations. We should seek common progress by 
drawing on one another’s strength with an open and 
inclusive mind, pursuing common ground while 
preserving differences. 
 We should foster a security environment 
conducive to stability and development. History has 
repeatedly shown that stability and development go 
hand in hand. Without stability, there can be no 
development; without development, there can be no 
stability. In keeping with the purposes and principles of 
the United Nations Charter, we should always use 
peaceful means to settle international disputes and 
hotspot issues. We should oppose the wilful use or 
threat of force, terrorism, separatism and extremism in 
all their forms, and we should uphold the common 
security of humankind. 
 China respects the independent choice of the 
people of the Sudan and South Sudan, and hopes that 
the new-born country of South Sudan will enjoy 
stability and development. The international 
community should continue to support and encourage 
the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their outstanding 
issues appropriately through dialogue and consultation, 
pursue amicable relations and common development, 
and uphold regional peace and stability. China has 
encouraged the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their 
dispute through peaceful negotiation and has worked 
hard to advance the peace process between them. We 
support the proper settlement of the Darfur issue. We 
will continue to work with the international community 
to play a constructive role in advancing regional peace, 
stability and development. 
 China has consistently supported the just cause of 
establishing an independent Palestinian State, and 
supports Palestine’s membership in the United Nations. 
We support efforts to achieve a two-State solution 
through political negotiation so as to establish, on the 
basis of the 1967 borders, an independent Palestinian 
State that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem 
as its capital. We believe that progress should be made 
in parallel in the peace talks between Syria and Israel 
and Lebanon and Israel, with an ultimate view to 
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in 
the Middle East along with peaceful coexistence 
between the Arab countries and Israel. We hope that 
the international community and the parties concerned 
will make unremitting efforts to this end and sustain 
the Middle East peace process. 
 China is greatly concerned about the turbulence 
in West Asia and North Africa. We stand for the 
principle of non-interference. We respect and support 
the efforts of countries in those regions to 
independently handle their internal affairs, and we 
respect their aspirations. We hope that the parties 
concerned will resolve their differences through 
political dialogue and speedily restore stability and 
order in their respective countries.  
 Libya has now entered a critical transition from a 
state of war and turmoil to national reconstruction. 
China respects the choice of the Libyan people and 
recognizes the National Transitional Council (NTC) as 
 
 
43 11-51384 
 
the governing authority of Libya and the representative 
of its people. We hope that, under the leadership of the 
NTC, the parties in Libya will launch an inclusive 
process of political transition through which they will 
maintain ethnic harmony and national unity, restore 
stability as soon as possible and begin economic 
reconstruction. China supports the leading role of the 
United Nations in Libya’s post-conflict reconstruction, 
and urges the speediest possible operationalization of 
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.  
 China is also greatly concerned about 
developments in Syria. We hope that parties in Syria 
will exercise restraint, avoid all violence, further 
bloodshed and conflict, and act quickly to ease 
tensions. We believe that a Syria-led, inclusive political 
process aimed at promoting reform through dialogue 
and consultation is the right way to resolve the current 
crisis in Syria. The international community should 
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial 
integrity of Syria, and address the Syrian issue 
cautiously so as to prevent further turbulence and 
repercussions on regional peace. 
 China welcomes the positive developments on the 
Korean peninsula. We believe that dialogue and 
consultation are the only effective way to address the 
issues of the peninsula. The Six-Party Talks are an 
effective mechanism for advancing the denuclearization 
of the Korean peninsula and for upholding peace and 
stability both on the peninsula and in North-East Asia.  
 China has worked hard to promote peace through 
dialogue, and has played a unique role in easing 
tensions and maintaining peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula. China welcomes the recent 
resumption of dialogue between the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, 
as well as between the Democratic People’s Republic 
of Korea and the United States. We hope that the 
parties concerned will seize the opportunity, remain 
engaged in dialogue and work for an early resumption 
of the Six-Party Talks. 
 We should promote balanced development 
between the South and the North. The uneven 
development between South and North is the biggest 
imbalance in the global economy. Without balanced 
development, there can hardly be sustainable 
development. Unless underdeveloped countries shake 
off poverty and grow their economies, there can be no 
common global prosperity.  
 Achieving the Millennium Development Goals on 
a global scale and on schedule is an urgent and arduous 
task. Developed countries should honour their 
commitments on official development assistance, open 
their markets, reduce and cancel debt, and their step up 
financial and technological support to developing 
countries. International financial institutions should 
use their resources to help developing countries, and 
particularly the LDCs, on a priority basis. Developing 
countries, on their part, should explore growth models 
that are conducive to development and poverty 
alleviation in order to achieve a higher level of 
development. 
 Food security has emerged as a major challenge. 
The Horn of Africa is suffering from massive famine 
triggered by the most severe drought in 60 years. The 
international community should scale up assistance, 
stabilize the price of food and other commodities, and 
help developing countries enhance their capacity for 
autonomous development so that all countries and 
regions can enjoy the benefits of common 
development. 
 The world witnessed major development, 
transformation and adjustment in the first decade of the 
twenty-first century. During this period, China enjoyed 
sustained and fast development, and its relations with 
the outside world underwent profound changes. 
China’s achievements in development, and its possible 
future course, have become a focus of international 
attention. Over the past 10 years, China’s economy 
continued to grow, and its people’s living standards 
rose markedly, thanks to the hard work of the Chinese 
people. Today, China has become the world’s second-
largest economy, largest exporter, second-largest 
importer and largest emerging market. The basic living 
needs of China’s 1.3 billion people are being 
adequately met, and the number living in absolute 
poverty has fallen drastically. 
 On the other hand, the difficulties China faces in 
terms of development should not be ignored. We 
remain a developing country with a large population, a 
weak economic foundation and serious imbalances and 
lack of coordination in our development. China will 
have to make persistent and strenuous efforts to 
achieve its development goals. Guided by our recently 
adopted twelfth five-year plan for economic and social 
development, we will pursue scientific development, 
accelerate the shift in our growth model, advance 
scientific and technological innovation and increase 
  
 
11-51384 44 
 
reforms and openness designed to promote long-term, 
steady and fast economic development, as well as 
social harmony and progress. The world will see a 
more open China, with more sustainable development 
and greater social harmony. 
 China’s development has brought real benefits to 
the Chinese people and contributed to global 
development and prosperity. During the past 10 years, 
China imported close to, on average, $750 billion 
worth of goods annually, creating more than 14 million 
jobs for the relevant countries and regions. At the end 
of the twelfth five-year period in 2015, China’s total 
economic output will be around $8.6 trillion. It is 
expected that China will import about $10 trillion in 
goods in the next five years, which will further boost 
world economic growth. China needs the world in 
order to be able to continue to develop, and China’s 
development will in turn contribute more to the shared 
development of the world as a whole. 
 As a developing country, China is committed to 
enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation with other 
developing countries, based on equality, and to 
enhancing its efforts to provide them with assistance 
and support. China has cancelled 380 debts incurred by 
50 heavily indebted poor countries and LDCs, and will 
phase in zero-tariff treatment for 95 per cent of exports 
from the African LDCs with which China has 
diplomatic relations. We have completed more than 
2,100 projects, including building schools and 
hospitals, in other developing countries, and trained 
150,000 professionals in various fields for them. In 
sympathy with the pain of the countries and people in 
the Horn of Africa hit by famine, China has decided to 
provide those countries with RMB443.2 million in 
emergency food assistance and cash for purchasing 
food to help them overcome the famine. 
 China has made notable efforts to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals. As it continues to 
develop, China will create more opportunities for 
world peace, development and cooperation. To advance 
common development, we must foster a sound 
international environment. Over the years, China has 
been dedicated to creating a peaceful international 
environment in which it can develop. At the same time, 
it has contributed to enhancing world peace through its 
own development. China has actively assumed 
international responsibilities as its capacity permits, 
and has worked to promote the peaceful settlement of 
issues in troubled areas.  
 China participates actively in international 
peacekeeping operations; with a total of more than 
19,000 personnel deployed in 28 United Nations 
peacekeeping missions, China is the largest contributor 
of United Nations peacekeeping personnel among 
Security Council permanent members. China has 
provided assistance in cash and kind to countries hit by 
earthquakes and tsunamis, and has sent rescue teams to 
carry out humanitarian relief operations in the affected 
areas. China is actively involved in the fight against 
piracy and in other areas of international cooperation. 
All these efforts have contributed to maintaining world 
peace and stability. 
 The tide of history is surging forward. In the next 
decade, peace, development and cooperation will 
remain trends of the times, and China will not waver in 
its pursuit of development and progress. Peaceful 
development is the strategic choice that China has 
made to build a modern, strong and prosperous country 
and to make a greater contribution to the progress of 
human civilization. China will stay on that path, 
pursuing an independent, peaceful foreign policy and a 
win-win strategy of opening up its society. 
 We are committed to achieving a better life for 
the Chinese people and greater development and 
prosperity for all humankind. We will achieve those 
goals through hard work, reforms and innovation, and 
by conducting long-term friendly exchanges and 
establishing equality-based, win-win cooperation with 
other countries. A prosperous, harmonious and stable 
China that lives up to its responsibilities will make a 
greater contribution to the prosperity and stability of 
the world and the common development of humankind. 
Let us work together to deepen cooperation and 
achieve development by sharing opportunities and 
meeting challenges together, and thus build a 
harmonious world of lasting peace and common 
prosperity.Seldom has 
people’s yearning for freedom, dignity and self-
determination played such a dominant role as it has this 
year. Until now, we have experienced globalization 
 
 
49 11-51384 
 
first and foremost through the ever-greater integration 
of the world economy. Today, we see that globalization 
means so much more; that it has also brought about a 
globalization of values. Those are the values enshrined 
in the United Nations Charter, the inalienable rights 
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. 
 In North Africa and in the Arab world, millions of 
people have shaken off the shackles of decades of 
oppression. They want freedom, democracy and human 
rights, as well as better lives for themselves and their 
families. That road is anything but easy. A new 
political system must mature in order to become stable. 
That takes time and patience. However, even the 
longest road begins with the very first step. This is a 
year of momentous steps. 
 We have not forgotten the moving images of 
people who won dignity and self-respect by their own 
efforts, the proud faces on Bourguiba Boulevard in 
Tunis and in Tahrir Square in Cairo. Those people want 
to shape their own future, and their yearning is by no 
means limited to the Arab world. In Belarus, too, 
people long for an end to repression and tyranny and 
for the opportunity to fully develop their individual 
personalities. 
 With the fall of the Berlin Wall and reunification 
more than 20 years ago, Germany experienced for 
itself the joy of a peaceful revolution. Today we have a 
fundamental interest in the success of the political 
awakening in the southern Mediterranean region. We 
Germans offer our support for the reforms in Morocco 
and Jordan, the political awakening in Egypt and 
Tunisia, and the fresh start in Libya following the 
overthrow of the dictator. 
 Every country and every society will find its own 
way into the modern world, either through revolution 
or through reform. We want to provide advice and 
support. We want to help create an independent 
judiciary, a pluralistic media landscape, and a vibrant 
civil society. We want to help people come to terms 
with their past and we want to support the 
constitutional process. Above all, however, we want to 
assist in the crucial process of building a new social 
and economic order, for we all know that the success of 
social change largely hinges on economic success. 
People who take to the streets for freedom and self-
determination must see first-hand that they, too, can 
succeed with the help of their ideas, their creativity and 
their commitment. 
 Germany is therefore working not only for close 
partnerships but for increased market access. We want 
to foster change through increased trade. We are 
offering investments, especially in the small and 
medium-sized enterprises that form the backbone of an 
open and successful society. Most important of all, 
however, will be to offer young people education and 
training so that they can make the most of their 
opportunities. That is of key importance to successful 
transitions and fresh starts in those countries. 
 The courageous men and women of Syria deserve 
a clear sign of our solidarity. The Syrian Government 
has responded to the legitimate demands of the Syrian 
people with brutal force. Germany will continue to 
press for a Security Council resolution. This is not only 
about showing solidarity with the Syrian people; it is 
also about the credibility of the international 
community. If the repression continues, we Europeans 
will further tighten sanctions against the regime. The 
Syrian people should be free to shape their own future. 
 This week has been dominated by the unresolved 
conflict in the Middle East. On Friday here in New 
York, President Abbas expressed the Palestinians’ 
expectations and understandable frustration with the 
lack of progress made (see ). On the same 
day, Prime Minister Netanyahu reaffirmed Israel’s 
justified desire to exist in peace within secure borders 
(see ). Both sides have legitimate interests. 
However, these interests are certainly not 
irreconcilable. They can be overcome if the parties 
involved are willing to do so. 
 Germany is backing a two-State solution. We 
support a Palestinian State that will allow the 
Palestinians to live in dignity and self-determination 
and that is independent, sovereign, contiguous and 
democratic, as well as politically and economically 
viable. Over the past few years, we have been heavily 
involved in the practical development of this statehood 
by helping to build an administration, infrastructure 
and vocational training, as well as politically, in the 
German-Palestinian Steering Committee. And we do 
not want that State to be founded sometime in the 
distant and indeterminate future. 
 Let there be no doubt, however, that the security 
of Israel is and will continue to be part of the raison 
d’être of the Federal Republic of Germany. Peace 
  
 
11-51384 50 
 
between Israelis and Palestinians is possible. A 
Palestinian State is possible. Two States existing 
peacefully side by side are possible. However, they can 
be achieved only through negotiations. The statement 
issued by the Middle East Quartet on Friday identified 
the milestones along the way. Germany worked hard 
for that Quartet statement and staunchly supports it. 
 The confrontation of words here in New York 
must not be allowed to lead to an escalation in violence 
in the Middle East. I therefore call on both sides, 
Palestinians and Israelis, to enter into direct 
negotiations without delay. On Friday, the two sides 
reaffirmed their desire for a negotiated peace. The task 
now is to channel the energy and pressure of recent 
days into a constructive process. The two sides have 
been called on to come forward within three months 
with comprehensive proposals on territory and security, 
and to refrain from all provocative actions. The 
international community will continue to support the 
difficult road to peace. This includes the Moscow 
conference as part of the negotiating timetable for the 
coming months. 
 I would like to express my appreciation to all 
who have worked so hard in the past few days to create 
this opportunity for a constructive solution. As a 
European, I would like to extend my special thanks to 
the European Union’s High Representative, Lady 
Ashton. Let us make use of the impetus provided by 
the intensive efforts here in New York for the benefit of 
the people of Israel and the Palestinian territories. 
 The international community has worked 
tirelessly for years to ensure that Afghanistan ceases to 
harbour a threat to international peace and security. 
Many, indeed too many people have already lost their 
lives as a result of that threat. On 5 December in Bonn, 
under Afghanistan’s chairmanship, we will discuss the 
way forward. The Conference will focus on three major 
issues. The first is the complete handover of 
responsibility for security. This summer saw the start 
of a process whereby the Afghans are to gradually 
assume responsibility for security in their country by 
2014. This is a responsible handover of responsibility. 
 Secondly, the international community will 
remain engaged in Afghanistan after 2014. Afghanistan 
will continue to need economic initiatives and more 
regional cooperation to help strengthen its sovereignty. 
The New Silk Road initiative, which we launched here 
in New York last week, is intended to serve this aim.  
 Thirdly, Afghanistan’s internal reconciliation and 
support from States in the region are critical to lasting 
peace. The brutal murder of former President Rabbani 
shows that the reconciliation process will continue to 
suffer setbacks. Nevertheless, it must and will go on. 
Germany will play its part on the road to Bonn. 
 While people are seizing the opportunity to build 
a better future for themselves in freedom and self-
determination in a growing number of countries around 
the world, millions in the Horn of Africa are struggling 
to survive. The United Nations has played a valuable 
role in providing swift humanitarian assistance. 
Germany is doing everything in its power in this and 
many other crises to alleviate the suffering. 
 The collapse of State authority and the impact of 
climate change are aggravating the already disastrous 
situation. Germany will continue to be in the vanguard 
of the fight against climate change. As with 
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, as well as 
the protection of human rights, the fight against 
climate change is an integral element of preventive 
diplomacy. It is part of a farsighted peace policy. 
 By the end of this year, our planet will have more 
than 7 billion inhabitants. In that world, Germany will 
place its hopes in a strong United Nations as a forum 
for political consensus-building, a source of rules with 
international legitimacy, and a player in the crisis 
regions of this world. The United Nations Charter and 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights offer more 
people than ever before the direction and inspiration 
they need to strive for a cooperative world order and a 
fairer global community. 
 However, the United Nations has to adapt to our 
changing world. Only then will the decisions made 
here gain political force, effectiveness and acceptance. 
New centres of power are emerging in global politics. 
Their economic dynamism has prompted them to 
demand political participation. The sixty-fifth session 
of the General Assembly considered United Nations 
reform, but no real progress has been achieved so far. 
We welcome the fact that the new President intends to 
again personally champion this reform. We will do 
everything we can to him. 
 In September 38 years ago, two German States 
were admitted to the United Nations. At that time, my 
predecessor in office, Walter Scheel, stated before the 
Assembly: 
 
 
51 11-51384 
 
 “Where there is a question of international 
cooperation, of preserving peace and of 
protecting the rights of man, there the Federal 
Republic of Germany will always be found. If 
there is anything we have learned from our own 
bitter experience it is this: man is the measure of 
all things”. 
 Man is the measure of all things. Germany 
remains committed to this principle.When we 
met in this very place in September last year, who 
among us could have imagined that in barely one year 
the world, already shaken by an unprecedented 
economic crisis, would undergo such change? Within a 
few months, the Arab Spring gave rise to immense 
hope. 
 The Arab peoples, too long crushed by 
oppression, were able to raise their heads and claimed 
the right to be free at last. They fought back against the 
violence and brutality with their bare hands. To those 
who proclaimed that the Arab Muslim world was by 
nature hostile to democracy and human rights, the 
young Arabs produced the most cogent denial. 
 We do not have the right to disappoint the hope of 
the Arab peoples. We do not have the right to destroy 
their dreams. For shattering the dreams of those 
peoples would vindicate the fanatics who have not 
stopped pitting Islam against the West by stirring up 
hatred and violence everywhere. 
 That appeal for justice shook the world, and the 
world cannot respond to that call for justice by 
perpetuating an injustice. That miraculous spring of the 
 
 
23 11-50692 
 
Arab peoples imposes on us the moral and political 
obligation at last to find a solution to the Middle East 
conflict. We cannot wait any longer. The method used 
to date — I weigh my words carefully — has failed. So 
we must change the method. 
 We must stop believing that a single country — 
whether the largest or a small group of countries — can 
resolve so complex a problem. Too many large actors 
have been sidelined for our efforts to succeed. I mean 
that no one can believe that the peace process can 
succeed without Europe, without all the permanent 
members of the Security Council and without the Arab 
States that have already chosen peace. A collective 
approach has become indispensable in order to create 
trust and to provide guarantees to each of the parties. 
 Peace will indeed be made by the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, and by no one else. No one can expect to 
impose it on them. But we must help them.  
 The method no longer works. Let us together 
acknowledge that setting preconditions for negotiation 
is to condemn ourselves to failure. Preconditions are 
the opposite of negotiation. If we wish to enter into 
negotiation, which is the only possible path for peace, 
there must be no preconditions. 
 Let us change the method. All the elements of a 
solution are known — the Madrid Conference of 1991, 
President Obama’s speech of 19 May, the Road Map, 
the Arab Peace Initiative and the parameters agreed by 
the European Union. So, let us stop endlessly 
discussing the parameters and allow negotiation to 
begin in line with a concrete and ambitious timetable. 
Sixty years without one centimetre’s progress — does 
that not compel us to change the method and time 
frame to one month to resume discussions, six months 
to reach agreement on borders and security, and one 
year to reach a definitive settlement? 
 As of this autumn, France proposes hosting a 
donor conference so that the Palestinians can complete 
the construction of their future State. France wishes to 
say that we must not immediately seek the perfect 
solution, because there are no perfect solutions. Let us 
choose the path of compromise, which is neither 
renunciation nor repudiation, but which allows us to 
move forward, step by step. 
 Thus, for 60 years the Palestinians have been 
waiting for their State. Has the time not come to give 
them hope? For 60 years, Israel has suffered from not 
being able to live in peace. For 60 years, the question 
of the peaceful coexistence of the two peoples — 
Palestinian and Israeli — has continued to fester. We 
can no longer wait to take the path of peace. Let us put 
ourselves in the place of the Palestinians. Is it not 
legitimate that they claim their State? Of course it is. 
And who does not see that creating a democratic, 
viable and peaceful Palestinian State would be, for 
Israel, the best guarantee of its security? 
 Let us put ourselves in the place of the Israelis. Is 
it not legitimate that, after 60 years of war and attacks, 
they demand guarantees of that peace, so long awaited? 
Of course it is. I say that forcefully. If anyone 
anywhere in the world were to threaten the existence of 
Israel, France would immediately and wholeheartedly 
stand alongside Israel. Threats made against a State 
Member of the United Nations are unacceptable, and 
they will not be accepted. 
 Today, we are facing a very difficult choice. Each 
of us knows — and let us stop with hypocrisy and one-
off diplomacy — that full recognition of the status of a 
State Member of the United Nations cannot be attained 
at once. The first reason for that is the lack of trust 
between the main parties. But let us tell the truth: who 
can doubt that a veto in the Security Council will 
engender a cycle of violence in the Middle East? Who 
can doubt that? 
 Must we therefore exclude an intermediate stage? 
Why not envisage offering Palestine the status of 
United Nations Observer State? That would be an 
important step forward. After 60 years of immobility, 
which has paved the way for extremists, we would be 
giving hope to the Palestinians by making progress 
towards final status. 
 To show their determined commitment to a 
negotiated peace, the Palestinian authorities should, as 
part of that approach, reaffirm Israel’s right to exist 
and to its security. They should commit to avoiding 
using this new status to resort to actions that are 
incompatible with the pursuit of negotiations. 
 We have but one alternative — immobility and 
negotiations that go nowhere or an intermediate 
solution that would give hope to the Palestinians with 
the status of an Observer State.  
 In parallel, Israel must observe the same restraint. 
It must abstain from any actions that would prejudge 
the final status.  
  
 
11-50692 24 
 
 The ultimate goal must be mutual recognition of 
two nation-States for two peoples established on the 
basis of the 1967 lines with agreed and equivalent 
exchanges of land.  
 The General Assembly, which has a power to do 
so, should decide to move ahead, leave behind the fatal 
trap of paralysis, missed appointments and short-lived 
attempts to relaunch the process. Let us change our 
approach. Let us change our state of mind. Each should 
try to understand the reasoning, sufferings and fears of 
the other. Each must open its eyes and be ready to 
make concessions. 
 In conclusion, I would like to say to the 
Palestinian people with the deep and sincere friendship 
I hold for them: “Think of the Israeli mothers grieving 
for their family members killed in terrorist attacks. 
They feel the same pain as the Palestinian mothers 
confronted with the brutal death of one of theirs”. 
 I would like to say to the Israeli people with the 
deep and sincere friendship I hold for them: “Listen to 
what the young people of the Arab Spring are saying: 
‘Long live freedom!’ They are not crying ‘Down with 
Israel’. You cannot remain immobile when this wind of 
freedom and democracy is blowing in your region”. 
 I say with deep and sincere friendship for these 
two peoples who have suffered so much that the time 
has come to build peace for the children of Palestine 
and for the children of Israel. But it would be a great 
shame if the General Assembly did not seize the 
opportunity of the reawakening of the Arab peoples to 
democracy to settle a problem that brings unhappiness 
to these two peoples, who are in any event condemned 
to live alongside each other. If we take a compromise 
solution, we will rebuild trust and we will give people 
hope. 
 I say that with the utmost gravity to the 
representatives of all nations. We must assume an 
historic responsibility. It is the General Assembly of 
the United Nations that must keep this appointment 
with History. 
 Let us reassure Israel and give hope to the 
Palestinian people. The solution is on the table. Let us 
take this compromise solution over deadlock. Deadlock 
might satisfy everyone here, but it will create violence, 
bitterness and opposition that will imperil the 
resurgence of the Arab peoples. To that, France says 
that the tragedy must cease for a simple reason: it has 
gone on for too long. 
It is an honour 
to address the General Assembly for the first time, and 
it is a particular honour to do so as such momentous 
events unfold in the Arab world. Last week I was in 
Tripoli and Benghazi. I saw the hunger of a people 
eager to get on with reclaiming their country, writing 
themselves a new chapter of freedom and democracy. 
This has been the most dramatic episode of what has 
been called the Arab Spring. 
 My argument today is that Libya and the Arab 
Spring show that the United Nations needs a new way 
of working, because the Arab Spring is a massive 
opportunity to spread peace, prosperity, democracy 
and, vitally, security, but only if we really seize the 
opportunity.  
 So the events of this year present a challenge to 
all of us — a challenge to Europe to show it can reform 
its aid and trade strategy to be truly progressive; a 
challenge to the African Union, to meet the 
opportunities of this century with the same courage 
that won liberation in the last; a challenge to the 
Israelis and Palestinians, to take the bold steps to come 
to the table and make lasting peace; a challenge to Iran 
and to Syria, to give their peoples the freedoms they 
deserve; and a challenge to the United Nations. 
 One can sign every human rights declaration in 
the world, but if one stands by and watches people 
being slaughtered in their own country when one could 
 
 
25 11-50865 
 
act, then what are those signatures really worth? The 
United Nations has to show that we can be not just 
united in condemnation, but united in action, acting in 
a way that lives up to the United Nations founding 
principles and meets the needs of peoples everywhere. 
 The peoples of the Arab world have made their 
aspirations clear. They want transparency and 
accountability of Government, an end to corruption, 
the fair and consistent rule of law, the chance to get a 
job and to have a stake in how their country is run, the 
freedom to communicate and the chance to participate 
in shaping society as citizens with rights and 
responsibilities. 
 No one says that achieving those ambitions will 
be easy. There will be false starts and wrong turns 
along the way, not least where countries have inherited 
sectarian and regional divisions, weak political parties, 
State institutions enfeebled by misuse and a politics 
distorted by the false choice between repression on the 
one hand and Islamist extremism on the other. 
 The long process of developing a new and 
accountable Government is just beginning. And across 
the region, we cannot guarantee that the process of 
reform is irreversible. But let us be clear. These 
developments present a great opportunity for many 
who have long been sold short by their Governments, 
and there is an opportunity and responsibility for all of 
us, too. 
 Just as after 1989 we helped those who tore down 
the Berlin Wall to build robust democracies and market 
economies, just as in 1994 we welcomed South Africa 
back into the commonwealth of nations when it chose 
the path of reconciliation and democracy instead of 
racial conflict, so now in 2011, as people in North 
Africa and the Middle East stand up and give voice to 
their hopes for more open and democratic societies, we 
have an opportunity, and, I would say, a responsibility 
to help them. 
 Now the mistake we often make in the West is to 
think that because the people in this region want 
democracy, they will want it in the same way and with 
the same outcomes that we do. We should not be trying 
to impose Western values or a single template on the 
region. Democracy is a process, not an event. 
Participatory Government involves so much more than 
just the simple act of voting. The Assembly heard not 
long ago from President Ahmadinejad. He did not 
remind us that he runs a country where they may have 
elections, of a sort, but they also repress freedom of 
speech. They do everything they can to avoid the 
accountability of a free media. They violently prevent 
demonstrations. And yes, they detain and torture those 
who argue for a better future. So we should never 
pretend that having elections is enough. The building 
blocks of democracy have to be patiently developed 
from the grass roots up. The process will be different in 
every country. And it is not for us to dictate how Arab 
nations should respond to those challenges, or to 
lecture them about how to do it. But there is an 
important opportunity for us to help, and we must seize 
it.  
 There are important lessons from what has 
happened in Libya. The Libyans liberated themselves. 
Ordinary Libyans from all walks of life came together 
and showed incredible resilience and bravery as they 
rose up and drove out Al-Qadhafi. The people of 
Benghazi, the brave fighters of Misurata, the people of 
Zawiyah, the warriors from the Nafusa Mountains, all 
of them showed incredible courage in liberating their 
country. The National Transitional Council, which 
demonstrated great leadership, not least as Tripoli fell, 
urged people to avoid reprisals and to look to the 
future — a message that still holds true today.  
 That revolution truly belongs to the Libyan 
people. The United Nations played a vital role 
authorizing international action. But let us be clear; the 
United Nations is no more effective than the nation 
States that come together to enforce its will. And on 
this occasion a coalition of nations across the Western 
and Arab world had the will to act. In doing so, they 
stopped Benghazi from joining Srebrenica and Rwanda 
in history’s painful roll call of massacres that the world 
failed to prevent. Today, Tripoli and Benghazi are 
cities transformed. Where there was fear, now there is 
hope and an optimism and belief that are truly 
inspiring.  
 But there are challenges ahead, not just in Libya 
but all across the region. Economies in the region have 
underperformed when compared with their peers. In 
1960, Egypt’s gross domestic product per capita was 
comparable with Korea’s. Today it has fallen to around 
just one fifth of the size. Across the region, some 
countries dependent on oil revenues, and others held 
back by heavy State control have failed to diversify 
and create jobs in productive new sectors and failed to 
connect themselves to the economies of the region and 
the wider world.  
  
 
11-50865 26 
 
 Indeed, less than four per cent of North African 
trade is within the region, making it the least integrated 
neighbourhood in our world. And the promise of 
economic reform has not been fulfilled. Too often 
people were told economic reform would bring them 
market economies with greater freedom to start up 
businesses, to trade, to grow and to create wealth. But 
it did not. It brought them corrupt and crony 
capitalism. Now the future is for the people of this 
region to determine, but I would urge them not to reject 
something they have never had — a genuine, open, fair 
and transparent market economy, which has proved the 
world over to be the best way to create jobs and 
wealth. And the need for economic success is vital, 
because this is a region where 60 per cent of the 
population is under 25, and youth unemployment is 
nearly double the world average. 
 It is a region that must create 50 million new jobs 
by 2020 just to keep pace with its population; that 
means 700,000 new jobs every year in Egypt alone. 
And these jobs should not be just for men. Let us be 
honest. It is not just the men of the region who want a 
job and a voice. The unemployment rate for Egyptian 
women is more than three times that of men. And it is 
not only the economy where they are denied the chance 
to play a fuller role. It is society and politics and 
culture too. But look at the crowds in Freedom Square 
and we see it is the women too, finding their voices, 
showing clearly that they want to play a part in 
building their future. 
 So, in this historic period, when the voice of this 
region is finally being heard, there is now a unique 
opportunity for women to fulfil their ambitions too. 
This is not just in the interests of women. It is in the 
interests of those countries as a whole. Let us be clear. 
You cannot build strong economies, open societies and 
inclusive political systems if you lock out women. So 
the Arab Spring will not succeed if the opportunities 
that are opening up are denied to half of the 
population.  
 Now, of course, the actions we take to support the 
people in each country must be tailored to that country, 
with respect for its particular culture, history and 
tradition. What is right for Libya will not necessarily 
be right for everywhere else. But the international 
community has found its voice in Libya, and we must 
not now lose our nerve. We must have the confidence 
to speak out and act as necessary to support those who 
seek new freedoms.  
 In the European Union, it is time to ensure that 
the billions of euros we spend in this region each year 
are used to support reform that will meet the 
aspirations of the people. And there should be no more 
excuses for denying the people of the region fair access 
to our markets, including in agriculture. Here at the 
United Nations, we have a responsibility to stand up 
against regimes that persecute their people. We need to 
see reform in Yemen. And above all, on Syria, it is time 
for the members of the Security Council to act. We 
must now adopt a credible resolution, threatening 
tough sanctions. 
 Of course we should always act with care when it 
comes to the internal affairs of a sovereign State. But 
we cannot allow this to be an excuse for indifference in 
the face of a regime that, week after week, arrests, 
intimidates, tortures and kills people who are 
peacefully trying to make their voices heard.  
 The voice of the African Union is vital too. Africa 
has rightly challenged the world to meet its aid 
commitments. I am proud that Britain will meet its 
commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross national 
income from 2013. And all the countries that made 
promises at Gleneagles and elsewhere must meet those 
promises too. In the case of Britain, it means we have 
been able to provide £124 million of emergency aid to 
3 million people facing starvation in the Horn of 
Africa. But at the same time, Africa must meet its 
responsibilities too.  
 Many will find it hard to understand why 
countries in southern Africa which fought so hard to 
throw off oppression themselves, have been so slow to 
respond to the Arab Spring. Of course, I recognize that 
many have long been committed to non-intervention. 
But my argument is that where action is necessary, 
legal and right, to fail to act is to fail those who need 
our help. So it is welcome that the African Union is 
taking steps to recognize the National Transitional 
Council in Libya, as many African countries have 
already done. Africa’s responsibility now is to embrace 
and support Libya’s new, inclusive and democratic 
future. And this must include ensuring that those 
wanted for serious crimes are brought to justice, and 
that the wealth stolen from the Libyan people is 
returned to them.  
 We all have a responsibility to the Palestinians 
too. A key part of the Arab Spring is the right of 
Palestinians to have a viable State of their own, living 
 
 
27 11-50865 
 
in peace, alongside a safe and secure State of Israel. 
And I strongly support this. There has been much 
speculation about what will happen here this week. Let 
us be clear about one fact. No resolution can, on its 
own, substitute for the political will necessary to bring 
peace. Peace will only come when Palestinians and 
Israelis sit down and talk to each other, make 
compromises, build trust and agree. So our role must 
be to support this, to defeat those who embrace 
violence, to stop the growth of settlements and to 
support Palestinians and Israelis alike to make peace.  
 But the opportunity in Libya and elsewhere in the 
region is not just about achieving a more open society, 
prosperity and the building blocks of democracy for 
their own sake — it is about security too. Some have 
argued that stability in the Arab world can only be 
achieved by the tight control of strong authoritarian 
regimes and that reform is a threat to stability. In fact, 
the opposite is true. Reform is the basis of long-term 
stability. Authoritarianism threatens it.  
 While there is never a justification for resorting 
to terror, if people’s hunger for a job and a voice are 
denied, there is a real risk that the frustration and the 
alienation they feel will cause them to be drawn to 
more violent and extremist responses. That is not just a 
problem for one region. It is a problem for all of us. 
Here, in this great city, where 10 years ago, people of 
90 different nationalities were killed in the most 
horrific terrorist attack in history, we must recognize 
that political and economic reform in the Middle East 
is not just good in its own right, but that it is also a key 
part of how, in the end, we will defeat Al-Qaida.  
 Of course, we must meet terrorist activity with a 
strong and resolute security response. Al-Qaida and its 
offshoots must know that they will have no safe hiding 
place to plot or recruit young men to train as terrorists. 
But in the long term, we must defeat not only the 
terrorists, but the extremist ideology that feeds them. 
Al-Qaida’s poisonous ideology has thrived on 
repression. Democracy is what it fears most. People are 
not in Tahrir Square in Cairo and Freedom Square in 
Libya for an Islamist caliphate, but for a job, a voice 
and a future. And we must heed their call, for their 
freedom and for the security of us all.Allow me at the outset to 
congratulate Mr. Al-Nasser on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. I wish to assure 
him of India’s full cooperation in the conduct of the 
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly. 
 It is also my great pleasure to welcome in our 
midst the new State of South Sudan. 
 We meet during this session of the General 
Assembly at a time of great uncertainty and profound 
change. Until a few years ago, the world had taken for 
granted the benefits of globalization and global 
interdependence. Today we are being called upon to 
cope with the negative dimensions of those very 
phenomena. Economic, social and political events in 
different parts of the world have coalesced, and their 
adverse impact is now being felt across countries and 
continents. 
 The world economy is in trouble. The shoots of 
recovery which were visible after the economic and 
financial crisis of 2008 have yet to blossom. In many 
respects, the crisis has deepened even further. 
 The traditional engines of the global economy, 
including the United States, Europe and Japan, which 
are also the sources of global economic and financial 
stability, are today faced with continued economic 
slowdown. Recessionary trends in those countries are 
affecting confidence in world financial and capital 
markets. These developments are bound to have a 
negative impact on developing countries, which also 
have to bear the additional burden of inflationary 
pressures. 
 There has been unprecedented social and political 
upheaval in West Asia, the Gulf and North Africa. The 
peoples of those regions are demanding the right to 
shape their own future. Energy and food prices are 
once again spiralling and introducing fresh instability, 
especially for developing countries. 
 The Palestinian question remains unresolved and 
a source of great instability and violence. India is 
steadfast in its support for the Palestinian people’s 
struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable and united 
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, 
living within secure and recognizable borders side by 
side and at peace with Israel. We look forward to 
welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of the United 
Nations. 
 Terrorism continues to rear its ugly head and take 
a grievous toll of innocent lives. New threats to 
international security have emerged. At a time when 
the world needs more international commerce, the sea 
lanes of communication across the Indian Ocean are 
under siege. Acts of piracy are being carried out with 
impunity from lands that are beyond the writ of any 
functioning State or international accountability. 
 Iniquitous growth, inadequate job and education 
opportunities and the denial of basic human freedoms 
are leading to a growing radicalization of the youth, 
intolerance and extremism. 
  
 
11-51360 10 
 
 We have no choice but to meet these challenges 
head-on. We will succeed if we adopt a cooperative 
rather than a confrontational approach. We will 
succeed if we embrace once again the principles on 
which the United Nations was founded: 
internationalism and multilateralism. More importantly, 
we will succeed if our efforts have legitimacy and are 
pursued not just within the framework of the law but 
also in the spirit of the law. 
 The observance of the rule of law is as important 
in international affairs as it is within countries. 
Societies cannot be reordered from outside through 
military force. People in all countries have the right to 
choose their own destiny and decide their own future. 
 The international community has a role to play in 
assisting in the processes of transition and institution-
building, but the idea that prescriptions should be 
imposed from outside is fraught with danger. 
 Action taken under the authority of the United 
Nations must respect the unity, territorial integrity, 
sovereignty and independence of individual States. 
Correspondingly, governments are duty-bound to their 
citizens to create conditions that enable them to freely 
determine their pathways to development. This is the 
essence of democracy and fundamental human 
freedoms. 
 There are many other things that we can do. We 
must address the issue of the deficit in global 
governance. We need a stronger and more effective 
United Nations. We need a United Nations that is 
sensitive to the aspirations of everyone, rich or poor, 
big or small. For this, the United Nations and its 
principal organs, the General Assembly and the 
Security Council, must be revitalized and reformed. 
 The reform and expansion of the Security 
Council are essential if it is to reflect contemporary 
reality. Such an outcome will enhance the Council’s 
credibility and effectiveness in dealing with global 
issues. Early reform of the Security Council must be 
pursued with renewed vigour and urgently enacted. 
 We should not allow the global economic 
slowdown to become a pretext for building walls 
around ourselves through protectionism or erecting 
barriers to the movement of people, services and 
capital. Effective ways and means must be deployed to 
promote the coordination of the macroeconomic 
policies of the major economies. The reform of the 
governance systems of international financial 
institutions should be pursued with speed and 
efficiency. 
 The development agenda must be brought firmly 
back to centre stage in United Nations priorities. We 
need a much more determined effort to ensure 
balanced, inclusive and sustainable development for 
the benefit of vast sections of humanity. Each of us can 
contribute to this task, but we can achieve far more if 
we act in partnership. 
 In the past few decades, India has lifted tens of 
millions of its people out of abject poverty. We are in a 
position to feed our population better, educate them 
better and widen their economic choices. However, we 
still have a very long way to go. 
 We wish to accelerate the pace of India’s 
transformation in partnership with the international 
community. A fast-growing India can expand the 
boundaries of the global economy. A democratic, plural 
and secular India can contribute to tolerance and 
peaceful coexistence among nations. 
 Developing countries need investment, 
technology and market access for their products. They 
need assistance in the areas of education, health, 
women’s empowerment and agriculture. During the 
recently held fourth United Nations Conference on the 
Least Developed Countries Conference in Istanbul in 
May 2011, India strengthened its partnership with the 
least developed countries through significantly 
enhanced lines of credit and assistance in capacity-
building. 
 We should pay particular attention to Africa. 
Africa’s richest resources are not its minerals but its 
people. We must empower them and open the doors for 
them to human advances through technology, education 
and skills development. 
 At the second India-Africa Forum Summit in 
Addis Ababa earlier this year, India offered lines of 
credit worth $5 billion and an additional $700 million 
in grant assistance for human resource development, 
technology transfer and building new institutions. 
 The United Nations should lead efforts in the area 
of food security. We need more cooperation in 
agricultural technologies, water conservation, land 
usage and productivity, and stability in commodity 
prices. 
 
 
11 11-51360 
 
 Developing countries need a peaceful external 
environment in which to grow. The fight against 
terrorism must be unrelenting. There cannot be 
selective approaches in dealing with terrorist groups or 
the infrastructure of terrorism. Terrorism has to be 
fought across all fronts. In South Asia there are 
encouraging signs of cooperation in the area of 
security, as exemplified in India’s cooperation with 
Bangladesh. Such cooperation is adding to the security 
of both our countries. 
 However, the recent assassination of 
Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani in Kabul is a chilling 
reminder of the designs of the enemies of peace in 
Afghanistan. It is essential that the process of nation-
building and reconciliation in that country succeed. 
This is vital for ensuring peace and security in the 
region. India will play its part in helping the people of 
Afghanistan build a better future for themselves, just as 
we are doing in other countries in South Asia. We will 
do so because prosperity and stability in our region are 
indivisible. 
 We wish to see an open, inclusive and transparent 
architecture of regional cooperation in the Asia-Pacific 
region and peaceful settlement of disputes. I call upon 
the United Nations to evolve a comprehensive and 
effective response to the problem of piracy in the Red 
Sea and off the coast of Somalia. As a littoral State of 
the Indian Ocean, India is ready to work with other 
countries in that regard. Simultaneously, the 
international community should continue with efforts 
to restore stability in Somalia. We have joined 
international efforts to provide humanitarian assistance 
to the countries afflicted with severe famine and 
drought in the Horn of Africa, specifically Somalia, 
Kenya and Djibouti. 
 Nuclear proliferation continues to be a threat to 
international security. The action plan put forward by 
former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world provides, even 
today, a concrete road map for achieving nuclear 
disarmament in a time-bound, universal, 
non-discriminatory, phased and verifiable manner. I 
commend the United Nations for its efforts in focusing 
world attention on nuclear safety. Our plans for 
utilizing nuclear power to meet our energy needs hinge 
on full satisfaction of our concerns about the safety of 
nuclear energy. We have undertaken a thorough review 
of the safety of our nuclear plants. 
 The perspectives I have outlined to the Assembly 
are those that have guided our actions in the Security 
Council since India became a non-permanent member 
of the Council in January. There are still millions of 
people living in poverty across the world. Their plight 
has worsened, through no fault of theirs, due to the 
global economic and financial crisis of recent years. 
The actions of Governments around the world are 
therefore under close scrutiny. It is vitally important 
that through our actions and deeds we renew the 
people’s faith in the Charter and objectives of the 
United Nations. I am confident that we can do this 
through acts of statesmanship, foresight and collective 
effort. India stands ready to play its part in this noble 
endeavour.Israel has extended its 
hand in peace from the moment it was established 
63 years ago. On behalf of Israel and the Jewish 
people, I extend that hand again today. I extend it to 
the people of Egypt and Jordan, with renewed 
friendship for neighbours with whom we have made 
peace. I extend it to the people of Turkey, with respect 
and goodwill. I extend it to the people of Libya and 
Tunisia, with admiration for those trying to build a 
democratic future. I extend it to the other peoples of 
North Africa and the Arabian peninsula, with whom we 
want to forge a new beginning. I extend it to the people 
of Syria, Lebanon and Iran, with awe at the courage of 
those fighting brutal repression.  
 Most especially, I extend my hand to the 
Palestinian people, with whom we seek a just and 
lasting peace. 
 In Israel, our hope for peace never wanes. Our 
scientists, doctors and innovators apply their genius to 
improving the world of tomorrow. Our artists and our 
writers enrich the heritage of humanity. Now, I know 
that this is not exactly the image of Israel that is often 
portrayed in this Hall. After all, it was here in 1975 that 
the age-old yearning of my people to restore our 
national life in our ancient biblical homeland was 
branded, shamefully, as racism. It was right here in 
1980 that the historic peace agreement between Israel 
and Egypt was not praised, but denounced. It is here, 
year after year, that Israel is unjustly singled out for 
condemnation. It is singled out for condemnation more 
often than all the nations of the world combined. 
Twenty-one out of 27 relevant General Assembly 
resolutions condemn Israel, the one true democracy in 
the Middle East.  
 This is an unfortunate part of the United Nations 
institution. It is the theatre of the absurd. It not only 
casts Israel as the villain, it often casts real villains in 
leading roles. Al-Qadhafi’s Libya chaired the 
Commission on Human Rights. Saddam’s Iraq headed 
the Conference on Disarmament.  
 One might say that is the past. Well, here is what 
is happening now — right now, today. Hizbullah-
controlled Lebanon now presides over the Security 
Council. This means, in effect, that a terror 
organization presides over the body entrusted with 
guaranteeing the world’s security. One could not make 
this up. Here in the United Nations, automatic 
majorities can decide anything. They can decide that 
the sun rises in the west. They can also decide — they 
have decided — that the Western Wall in Jerusalem, 
Judaism’s holiest place, is occupied Palestinian 
territory. 
 Yet, even here in the General Assembly, the truth 
can sometimes break through. In 1984, when I was 
appointed Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I 
 
 
37 11-51185 
 
visited the great rabbi of Lubavitch. He said to me — 
and I do not want anyone here to be offended, because 
from personal experience of serving here, I know there 
are many honourable men and women, many capable 
and decent people, serving their nations here — but 
here is what the rebbe said to me. He said, “You will be 
serving in a house of many lies”. And then he said, 
“Remember that, even in the darkest place, the light of 
a single candle can be seen far and wide”. Today I hope 
that the light of truth will shine, if only for a few 
minutes, in a Hall that for too long has been a place of 
darkness for my country.  
 As Israel’s Prime Minister, I did not come here to 
win applause. I came here to speak the truth. The truth 
is that Israel wants peace. The truth is that I want 
peace. The truth is that in the Middle East, at all times 
but especially during these turbulent days, peace must 
be anchored in security. The truth is that we can 
achieve peace not through United Nations resolutions, 
but only through direct negotiations between the 
parties. The truth is that so far the Palestinians have 
refused to negotiate. The truth is that Israel wants 
peace with a Palestinian State, but the Palestinians 
want a State without peace. The truth is that the 
Assembly should not let that happen. 
 When I first came here 27 years ago, the world 
was divided between East and West. Since then, the 
Cold War ended, great civilizations have risen from 
centuries of slumber, hundreds of millions have been 
lifted out of poverty, countless more are poised to 
follow, and the remarkable thing is that, so far, this 
monumental historic shift has largely occurred 
peacefully.  
 Yet a malignancy is now growing between East 
and West that threatens the peace of all. It seeks not to 
liberate, but to enslave; not to build, but to destroy. 
That malignancy is militant Islam. It cloaks itself in the 
mantle of a great faith, yet it murders Jews, Christians 
and Muslims alike with unforgiving impartiality. On 
11 September 2001, it killed thousands of Americans 
and left the twin towers in smouldering ruins. Last 
night, I laid a wreath on the 9/11 memorial. It was 
deeply moving. However, as I was going there, one 
thing echoed in my mind: the outrageous words of the 
President of Iran at this rostrum yesterday. He implied 
that 9/11 was an American conspiracy. Some left this 
Hall; everyone should have. 
 Since 9/11, militant Islamists have slaughtered 
countless other innocents in London and Madrid, in 
Baghdad and Mumbai, in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, and 
in every part of Israel. I believe that the greatest danger 
facing our world is that this fanaticism will arm itself 
with nuclear weapons, and that is precisely what Iran is 
trying to do. Can we imagine that man who ranted here 
yesterday armed with nuclear weapons? 
 The international community must stop Iran 
before it is too late. If Iran is not stopped, we will all 
face the spectre of nuclear terrorism, and the Arab 
Spring could soon become an Iranian winter. That 
would be a tragedy. Millions of Arabs have taken to the 
streets to replace tyranny with liberty, and no one 
would benefit more than Israel if those committed to 
freedom and peace would prevail. 
 That is my fervent hope, but as the Prime 
Minister of Israel, I cannot risk the future of the Jewish 
State on wishful thinking. Leaders must see reality as it 
is, not as it ought to be. We must do our best to shape 
the future, but we cannot wish away the dangers of the 
present. 
 The world around Israel is definitely becoming 
more dangerous. Militant Islam has already taken over 
Lebanon and Gaza. It is determined to tear apart the 
peace treaties between Israel and Egypt and between 
Israel and Jordan. It has poisoned many Arab minds 
against Jews and Israel, and against America and the 
West. It opposes not the policies of Israel but the 
existence of Israel. 
 Now, some argue that if we want to slow down 
the spread of militant Islam, especially in these 
turbulent times, Israel must hurry to make concessions, 
including territorial compromises. And this theory 
sounds simple. Basically it goes like this: leave the 
territory and peace will be advanced. The moderates 
will be strengthened; the radicals will be kept at bay. 
And do not worry about the pesky details of how Israel 
will actually defend itself; international troops will do 
the job. 
 These people say to me constantly, “Just make a 
sweeping offer, and everything will work out”. There is 
only one problem with that theory. We have tried it and 
it has not worked. In 2000, Israel made a sweeping 
peace offer that met virtually all the Palestinian 
demands. Chairman Arafat rejected it. The Palestinians 
then launched a terror attack that claimed 1,000 Israeli 
lives. 
  
 
11-51185 38 
 
 In 2008, Prime Minister Olmert afterwards made 
an even more sweeping offer. President Abbas did not 
even respond to it. But Israel did more than just make 
sweeping offers. We actually left territory. We 
withdrew from Lebanon in 2000 and from every square 
inch of Gaza in 2005. That did not calm the militant 
Islamic storm that threatens us. It only brought the 
storm closer and made it stronger. Hizbullah and 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets against our cities 
from the very territories we had vacated.  
 When Israel left Lebanon and Gaza, the 
moderates did not defeat the radicals; the moderates 
were devoured by the radicals. And I regret to say that 
international troops, including those of the United 
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the European 
Union Border Assistance Mission in Gaza, did not stop 
the radicals from attacking Israel. 
 We left Gaza hoping for peace. We did not freeze 
the settlements in Gaza; we uprooted them. We did 
exactly what the theory says. We got out, went back to 
the 1967 borders and dismantled the settlements. I do 
not think people remember how far we went to achieve 
this. We uprooted thousands of people from their 
homes. We pulled children out of their schools and 
their kindergartens. We bulldozed synagogues. We 
even moved loved ones from their graves. And then, 
having done all that, we gave the keys of Gaza to 
President Abbas. 
 The theory says that it should have all worked 
out, and that President Abbas and the Palestinian 
Authority could now build a peaceful state in Gaza. We 
all remember that the entire world applauded our 
withdrawal as an act of great statesmanship and a bold 
act of peace. But we did not get peace. We got war. We 
got Iran, which, through its proxy, Hamas, promptly 
kicked out the Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian 
Authority collapsed in a day — in one day.  
 President Abbas just said from this rostrum that 
the Palestinians are armed only with their hopes and 
dreams. Yes, they are armed with their hopes, dreams 
and 10,000 missiles and Grad rockets supplied by Iran, 
not to mention the river of lethal weapons now flowing 
into Gaza from the Sinai, from Libya and from 
elsewhere. 
 Thousands of missiles have already rained down 
on our cities. So it might be understand, given all this, 
why Israelis rightly ask, “What is to prevent this from 
happening again in the West Bank?” Most of the major 
cities in the south of our country are within a few 
dozen kilometres from Gaza, but in the centre of the 
country opposite the West Bank, our cities are a few 
hundred metres or at most a few kilometres from the 
edge of the West Bank. 
 So I want to ask: Would anyone here bring danger 
so close to their cities and families? Would they act so 
recklessly with the lives of their citizens? Israel is 
prepared to have a Palestinian State in the West Bank, 
but we are not prepared to have another Gaza there. 
And that is why we need to have real security 
arrangements, which the Palestinians simply refuse to 
negotiate with us. 
 Israelis remember the bitter lessons of Gaza. 
Many of Israel’s critics ignore them. They 
irresponsibly advise Israel to go down this same 
perilous path again. We read what these people say and 
it is as if nothing happened. They just repeat the same 
advice and the same formulas as though none of this 
happened. And these critics continue to press Israel to 
make far-reaching concessions without first assuring 
Israel’s security. They praise those who unwittingly 
feed the insatiable crocodile of militant Islam as bold 
statesmen. They cast as enemies of peace those of us 
who insist that we must first erect a sturdy barrier to 
keep the crocodile out, or at the very least jam an iron 
bar between its gaping jaws. 
 So in the face of the labels and the libels, Israel 
must heed better advice. It is better to receive bad press 
than a good eulogy, and better still would be a fair 
press whose sense of history extends beyond breakfast 
and that recognizes Israel’s legitimate security 
concerns. I believe that in serious peace negotiations, 
these needs and concerns can be properly addressed, 
but they will not be addressed without negotiations.  
 And the needs are many, because Israel is such a 
tiny country. Without Judea and Samaria — the West 
Bank — Israel is all of nine miles wide. I want to put 
that in perspective for all of us in this city. It is about 
two-thirds the length of Manhattan. It is the distance 
between Battery Park and Columbia University. And 
let us not forget that the people who live in Brooklyn 
and New Jersey are considerably nicer than some of 
Israel’s neighbours.  
 So how does one protect such a tiny country, 
surrounded by people sworn to its destruction and 
armed to the teeth by Iran? Obviously, one cannot 
defend it from within that narrow space alone. Israel 
 
 
39 11-51185 
 
needs greater strategic depth, and that is exactly why 
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) did not require 
Israel to leave all of the territories it captured in the 
Six-Day War. It talked about withdrawal from 
territories to secure and defensible boundaries. And to 
defend itself, Israel must therefore maintain a long-
term Israeli military presence in critical strategic areas 
in the West Bank. 
 I explained this to President Abbas. He answered 
that if a Palestinian State was to be a sovereign 
country, it could never accept such arrangements. Why 
not? The United States has had troops in Japan, 
Germany and South Korea for more than a half a 
century. Britain has an air base in Cyprus. France has 
forces in three independent African nations. None of 
those States claim that they are not sovereign countries.  
 There are many other vital security issues that 
also must be addressed. Take the issue of airspace. 
Again, Israel’s small dimensions create huge security 
problems. The United States can be crossed by jet 
airplane in six hours. To fly across Israel, it takes three 
minutes. So is Israel’s tiny airspace to be chopped in 
half and given to a Palestinian State not at peace with 
Israel?  
 Our major international airport is a few 
kilometres from the West Bank. Without peace, will 
our planes become targets for anti-aircraft missiles 
placed in the adjacent Palestinian State? And how will 
we stop the smuggling into the West Bank? It is not 
merely the West Bank; it is the West Bank mountains, 
which dominate the coastal plain below where most of 
Israel’s population sits. How could we prevent the 
smuggling into those mountains of missiles that could 
be fired at our cities?  
 I bring up these problems because they are not 
theoretical problems. They are very real, and for 
Israelis, they are life-and-death matters. All of these 
potential cracks in Israel’s security have to be sealed in 
a peace agreement before a Palestinian State is 
declared, not afterwards, because if it is left until 
afterwards they will not be sealed. And these problems 
will explode in our face and explode the peace.  
 The Palestinians should first make peace with 
Israel and then get their State. But I also want to say 
this. After such a peace agreement is signed, Israel will 
not be the last country to welcome a Palestinian State 
as a new Member of the United Nations. We will be the 
first.  
 There is one more thing. Hamas has been 
violating international law by holding our soldier Gilad 
Shalit captive for five years. They have not allowed 
even one Red Cross visit. He is held in a dungeon, in 
darkness, against all international norms. Gilad Shalit 
is the son of Aviva and Noam Shalit. He is the 
grandson of Zvi Shalit, who escaped the Holocaust by 
coming to the land of Israel as a boy in the 1930s. 
Gilad Shalit is the son of every Israeli family. Every 
nation represented here should demand his immediate 
release. If we want to adopt a resolution about the 
Middle East today, that is the resolution we should 
adopt.  
 Last year in Israel at Bar-Ilan University, and this 
year in the Knesset and the United States Congress, I 
laid out my vision for peace, in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State. Yes, the 
Jewish State. After all, this is the body that recognized 
the Jewish State 64 years ago. Now, does the Assembly 
not think that it is about time that Palestinians did the 
same?  
 The Jewish State of Israel will always protect the 
rights of all of its minorities, including the more than 
1 million Arab citizens of Israel. I wish I could say the 
same thing about a future Palestinian State, for as 
Palestinian officials made clear the other day — in 
fact, I think they did so right here in New York — the 
Palestinian State would not allow any Jews. They 
would be Jew-free — Judenrein. That is ethnic 
cleansing. There are laws today in Ramallah that make 
the selling of land to Jews punishable by death. That is 
racism. And the Assembly knows which laws this 
evokes.  
 Israel has no intention whatsoever of changing 
the democratic character of our State. We just do not 
want the Palestinians to try to change the Jewish 
character of our State. We want them to give up the 
fantasy of flooding Israel with millions of Palestinians.  
 President Abbas just stood here and said that the 
settlements lie at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflicts. Well, that is odd. Our conflict was raging for 
nearly half a century before there was a single Israeli 
settlement in the West Bank. So, if what President 
Abbas is saying was true, then I guess that the 
settlements he is talking about are Tel Aviv, Haifa, 
Jaffa and Be?er Sheva. Maybe that is what he meant the 
other day when he said that Israel had been occupying 
  
 
11-51185 40 
 
Palestinian land for 63 years. He did not say from 
1967; he said from 1948.  
 I hope that somebody will bother to ask him this 
question, because it illustrates a simple truth. The core 
of the conflict is not the settlements; the settlements 
are a result of the conflict. The settlements are an issue 
that has to be addressed and resolved in the course of 
negotiations. But the core of the conflict has always 
been, and unfortunately remains, the refusal of the 
Palestinians to recognize a Jewish State within any 
border.  
 I think it is time that the Palestinian leadership 
recognize what every serious international leader from 
Lord Balfour and David Lloyd George in 1917, to 
President Truman in 1948, to President Obama just two 
days ago right here, has recognized — that Israel is the 
Jewish State.  
 I would ask President Abbas to stop walking 
around this issue, recognize the Jewish State, and make 
peace with us. In such a genuine peace, Israel is 
prepared to make painful compromises. We believe that 
the Palestinians should be neither the citizens of Israel 
nor its subjects. They should live in a free State of their 
own. But they should be ready, like us, for 
compromise. And we will know that they are ready for 
compromise and peace when they start taking Israel’s 
security requirements seriously and when they stop 
denying our historical connection to our ancient 
homeland. I often hear them accuse Israel of Judaizing 
Jerusalem. That is like accusing America of 
Americanizing Washington, D.C., or the British of 
Anglicizing London. Why are we called Jews? Because 
we come from Judea.  
 In my office in Jerusalem, there is an ancient 
seal. It is a signet ring of a Jewish official from the 
time of the Bible. The seal was found right next to the 
Western Wall and it dates back 2,700 years to the time 
of King Hezekiah. Now, the name of a Jewish official 
is inscribed on the ring in Hebrew. His name was 
Netanyahu. That is my last name. My first name, 
Benjamin, can be traced back a 1,000 years to 
Benjamin — Binyamin — the son of Jacob, who was 
also known as Israel. Jacob and his 12 sons roamed 
these same hills of Judea and Samaria 4,000 years ago, 
and there has been a continuous Jewish presence in the 
land ever since.  
 Those Jews who were exiled from our land — 
Jews in Spain, on the eve of their expulsion; Jews in 
Ukraine, fleeing the pogroms; Jews fighting in the 
Warsaw Ghetto, as the Nazis were circling around it — 
never stopped dreaming of coming back. They never 
stopped praying, they never stopped yearning. They 
whispered: “Next year in Jerusalem. Next year in the 
promised land”.  
 As the Prime Minister of Israel, I speak for a 
hundred generations of Jews who were dispersed 
throughout the lands and suffered every evil under the 
sun, but who never gave up hope of restoring their 
national life in the one and only Jewish State.  
 I continue to hope that President Abbas will be 
my partner in peace. I have worked hard to advance 
that peace. The day I came into office, I called for 
direct negotiations without preconditions. President 
Abbas did not respond. I outlined a vision of peace of 
two States for two peoples. He still did not respond. I 
removed hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints to 
ease freedom of movement in the Palestinian areas. 
This facilitated fantastic growth in the Palestinian 
economy. But again, there was no response. I took the 
unprecedented step of freezing new building in the 
settlements for 10 months. No Prime Minister had done 
that before, ever. Once again, I hear applause, but there 
was no response. No response.  
 In the past few weeks, American officials have 
put forward ideas to restart peace talks. There were 
things in those ideas about borders that I did not like. 
There were things there about the Jewish State that I 
am sure the Palestinians did not like. But despite all of 
my reservations, I was willing to move forward on 
those American ideas. Why does President Abbas not 
join me? We have to stop negotiating about the 
negotiations. Let us just get on with it. Let us negotiate 
peace.  
 I spent years defending Israel on the battlefield. I 
spent decades defending Israel in the court of public 
opinion. President Abbas has dedicated his life to 
advancing the Palestinian cause. Must this conflict 
continue for generations, or will we enable our children 
and our grandchildren to speak in the years ahead of 
how we found a way to end it? That is what we should 
aim for, and that is what I believe we can achieve.  
 In two and a half years, President Abbas and I 
have met in Jerusalem only once, even though my door 
has always been open to him. If he wishes, I will come 
to Ramallah. Actually, I have a better suggestion. We 
have both just flown thousands of miles to New York. 
 
 
41 11-51185 
 
Now we are in the same city; we are in the same 
building. So let us meet here today, at the United 
Nations. Who is there to stop us? What is there to stop 
us? If we genuinely want peace, what is there to stop 
us from meeting today and beginning peace 
negotiations? 
 I suggest that we talk openly and honestly. Let us 
listen to one another. Let us, as we say in the Middle 
East, talk dugri. That means “straightforward”. I will 
tell him my needs and concerns; he will tell me his. 
And with God’s help, we will find the common ground 
of peace.  
 There is an old Arab saying that one cannot 
applaud with one hand. Well, the same is true of peace. 
I cannot make peace alone. I cannot make peace 
without an interlocutor. President Abbas, I extend my 
hand — the hand of Israel — in peace. I hope that he 
will grasp that hand. We are both the sons of Abraham. 
My people call him Avraham; his people call him 
Ibrahim. We share the same patriarch. We dwell in the 
same land. Our destinies are intertwined. Let us realize 
the vision of Isaiah: “The people who walk in darkness 
will see a great light”. (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 9:2). Let 
that light be the light of peace.As we say in Maori, 
to all peoples and to all voices, greetings, greetings, 
greetings to all. 
 I speak at the end of a period of intense United 
Nations dialogue and engagement. This year’s general 
debate provides unparalleled opportunities to reaffirm 
the unique multilateral role of the United Nations. And 
there has been much to debate. The events set in 
motion by a single Tunisian street vendor have 
transformed much of the Middle East and North Africa. 
People have displayed extraordinary courage in 
claiming their rights and freedoms. The transition from 
dictatorship to democracy will not be easy; it will not 
be quick; but it must be achieved. 
 For others, the struggle continues. We still look 
for change in Yemen; we still look for change in Syria. 
Other challenges are highlighted by this debate. We 
heard from the President of South Africa and others 
how the global community must move swiftly to avert 
humanitarian disaster in the Horn of Africa. 
 We heard from the President of Nigeria how 
terror networks threaten international peace and 
security, and from the President of Tanzania about 
growing piracy on Africa’s eastern coast, from Somalia 
to Mozambique. We heard calls from the Indonesian 
Foreign Minister for bold measures to avert a renewed 
global financial crisis, and we heard from the President 
of Brazil about the challenge of empowering women to 
participate in political decision-making. 
 As this debate has demonstrated, much more 
remains to be done. Lives have also been wrenched by 
natural disasters in many countries, including my own. 
On 22 February 2011, we experienced what my Prime 
Minister called New Zealand’s darkest day. An 
earthquake struck Christchurch, our second-largest 
city. A total of 181 people were killed, a loss we share 
with 15 other countries whose citizens also died. We 
were humbled by the support we received, and, once 
again, I thank those who gave that help. 
  
 
11-51681 32 
 
 Despite that disaster and the literally thousands of 
aftershocks that have followed, New Zealanders remain 
resilient and optimistic. Christchurch is being rebuilt. 
Our economy is bouncing back and the country is 
returning to normal, not least by currently hosting the 
Rugby World Cup, a celebration of a game we love, in 
the country we love.  
 Despite some cause for economic optimism, the 
events of just the past week suggest that the world still 
faces what we have long feared: a second and even 
more disastrous decline into a double-dip recession. 
We do not relish the prospect of being dragged into 
another recession that is not of our own making. We 
caution others larger than ourselves against repeating 
the mistakes of the 1930s, when autarkic protectionism 
only deepened the Depression and led to war. 
 Instead, a successful conclusion of the Doha 
Round is one of the keys to prosperity, particularly for 
those of the global South. The February Christchurch 
earthquake was followed by the devastation wrought 
on our close friend and neighbour Japan. I reiterate our 
heartfelt sympathy to Japan, so steadfast in its support 
for New Zealand in our time of need. Those disasters, 
and others elsewhere, reinforced the importance of 
effective disaster preparedness, response and recovery. 
 New Zealand will work with the United Nations, 
non-governmental organizations and international 
agencies so that the lessons learned from Christchurch 
are shared with others so that those in regions as 
vulnerable as ours can be better prepared. Indeed, in 
those regions, disaster preparedness is no desktop 
exercise; it is a matter of survival. 
 Likewise, for our Pacific neighbours, another 
high risk, climate change, is no abstract threat, 
confined to thousands of pages of reports and esoteric 
debate; it is a fundamental question of existence. For 
the Pacific, climate change is a grave and present threat 
to livelihoods, security and well-being. 
 The Secretary-General experienced those 
challenges first-hand when he visited several Pacific 
States, including one post-conflict society, and another 
whose people see, on a daily basis, the dangers of 
rising oceans. He experienced real vulnerability when 
he saw that his hotel room, in addition to the towels 
and the telephone, was equipped with a lifejacket. And 
he saw the impact of rising oceans on the viability and 
survival of many communities when his plane had to 
be “wheels up” from the country’s airport — its major 
link with the world — before the tide came in. 
 Much more of that, and whole populations will be 
on the move, as they will be in other regions of the 
world as well, and that will have with implications for 
regional and international stability and security. Faced 
with that, it is self-evident that all relevant 
international forums, including the Security Council, 
must play their part in addressing the challenge. That 
means taking urgent and effective action on emissions 
reduction. It means strengthening adaptation in 
developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable. 
And it means acknowledging and planning for the 
security implications before they become threats to 
regional and international security. 
 This year’s Durban meeting must set us on the 
road to full implementation of the Cancun agreements. 
New Zealand is committed, both through the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
negotiations and its active assistance in the Pacific and 
elsewhere, to integrate adaptation and mitigation 
measures into its development activities. 
 New Zealand also initiated the Global Research 
Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Supported 
by more than 30 countries, the Alliance seeks to ensure 
that reducing agricultural emissions does not 
compromise global food security. 
 Increased agricultural productivity — the ability 
of many countries to feed themselves — is one of the 
great achievements of recent decades. Constraining 
agricultural production would put much of the world’s 
population at risk, and no country will do that. We 
must therefore maintain investment in agricultural 
research, so that productivity and efficiency gains can 
continue, but with fewer greenhouse-gas emissions. 
That is what the Global Alliance is all about.  
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. We are 
indigenous Maori; we are European; and we are the 
many peoples from the Asia-Pacific region and 
elsewhere who now call New Zealand home. We are 
also proud to be part of the Pacific Islands Forum, the 
foremost regional body. For 40 years, it has been 
central to the region’s efforts to address its own 
problems, be they the special development challenges 
of small, isolated, vulnerable island States, or halting 
and healing the impacts of violent conflict. It has done 
that in the time-honoured Pacific way, through 
 
 
33 11-51681 
 
respectful dialogue and cooperation and then through 
joint action. 
 Three weeks ago, at the Forum’s fortieth 
anniversary meeting in Auckland, Pacific leaders 
honoured that legacy by agreeing on measures aimed at 
converting Pacific potential into Pacific prosperity. 
 The themes of their discussions will resonate in 
other regions: strong, sustainable economic growth, 
protecting vulnerable populations and ensuring that 
they are healthy and educated and that they can have 
long lives. 
 A key focus of that meeting was the alarming 
incidence of non-communicable diseases, a scourge 
that is rapidly encircling the globe. Almost half of all 
New Zealand deaths relate to cancer and heart disease, 
but the situation is even more critical in many Pacific 
island countries, where diabetes in particular 
approaches epidemic proportions. We thank those who 
brought that cause here to the United Nations, 
particularly the countries members of the Caribbean 
Community. 
 With the 2012 United Nations Conference on 
Sustainable Development (Rio+20) very much in mind, 
Pacific Forum leaders also focused on sustainable 
development. Rio+20 will be an opportunity to assess 
the progress made since the 1992 Conference, take its 
agenda forward and highlight best practices. For 
example, New Zealand’s aid programme includes 
energy, agriculture and tourism initiatives that promote 
sustainable development. 
 Pacific peoples were navigating their ocean, the 
world’s largest, at a time when others were still 
confined to their coastal waters. New Zealand Maori 
call the Pacific the ocean guarded by the god Kiwa. 
Our region is uniquely dependent on its ocean. For 
those who call the Pacific home, the “green economy” 
is in reality a blue economy. Our ocean underpins 
livelihoods, food security and economic development. 
That is why Pacific leaders have focused on ensuring 
its sustainable development, management and 
conservation. That is why they made addressing 
acidification, pollution and illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing urgent matters. That is why our 
leaders want us to work towards integrated ocean 
management, with our own Pacific Oceanscape 
framework as a very good model. And that is why they 
called for Rio+20 to recognize the Pacific’s economic 
and environmental significance, and its contribution to 
sustainable development. At Rio+20, we will seek the 
support of the United Nations for that blue economy. 
 We work to protect the health of people and their 
environment, but we must also enhance collective 
security by advancing the disarmament agenda. Over 
the coming year, we must focus on the full 
implementation of the action plan agreed at the 2010 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As coordinator 
for the New Agenda Coalition, a group of non-nuclear-
weapon States committed to a nuclear-weapon-free 
world, New Zealand will soon introduce a draft 
resolution highlighting the work that will be required 
to achieve its implementation during the coming 
review cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons. We commend that draft resolution 
for the Assembly’s consideration. 
 There have been gains over the past year with 
respect to conventional disarmament, but we have yet 
to see the results of those achievements. There has 
been pleasing progress towards an arms trade treaty, 
but hard work remains. Next year’s Diplomatic 
Conference must deliver a treaty establishing the 
highest possible common international standards for 
conventional arms transfers. 
 We must also maintain focus on small arms and 
light weapons, which for many regions are their 
weapons of mass destruction. The year 2011 marks the 
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Programme of 
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit 
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its 
Aspects. There has been much to celebrate, including 
the first Open-Ended Meeting of Governmental Experts 
on the implementation of the Programme of Action, 
which I had the honour of chairing in May. But next 
year’s Review Conference must work to ensure that the 
Programme delivers on its potential for keeping 
communities safe from such weapons. 
 To deal with all of that, we need a strong, nimble 
and effective United Nations, and we need a Security 
Council that reflects geopolitical realities — realities 
that have changed since 1945. Today, some States 
might credibly seek a fuller, longer-term Council role. 
New Zealand supports change that acknowledges those 
realities. 
 But most United Nations Members are not major 
or emerging Powers, they are small States. They too 
are crucial to the universality and legitimacy of the 
  
 
11-51681 34 
 
United Nations; they too must contribute at the Council 
table. Let me put it simply: if we reform the Security 
Council to provide a fuller, longer-term role for 
emerging Powers, we must also ensure a role for small 
States. Speaking as a small State, I say that we are the 
United Nations. And so we agreed with the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago when he said 
that the smallness of a country is not a deterrent to the 
realization of big dreams (see ), and with 
the Prime Minister of Cape Verde, who told us that 
small States must have a greater voice in international 
decision-making (see ). 
 There are real risks if we cannot achieve genuine 
Security Council reform. Emerging Powers will be 
denied a role consistent with their global significance, 
and small States will continue to be squeezed out of 
positions of responsibility. It is in everyone’s interests 
that the Security Council be more representative. As 
we saw earlier this year with respect to Libya, the 
Council is an extraordinarily powerful instrument for 
maintaining international peace and security. But with 
extraordinary power comes extraordinary responsibility — 
responsibility that must be exercised with regard for the 
views of all countries, large and small. 
 The Council must also build on its partnerships 
with regional groups, such as the African Union, which 
increasingly plays a critical role in maintaining 
regional and global peace and security. Recognizing 
the importance of closer relations with Africa, we are 
encouraging New Zealand investment in and trade with 
Africa, supporting peace and security and providing 
development assistance. Last week, we increased our 
diplomatic engagement by appointing a dedicated 
ambassador to the African Union and the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 
 New Zealand is proud of its history of active 
contribution right across the United Nations agenda. 
We have a strong record as an independent and  
 
principled voice advocating collective security and the 
rule of law. We take an even-handed approach to 
security issues, as has been shown by our voting record 
and our tangible contributions to peace processes. We 
take seriously our international responsibilities. 
 That is why, in 2004, we announced that we 
would seek a non-permanent Security Council seat for 
the 2015-2016 term. Nearly 20 years have passed since 
New Zealand’s last time on the Council. The time is 
right for us to again bring the fresh, independent 
perspective of a small Asia-Pacific country to the 
Council. That candidature, which I confirm here today, 
is based on the belief that States, large and small, have 
a place at the Council table. Modern New Zealand was 
founded on a compact, a treaty-based partnership with 
its indigenous Maori people. That, and our diversity, 
means a unique history and perspective on promoting 
tolerance and conflict resolution; a perspective that we 
have previously brought, to good effect, to the Council 
table, and which we will bring again. 
 For the United Nations, 2011 has been a truly 
historic year. The Organization has quickly responded 
to change in the Middle East and North Africa. It 
stands ready to provide post-conflict support, and not 
just in Libya. It has been critical to relief in the Horn 
of Africa. Its essential role in State recognition has 
been at global centre stage. Even the most cynical, the 
most jaded, have had to relearn that the United Nations 
is at the epicentre of much that happens, and much that 
matters. We need the United Nations. We need it to 
address the woes of the world and to consolidate its 
successes. Its fundamental importance stems from its 
universality, its legitimacy and its mechanisms to 
confront challenges. Its effectiveness depends on its 
ability to adapt as those challenges emerge and on its 
ability to address them together. Member States, large 
and small, come together in that collective endeavour. 
New Zealand, as always, stands ready to play its part.This year the session of the General 
Assembly is opening at a time when international 
relations are in a state of turbulence. The Middle East 
and North Africa have gone through a period of large-
scale changes, and the situation is volatile in certain 
other parts of the world. We have not yet been able to 
put the global economy back on the track of 
progressive sustainable development. The increasing 
number of alarming factors has been accompanied by 
an exacerbation of social, inter-ethnic and intercultural 
conflicts as well as outbreaks of extremism. 
 Just as a ship caught in adverse weather 
conditions needs a united crew and a compass to find 
the right course, the international community today 
needs in particular to deploy joint efforts to respond to 
common challenges and set clear guidelines to 
strengthen global governance mechanisms. We are 
convinced that such guidelines should include, first and 
foremost, the rule of international law; clear, strict and 
responsible reliance on the fundamental principles of 
the Charter of the United Nations; and the will to 
implement a positive unification agenda. 
 The United Nations remains a pillar of 
international relations and equitable multilateral 
cooperation in the interests of all States. It has a unique 
legitimacy and the necessary authority to respond 
adequately to the variety of contemporary risks and 
threats. It is the United Nations that should continue to 
provide political, legal and moral leadership in dealing 
with global challenges, to establish equitable principles 
and standards of interaction, to monitor their 
implementation and to render necessary assistance and 
support for the States that need it. 
 Ten years ago on September 11, a horrible 
terrorist attack was committed in this city. We are 
convinced that it is necessary to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation in countering international terrorism on 
both the global and regional levels. However, the 
additional mechanisms to be created in this area should 
be incorporated in our common work within the United 
Nations, with due account taken of its central 
coordinating role in combating terrorism. 
 Wide international cooperation is needed to keep 
the situation in the global economic and financial 
system under control. One can hardly deny the 
importance of the role that the Group of Twenty (G-20) 
plays in the post-crisis recovery of the world economy. 
Today, it is important to finalize the process of 
reforming the global financial and economic 
architecture and to implement everything we have 
agreed on, rather than to stop halfway. The efficiency 
of these efforts will only grow if the G-20 strengthens 
its dialogue with the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies.  
 A significant contribution to the reform of the 
global economy and finance is being made by 
BRICS — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — a global-scale association of five major, 
rapidly growing economies that reflects the realities of 
the evolving multipolar world. BRICS does not aim at 
confrontation with anyone. Its goal is to enhance 
productive multilateral collaboration to address the 
urgent problems of the contemporary world. 
 Sustainable development requires a reliable 
supply of energy resources for the global economy. 
Russia has proposed drafting a convention on 
international energy security that would cover all 
aspects of global energy cooperation, taking into 
account the balance of interests of all actors in the 
international market. We call for the start of the 
practical preparation of this document. 
 As in economics, the logic of joint consolidated 
actions should prevail in matters of security and the 
elimination of surplus weapons worldwide. Russia and 
the United States made another important step towards 
nuclear disarmament when they signed the Treaty on 
Strategic Offensive Arms and began its 
implementation. Its practical realization will allow us 
to make sure that the Treaty is effective and viable and 
  
 
11-51670 16 
 
to see how its fundamental principles are implemented. 
We call on all States with nuclear weapons capability 
to join the Russian-American efforts. We believe that 
further progress in nuclear arms reductions is possible 
only on a multilateral basis. 
 Moreover, progress in this area is inseparable 
from coordinated efforts to move forward on all 
aspects of strengthening international security and 
strategic stability. This includes development of 
universally acceptable approaches to missile defence 
issues, an accounting on the impact of strategic 
conventional arms, prevention of the weaponization of 
space and elimination of qualitative and quantitative 
imbalances in conventional arms. 
 The deployment of strategic missile defence 
elements in various parts of the world alters the overall 
configuration of international security. It is not enough 
to make statements that the increase in global missile 
defence capabilities would not undermine the basics of 
strategic stability. The issue is far too serious. We need 
solid legal guarantees that missile defence potential 
will actually be adequate to the declared objectives and 
will not disrupt global and regional balances. This 
holds equally true for both Europe and the Asia-Pacific 
region, where the missile defence factor is beginning to 
affect the strategic environment. 
 It is of primary importance for us to prevent the 
undermining of the non-proliferation regime. We call 
for universalization of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons, strengthening of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system and 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. Russia has been one of the main 
initiators of the proposal to convene in 2012 a 
conference on establishing a zone free of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery in the 
Middle East and is now working intensively, together 
with its partners, on the preparations for this important 
forum. 
 The early resolution of the nuclear problems of 
Iran and the Korean Peninsula would contribute to the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. We see 
no alternative to their political and diplomatic 
settlement and to taking concrete steps to create the 
conditions for the resumption of negotiations. We call 
on all partners to address these tasks with utmost 
responsibility. 
 The situation around Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi-1 
nuclear power plant has highlighted the need to 
improve the international legal framework in order to 
ensure the safety of nuclear power facilities. The 
Russian Federation has made proposals to enhance the 
mechanisms of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and 
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and to strengthen the relevant IAEA norms. 
We urge support for these initiatives. 
 In the age of new telecommunications 
technologies, international information security has 
become a challenge that requires coordinated efforts by 
the international community. Reliable protection of the 
field of information from malicious and criminal 
attacks is the goal of the initiative that Russia and its 
partners are promoting at the United Nations. During 
this session, we will put forward proposals on 
developing specific rules of conduct in this area. 
 In a polycentric world, an effective international 
architecture can be created only if it rests on regional 
building blocks. The enhancing of global governance at 
the regional level and the increasing role of regional 
organizations are an integral part of modern 
international relations. Integration associations and 
organizations in the Commonwealth of Independent 
States area contribute to these processes. The Eurasian 
Economic Community, with its $10 billion anti-crisis 
fund, operates in the financial and economic sphere. A 
customs union between Russia, Kazakhstan and 
Belarus has been created, and single economic space is 
taking shape with a view to establishing a Eurasian 
union. 
 The Collective Security Treaty Organization 
(CSTO) is a key tool for ensuring stability within the 
area of its responsibility. The signing of the joint 
declaration on cooperation between the United Nations 
Secretariat and the CSTO secretariat in March 2011 
was a major step in the collaboration between these 
two organizations, primarily in the field of 
peacekeeping. We are ready to start working on its 
practical modalities. Russia consistently calls for 
interaction between regional organizations, under the 
auspices of the United Nations, to strengthen global 
stability on the basis of the solid legal framework of 
the Charter. 
 Priority should be given to equal and indivisible 
security, predictability, transparency and mutual 
respect, taking into account one other’s interests. This 
 
 
17 11-51670 
 
is exactly the aim of Russian President Medvedev’s 
initiative to sign a treaty on European security. Its 
practical implementation would allow us to finally put 
a period to the post-cold war era, to establish a 
universal and clear framework for a reliable solution to 
such issues as missile defence and arms control, and to 
create a common space of security and development 
without dividing lines. 
 Achieving equal and indivisible security is an 
urgent issue for the Asia-Pacific region, with the 
Russian Far East and Eastern Siberia as integral parts. 
The joint initiative launched by the leaders of China 
and Russia in September 2010 is aimed at creating a 
comprehensive architecture for security and 
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region on a bloc-free 
legal basis. We could move closer to this goal by 
promoting a network of multilateral diplomacy, an idea 
that has been supported by the members of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 Progress in the settlement of regional conflicts 
would contribute to a more stable international 
environment. Today, special attention is given to the 
developments in the Arab world.  
 Russia condemns the use of violence against 
civilians and supports the aspirations of Arab peoples 
for the revival of their States and their democratic 
development and social and economic prosperity. At 
the same time, actions by the outside forces must be 
based on full respect for international law and be 
instrumental to the search for a political settlement 
between the authorities and the opposition. The 
attempts to go beyond the Security Council mandate 
are unacceptable, since they undermine its authority 
and compound the suffering of innocent civilians. 
 In this context, it seems quite pertinent that States 
and regional organizations commit themselves to 
strictly complying with the existing norms of 
international law, including humanitarian law, in order 
to protect civilians during armed conflict. This step, 
which further enhances the existing legal basis of 
international relations, would contribute to the 
strengthening of regional and global security in its 
modern, multidimensional interpretation. 
 The leading role in elaborating modalities for 
post-conflict resolution in Libya must be played by the 
United Nations and in particular the Security Council. 
That is precisely the goal of Security Council 
resolution 2009 (2011) of 16 September 2011, which 
established the United Nations Support Mission in 
Libya. We believe that it is time to take additional 
steps, including the lifting of the no-fly zone. 
 As for Syria, it is inadmissible to boycott 
proposals for a national dialogue, stir up confrontation 
and provoke violence, while neglecting the reforms — 
late in coming, but still achievable — proposed by 
President Al-Assad. It is important to encourage the 
authorities and the opposition to start negotiations and 
agree on the future of their country. We hope that the 
League of Arab States will make the necessary efforts. 
 The situation in the Middle East could be 
significantly improved by progress in the negotiation 
process, on the basis of the main parameters defined 
and recorded in Security Council resolutions, the 
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace 
Initiative, and reiterated in the Quartet ministerial 
statement of 23 September. The only viable basis for a 
settlement is the coexistence of Palestinian and Israeli 
States in peace and security. We support the 
Palestinians’ application to the Security Council and 
welcome the readiness reiterated by the President of 
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Abbas, to hold 
talks with Israel on the basis of the existing 
international legal framework. 
 We encourage the Cypriot communities to 
continue negotiations under United Nations auspices to 
achieve a comprehensive, just and viable settlement on 
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
 We call upon all parties to the Nagorno-Karabakh 
settlement process to take advantage of the additional 
opportunities arising from the efforts made in the 
context of Russia’s mediation. We will promote 
confidence-building and ceasefire enforcement 
measures within the framework of the Troika of the 
co-Chairs of the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group, together with 
American and French partners. 
 We hope that the decision taken in Moscow on 
22 September on resuming official talks on a 
Transdniestrian settlement will encourage the parties to 
seek ways to arrive at mutually acceptable agreements. 
 We are strongly committed to doing our utmost to 
prevent a repetition of a scenario involving the use of 
force in the Caucasus, as happened in August 2008 as a 
result of a reckless venture by the ruling regime in 
Tbilisi. Russia is ready to act as a guarantor of 
  
 
11-51670 18 
 
arrangements on the non-use of force between 
Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, taking into 
account the earlier relevant statements made by the 
leaders of these three parties. We would welcome it if 
the United States and the European Union made similar 
commitments. As guarantors, we would be ready to 
take steps to prevent the resumption of violence in the 
region and, in the case of the wrongful use of force by 
either side, to work towards an early resolution of the 
situation on the basis of the existing norms of 
international law. 
 Russia is providing significant support for the 
efforts to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. At the 
same time, we call on the International Security 
Assistance Force to more effectively fight the growing 
Afghan drug threat. Central Asia and Russia are 
already facing a “heroin aggression”, while the profits 
from drug trafficking are being used as the main source 
of financing the clandestine extremist underground in 
the region. The fight against this evil should be 
uncompromising, and it should target the entire drug 
business chain. 
 The problems on the African continent should be 
a focus of continuous attention on the part of the 
United Nations. Such attention should include 
development assistance as well as efforts to overcome 
the current humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa 
and resolve the numerous ongoing conflicts, while 
maintaining the leading role of the African Union. 
 The eradication of piracy remains a priority. It is 
necessary to accelerate the establishment of an 
international anti-piracy court mechanism in the 
region, in accordance with the Security Council 
resolution adopted on the initiative of Russia. 
 Experience has shown that pressure and unilateral 
sanctions cannot be a cure-all in addressing various 
conflict situations; they only complicate efforts to 
resolve them. We urge that an end be put to any actions 
that circumvent the Security Council. We also call for 
the lifting of the blockade of Cuba. Cooperation rather 
than isolation should be the method for settling 
conflicts in the twenty-first century. 
 The ongoing transformation in contemporary 
international relations makes it a priority task on the 
global agenda to expand intercultural, interreligious 
and inter-civilization dialogue in order to devise 
approaches to the problems of the modern world that 
are based on shared values. The degradation of 
fundamental moral values leads to the degradation of 
society. The recent tragic events in Norway, riots in 
Great Britain, protests by young people in other 
countries, and calls to suppress Christian minorities in 
the Middle East and North Africa — all of those events 
are the result of a deterioration in moral and ethical 
values. There can be no freedom without responsibility 
and no democracy without self-restraint. There is a 
clear and urgent need to counter the threats posed by 
nationalism, ethnic and religious intolerance. We 
therefore reiterate the importance of the recent High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly to 
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of 
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and 
related intolerance. 
 Attempts to falsify or revise history are 
inadmissible, all the more so given that we are marking 
the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Nuremberg Tribunal 
verdict. Political correctness and talk of freedom of 
speech cannot serve as a cover when, in certain 
European countries, people who brought disgrace upon 
themselves by cooperating with the Nazis are being 
talked and written about in an increasingly elevated 
tone. Russia will never forget the countless military 
crimes committed by Hitler and his associates in our 
land and throughout Europe during the years of the 
Nazi aggression. 
 The rapid changes taking place in the world make 
it imperative to strengthen the role of the United 
Nations and to adapt it to contemporary realities while 
preserving — naturally — its inter-State character and 
the immutability of its Charter principles. A 
fundamental element of the Organization’s renewal is 
the reform of the Security Council. We support a 
solution that is based upon the broadest possible 
agreement. 
 The world community faces many challenges, 
and the United Nations, as a major mechanism for 
global regulation, is today in demand as never before. 
Together we will find practical ways to effectively 
overcome the threats of the twenty-first century.It is a great honour for me to 
be here today. I would like to talk to the General 
Assembly about a subject that is at the heart of the 
United Nations — the pursuit of peace in an imperfect 
world. 
 War and conflict have been with us since the 
beginning of civilization. But in the first part of the 
twentieth century, the advance of modern weaponry led 
to death on a staggering scale. It was that killing that 
  
 
11-50692 10 
 
compelled the founders of this body to build an 
institution that was focused not just on ending one war, 
but on averting others; a union of sovereign States that 
would seek to prevent conflict while also addressing its 
causes. 
 No American did more to pursue that objective 
than President Franklin Roosevelt. He knew that a 
victory in war was not enough. As he said at one of the 
very first meetings on the founding of the United 
Nations, “We have got to make not merely peace, but a 
peace that will last”. 
 The men and women who built this institution 
understood that peace is more than the absence of war. 
A lasting peace — for nations and individuals — 
depends upon a sense of justice and opportunity; of 
dignity and freedom. It depends upon struggle and 
sacrifice; on compromise and on a sense of common 
humanity. 
 One delegate to the San Francisco Conference, 
which led to the creation of the United Nations, put it 
well: 
 “Many people have talked as if all we had to do 
to get peace was to say loudly and frequently that 
we loved peace and hated war. Now we have 
learned that no matter how much we love peace 
and hate war, we cannot avoid having war 
brought upon us if there are convulsions in other 
parts of the world”. 
 The fact is, peace is hard, but our people demand 
it. Over nearly seven decades, even as the United 
Nations helped avert a third world war, we still live in 
a world scarred by conflict and plagued by poverty. 
Even as we proclaim our love for peace and hatred of 
war, there are still convulsions in our world that 
endanger us all. 
 I took office at a time of two wars for the United 
States. Moreover, the violent extremists who drew us 
into war in the first place — Osama bin Laden and his 
Al-Qaida organization — remained at large. Today, we 
have set a new direction. 
 At the end of this year, America’s military 
operation in Iraq will be over. We will have a normal 
relationship with a sovereign nation that is a member 
of the community of nations. That equal partnership 
will be strengthened by our support for Iraq — for its 
Government and its security forces, for its people and 
their aspirations. 
 As we end the war in Iraq, the United States and 
our coalition partners have begun a transition in 
Afghanistan. Between now and 2014, an increasingly 
capable Afghan Government and security forces will 
step forward to take responsibility for the future of 
their country. As they do, we are drawing down our 
own forces, while building an enduring partnership 
with the Afghan people. 
 So let there be no doubt: the tide of war is 
receding. When I took office, roughly 180,000 Americans 
were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. By the end of 
this year, that number will be cut in half, and it will 
continue to decline. This is critical for the sovereignty 
of Iraq and Afghanistan, and to the strength of the 
United States as we build our nation at home. 
 Moreover, we are poised to end these wars from a 
position of strength. Ten years ago, there was an open 
wound and twisted steel; a broken heart in the centre of 
this city. Today, as a new tower is rising at Ground 
Zero, it symbolizes New York’s renewal, even as 
Al-Qaida is under more pressure than ever before. Its 
leadership has been degraded. Osama bin Laden, a man 
who murdered thousands of people from dozens of 
countries, will never endanger the peace of the world 
again. 
 Yes, this has been a difficult decade. But today 
we stand at a crossroads of history, with the chance to 
move decisively in the direction of peace. To do so we 
must return to the wisdom of those who created this 
institution.  
 The founding Charter of United Nations calls 
upon us, to unite our strength to maintain international 
peace and security. Article 1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights reminds us that, “All 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in 
rights”. Those bedrock beliefs — in the responsibility 
of States and the rights of men and women — must be 
our guide. 
 In that effort, we have reason to hope. This year 
has been a time of extraordinary transformation. More 
nations have stepped forward to maintain international 
peace and security. More individuals are claiming their 
universal right to live in freedom and dignity. 
 Think about it. One year ago, when we met here 
in New York, the prospect of a successful referendum 
in South Sudan was in doubt. But the international 
community overcame old divisions to support the 
 
 
11 11-50692 
 
agreement that had been negotiated to give South 
Sudan self-determination. Last summer, as a new flag 
went up in Juba, former soldiers laid down their arms, 
men and women wept with joy and children finally 
knew the promise of looking to a future that they will 
shape. 
 One year ago, the people of Côte d’Ivoire 
approached a landmark election. When the incumbent 
lost and refused to respect the results, the world 
refused to look the other way. United Nations 
peacekeepers were harassed, but they did not leave 
their posts. The Security Council, led by the United 
States, Nigeria and France, came together to support 
the will of the people. Côte d’Ivoire is now governed 
by the man who was elected to lead. 
 One year ago, the hopes of the people of Tunisia 
were suppressed. But they chose the dignity of 
peaceful protest over the rule of an iron fist. A vendor 
lit a spark that took his own life, but ignited a 
movement. In the face of a crackdown, students spelled 
out the word freedom. The balance of fear shifted from 
the ruler to those whom he ruled. Now the people of 
Tunisia are preparing for elections that will move them 
one step closer to the democracy that they deserve. 
 One year ago, Egypt had known one President for 
nearly 30 years. But for 18 days, the eyes of the world 
were glued to Tahrir Square, where Egyptians from all 
walks of life — men and women, young and old, 
Muslim and Christian — demanded their universal 
rights. We saw in those protesters the moral force of 
non-violence that has lit the world from Delhi to 
Warsaw, from Selma to South Africa — and we knew 
that change had come to Egypt and to the Arab world. 
 One year ago, the people of Libya were ruled by 
the world’s longest-serving dictator. But faced with 
bullets and bombs and a dictator who threatened to 
hunt them down like rats, they showed relentless 
bravery. We will never forget the words of the Libyan 
who stood up in those early days of the revolution and 
said, “Our words are free now”. It is a feeling one 
cannot explain. Day after day, in the face of bullets and 
bombs, the Libyan people refused to give back that 
freedom. And when they were threatened by the kind 
of mass atrocity that often went unchallenged in the 
past century, the United Nations lived up to its Charter. 
The Security Council authorized all necessary 
measures to prevent a massacre. The Arab League 
called for that effort. Arab nations joined a NATO-led 
coalition that halted Al-Qadhafi’s forces in their tracks. 
 In the months that followed, the will of the 
coalition proved unbreakable, and the will of the 
Libyan people could not be denied. Forty-two years of 
tyranny were ended in six months. From Tripoli to 
Misurata to Benghazi — today, Libya is free. 
Yesterday, the leaders of a new Libya took their 
rightful place beside us, and this week the United 
States is reopening our embassy in Tripoli. 
 This is how the international community is 
supposed to work — nations standing together for the 
sake of peace and security, and individuals claiming 
their rights. Now, all of us have a responsibility to 
support the new Libya and the new Libyan 
Government as they confront the challenge of turning 
this moment of promise into a just and lasting peace 
for all Libyans. 
 So this has been a remarkable year. The 
Al-Qadhafi regime is over. Gbagbo, Ben Ali and 
Mubarak are no longer in power. Osama bin Laden is 
gone, and the idea that change could come only 
through violence has been buried with him. Something 
is happening in our world. The way things have been is 
not the way that they will be. The humiliating grip of 
corruption and tyranny is being pried open. Dictators 
are on notice. Technology is putting power into the 
hands of the people. Youth are delivering a powerful 
rebuke to dictatorship and rejecting the lie that some 
races, some peoples, some religions and some 
ethnicities do not desire democracy. The promise 
written down on paper — “all human beings are born 
free and equal in dignity and rights” — is closer at 
hand. 
 But let us remember: Peace is hard. Peace is hard. 
Progress can be reversed. Prosperity comes slowly. 
Societies can split apart. The measure of our success 
must be whether people can live in sustained freedom, 
dignity and security. And the United Nations and its 
Member States must do their part to support those 
basic aspirations. And we have more work to do. 
 In Iran, we have seen a Government that refuses 
to recognize the rights of its own people. As we meet 
here today, men, women and children are being 
tortured, detained and murdered by the Syrian regime. 
Thousands have been killed, many during the holy time 
of Ramadan. Thousands more have poured across 
Syria’s borders. The Syrian people have shown dignity 
  
 
11-50692 12 
 
and courage in their pursuit of justice, protesting 
peacefully, standing silently in the streets and dying for 
the same values that this institution is supposed to 
stand for. And the question for us is clear: Will we 
stand with the Syrian people or with their oppressors? 
 Already, the United States has imposed strong 
sanctions on Syria’s leaders. We supported a transfer of 
power that would be responsive to the Syrian people. 
And many of our allies have joined in this effort. But 
for the sake of Syria — and the peace and security of 
the world — we must speak with one voice. There is 
no excuse for inaction. Now is the time for the Security 
Council to sanction the Syrian regime and to stand with 
the Syrian people. 
 Throughout the region, we will have to respond 
to the calls for change. In Yemen, men, women and 
children gather by the thousands in towns and city 
squares every day with the hope that their 
determination and spilled blood will prevail over a 
corrupt system. America supports those aspirations. We 
must work with Yemen’s neighbours and our partners 
around the world to seek a path that allows for a 
peaceful transition of power from President Saleh, and 
a movement to free and fair elections as soon as 
possible. 
 In Bahrain, steps have been taken towards reform 
and accountability. We are pleased with that, but more 
is required. America is a close friend of Bahrain, and 
we will continue to call on the Government and the 
main opposition bloc — al-Wifaq — to pursue a 
meaningful dialogue that brings peaceful change that is 
responsive to the people. We believe the patriotism that 
binds Bahrainis together must be more powerful than 
the sectarian forces that would tear them apart. It will 
be hard, but it is possible. 
 We believe that each nation must chart its own 
course to fulfil the aspirations of its people. America 
does not expect to agree with every party or person 
who expresses themselves politically, but we will 
always stand up for the universal rights that were 
embraced by this Assembly. Those rights depend on 
elections that are free and fair, governance that is 
transparent and accountable, respect for the rights of 
women and minorities, and justice that is equal and 
fair. That is what our people deserve. Those are the 
elements of peace that can last. 
 Moreover, the United States will continue to 
support, with greater trade and investment, those 
nations that transition to democracy, so that freedom is 
followed by opportunity. We will pursue deeper 
engagement with Governments, but also with civil 
society — students and entrepreneurs, political parties 
and the press. We have banned those who abuse human 
rights from travelling to our country and we have 
sanctioned those who trample on human rights abroad. 
And we will always serve as a voice for those who 
have been silenced. 
 Now, I know, particularly this week, that for 
many in this Hall, there is one issue that stands as a test 
of these principles and a test of American foreign 
policy, and that is the conflict between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians. 
 One year ago, I stood at this podium and I called 
for an independent Palestine. I believed then, and I 
believe now, that the Palestinian people deserve a State 
of their own, but what I also said is that a genuine 
peace can be realized only between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians themselves. One year later, despite 
extensive efforts by America and others, the parties 
have not bridged their differences. Faced with this 
stalemate, I put forward a new basis for negotiations in 
May of this year. That basis is clear. It is well known to 
all of us here. Israelis must know that any agreement 
provides assurances for their security. Palestinians 
deserve to know the territorial basis of their State. 
 I know that many are frustrated by the lack of 
progress; I assure them that I am too. But the question 
is not the goal that we seek. The question is: How do 
we reach that goal? And I am convinced that there is no 
shortcut to the end of a conflict that has endured for 
decades. Peace is hard work. Peace will not come 
through statements and resolutions at the United 
Nations. If it were that easy, it would have been 
accomplished by now. Ultimately, it is the Israelis and 
the Palestinians who must live side by side. Ultimately, 
it is the Israelis and the Palestinians — not us — who 
must reach agreement on the issues that divide them: 
on borders and on security, on refugees and on 
Jerusalem. 
 Ultimately, peace depends upon compromise 
among people who must live together long after our 
speeches are over, long after our votes have been 
tallied. That is the lesson of Northern Ireland, where 
ancient antagonists bridged their differences. That is 
the lesson of the Sudan, where a negotiated settlement 
led to an independent State. And that is and will be the 
 
 
13 11-50692 
 
path to a Palestinian State — negotiations between the 
parties. 
 We seek a future where Palestinians live in a 
sovereign State of their own, with no limit to what they 
can achieve. There is no question that the Palestinians 
have seen that vision delayed for too long. It is 
precisely because we believe so strongly in the 
aspirations of the Palestinian people that America has 
invested so much time and so much effort in the 
building of a Palestinian State and in the negotiations 
that can deliver a Palestinian State. 
 But understand this as well: America’s 
commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. Our 
friendship with Israel is deep and enduring. And so we 
believe that any lasting peace must acknowledge the 
very real security concerns that Israel faces every 
single day. 
 Let us be honest with ourselves: Israel is 
surrounded by neighbours that have waged repeated 
wars against it. Israel’s citizens have been killed by 
rockets fired at their houses and suicide bombs on their 
buses. Israel’s children come of age knowing that 
throughout the region other children are taught to hate 
them. Israel, a small country of less than 8 million 
people, looks out at a world where leaders of much 
larger nations threaten to wipe it off of the map. The 
Jewish people carry the burden of centuries of exile 
and persecution and fresh memories of knowing that 
6 million people were killed simply because of who 
they are. Those are facts. They cannot be denied. 
 The Jewish people have forged a successful State 
in their historic homeland. Israel deserves recognition. 
It deserves normal relations with its neighbours. And 
friends of the Palestinians do them no favours by 
ignoring that truth, just as friends of Israel must 
recognize the need to pursue a two-State solution with 
a secure Israel next to an independent Palestine. 
 That is the truth. Each side has legitimate 
aspirations, and that is part of what makes peace so 
hard. And the deadlock will be broken only when each 
side learns to stand in the other’s shoes and each side 
can see the world through the other’s eyes. That is 
what we should be encouraging. That is what we 
should be promoting. 
 This body — founded as it was out of the ashes 
of war and genocide, and dedicated as it is to the 
dignity of every single person — must recognize the 
reality that is lived by the Palestinians and the Israelis 
alike. The measure of our actions must always be 
whether they advance the right of Israeli and 
Palestinian children to live lives of peace and security 
and dignity and opportunity. And we will succeed in 
that effort only if we can encourage the parties to sit 
down, to listen to each other and to understand each 
other’s hopes and each other’s fears. That is the project 
to which America is committed. There are no shortcuts. 
And that is what the United Nations should be focused 
on in the weeks and months to come. 
 Even as we confront these challenges of conflict 
and revolution, we must also recognize — and we must 
also remind ourselves — that peace is not just the 
absence of war. True peace depends on creating the 
opportunity that makes life worth living. And to do 
that, we must confront the common enemies of 
humanity: nuclear weapons and poverty, ignorance and 
disease. Those forces corrode the possibility of lasting 
peace and together we are called upon to confront 
them. 
 To lift the spectre of mass destruction, we must 
come together to pursue the peace and security of a 
world without nuclear weapons. Over the past two 
years, we have begun to walk down that path. Since 
our Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., 
nearly 50 nations have taken steps to secure nuclear 
materials from terrorists and smugglers. Next March, a 
summit in Seoul will advance our efforts to lock down 
all of them. The New START Treaty between the 
United States and Russia will cut our deployed arsenals 
to the lowest level in half a century, and our nations are 
pursuing talks on how to achieve even deeper 
reductions. America will continue to work for a ban on 
the testing of nuclear weapons and the production of 
fissile material needed to make them. 
 And so we have begun to move in the right 
direction. And the United States is committed to 
meeting our obligations. But even as we meet our 
obligations, we have strengthened the treaties and 
institutions that help stop the spread of those weapons. 
And to do so, we must continue to hold accountable 
those nations that flout them. 
 The Iranian Government cannot demonstrate that 
its programme is peaceful. It has not met its obligations 
and it rejects offers that would provide it with peaceful 
nuclear power. North Korea has yet to take concrete 
steps towards abandoning its weapons and continues 
  
 
11-50692 14 
 
belligerent action against the South. There is a future 
of greater opportunity for the people of those nations if 
their Governments meet their international obligations. 
But if they continue down a path that is outside 
international law, they must be met with greater 
pressure and isolation. That is what our commitment to 
peace and security demands. 
 To bring prosperity to our people, we must 
promote the growth that creates opportunity. In this 
effort, let us not forget that we have made enormous 
progress over the past several decades. Closed societies 
gave way to open markets. Innovation and 
entrepreneurship have transformed the way we live and 
the things that we do. Emerging economies from Asia 
to the Americas have lifted hundreds of millions of 
people from poverty. It is an extraordinary 
achievement.  
 And yet, three years ago, we were confronted 
with the worst financial crisis in eight decades. And 
that crisis proved a fact that has become clearer with 
each passing year. Our fates are interconnected. In a 
global economy, nations will rise or fall together. 
 Today, we confront the challenges that have 
followed on the heels of that crisis. Around the world 
recovery is still fragile. Markets remain volatile. Too 
many people are out of work. Too many others are 
struggling just to get by. We acted together to avert a 
depression in 2009. We must take urgent and 
coordinated action once more. 
 Here in the United States, I have announced a 
plan to put Americans back to work and jump-start our 
economy, at the same time as I am committed to 
substantially reducing our deficits over time. 
 We stand with our European allies as they 
reshape their institutions and address their own fiscal 
challenges. For other countries, leaders face a different 
challenge as they shift their economy towards more 
self-reliance, boosting domestic demand while slowing 
inflation. So we will work with emerging economies 
that have rebounded strongly so that rising standards of 
living create new markets that promote global growth. 
That is what our commitment to prosperity demands. 
 To combat the poverty that punishes our children, 
we must act on the belief that freedom from want is a 
basic human right. The United States has made it a 
focus of our engagement abroad to help people to feed 
themselves. And today, as drought and conflict have 
brought famine to the Horn of Africa, our conscience 
calls on us to act. Together, we must continue to 
provide assistance and support organizations that can 
reach those in need. And together, we must insist on 
unrestricted humanitarian access so that we can save 
the lives of thousands of men and women and children. 
Our common humanity is at stake. Let us show that the 
life of a child in Somalia is as precious as any other. 
That is what our commitment to our fellow human 
beings demands. 
 To stop disease that spreads across borders, we 
must strengthen our system of public health. We will 
continue the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and 
malaria. We will focus on the health of mothers and of 
children. And we must come together to prevent and 
detect and fight every kind of biological danger — 
whether it is a pandemic like H1N1 or a terrorist threat 
or a treatable disease. 
 This week, America signed an agreement with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) to affirm our 
commitment to meeting that challenge. And today, I 
urge all nations to join us in meeting the WHO goal of 
making sure all nations have core capacities to address 
public health emergencies in place by 2012. That is 
what our commitment to the health of our people 
demands. 
 To preserve our planet, we must not put off action 
that climate change demands. We have to tap the power 
of science to save those resources that are scarce. And 
together, we must continue our work to build on the 
progress made in Copenhagen and Cancún, so that all 
the major economies represented here today follow 
through on the commitments that were made. Together, 
we must work to transform the energy that powers our 
economies and support others as they move down that 
path. That is what our commitment to the next 
generation demands. 
 To make sure our societies reach their potential, 
we must allow our citizens to reach theirs. No country 
can afford the corruption that plagues the world like a 
cancer. Together, we must harness the power of open 
societies and open economies. That is why we have 
partnered with countries across the globe to launch a 
new partnership on open Government that helps ensure 
accountability and helps to empower citizens. No 
country should deny people their rights to freedom of 
speech and freedom of religion, but also no country 
should deny people their rights because of whom they 
 
 
15 11-50692 
 
love, which is why we must stand up for the rights of 
gays and lesbians everywhere. 
 No country can realize its potential if half its 
population cannot reach theirs. This week, the United 
States signed a new declaration on women’s 
participation. Next year, we should each announce the 
steps we are taking to break down the economic and 
political barriers that stand in the way of women and 
girls. That is what our commitment to human progress 
demands. 
 I know there is no straight line to that progress, 
no single path to success. We come from different 
cultures, and carry with us different histories. But let 
us never forget that even as we gather here as Heads of 
different Governments, we represent citizens who share 
the same basic aspirations to live with dignity and 
freedom, to get an education and pursue opportunity, to 
love our families and love and worship our God, to live 
in the kind of peace that makes life worth living. 
 It is the nature of our imperfect world that we are 
forced to learn these lessons over and over again. 
Conflict and repression will endure so long as some 
people refuse to do unto others as we would have them 
do unto us. Yet that is precisely why we have built 
institutions like this — to bind our fates together, to 
help us recognize ourselves in each other — because 
those who came before us believed that peace is 
preferable to war, and freedom is preferable to 
suppression, and prosperity is preferable to poverty. 
That is the message that comes not from capitals, but 
from citizens, from our people. 
 When the cornerstone of this very building was 
put in place, President Truman came here to New York 
and said, “The United Nations is essentially an 
expression of the moral nature of man’s aspirations” — 
the moral nature of man’s aspirations. As we live in a 
world that is changing at a breathtaking pace, that is a 
lesson that we must never forget. 
 Peace is hard, but we know that it is possible. So, 
together, let us be resolved to see that it is defined by 
our hopes and not by our fears. Together, let us make 
peace — but a peace, most importantly, that will last.On behalf of the Government 
and the people of South Africa, I wish to extend our 
sincere congratulations to Ambassador Nassir 
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election as President of the 
General Assembly. We wish him a successful tenure in 
the stewardship of this body and assure him of our 
delegation’s full support. We also congratulate his 
predecessor, Mr. Joseph Deiss, for the diligent manner 
in which he guided the work of the Assembly at its 
sixty-fifth session. 
 I would further like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his re-appointment as 
Secretary-General. 
 It is also an honour for South Africa to welcome 
the Republic of South Sudan to the community of 
nations as the 193rd State Member of the United 
Nations. 
 This month, the United States and the world 
marked the tenth anniversary of the horrendous 
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, which affected 
the United States and 89 other countries. That horrific 
incident united the international community and 
strengthened its resolve to cooperate in the fight 
against terrorism. We pay our respects to the victims of 
the tragedy and their families. We reaffirm our 
commitment to working with other Member States to 
eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
 The theme of this session — “The role of 
mediation in the settlement of disputes by peaceful 
means” — is timely and well chosen. The Charter of 
the United Nations mandates the Organization to 
utilize mediation as one of the tools to prevent and 
resolve conflicts across the globe. The role of 
mediation as a tool for the settlement of disputes has 
renewed relevance today, given the number of conflicts 
in the world. We should defend the independence and 
impartiality of the United Nations and promote the 
principles of its Charter during conflicts and crises. 
The United Nations should never take sides in any 
conflict but should always maintain its impartiality. 
The United Nations must not allow itself to be used by 
any country, regardless of its history or size. All 
citizens of the world should feel confident and secure 
in the knowledge that the United Nations is above all 
partisan interests and serves only those of the citizens 
of the globe. 
 We are of the view that regional organizations 
play a crucial role in the resolution of conflicts and in 
regional mediation processes. The Charter of the 
United Nations itself provides for the role of regional 
organizations in cooperation with the United Nations. 
This role of the regions must always be enforced and 
enhanced, and not undermined. In our continent, the 
African Union (AU) continues to play a significant role 
in mediation and the resolution of conflicts, trying at 
 
 
23 11-50702 
 
all times to produce African solutions to African 
problems, of course with the support of the world. 
 This year, the world witnessed the so-called Arab 
Spring in North Africa and the Middle East. With 
regard to the situation in Libya, the AU played a 
crucial role in seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis, 
in line with its mandate of working for peace and 
stability in the continent. However, it is a matter of 
record now that the AU efforts were never given a 
chance. Military actions were preferred over peaceful 
means. 
 Nonetheless, the AU continues to be seized with 
the Libyan conflict, as it should be. South Africa, 
through the AU and the United Nations, will work with 
the National Transitional Council, the representative of 
the Libyan people, as it proceeds to form an inclusive 
transitional Government that will take the Libyan seat 
in the African Union. During this period of working 
towards normalcy in Libya, we call for a cessation of 
hostilities and an end to the NATO aerial 
bombardment. We also call for the lifting of the no-fly 
zone, whose imposition was necessary for the 
protection of civilians. 
 The proliferation of arms in Libya is a major 
concern. The transitional Government will need to be 
supported in addressing this security issue. It may pose 
a serious challenge affecting the entire subregion if it is 
not adequately attended to. We also urge the new 
Libyan authorities to ensure the protection of migrant 
workers, especially those from sub-Saharan African 
countries, who number approximately 2.5 million. 
Immediate measures should be taken to put an end to 
the killing, arbitrary arrest and detention of migrant 
workers and black Libyans. 
 We will fully support the people of Libya as they 
go through the transition towards a new, united and 
democratic Libya that protects human rights, human 
dignity and freedom. 
 South Africa continues to support international 
efforts to assist the people of Palestine and Israel to 
find lasting peace. The decades-old struggle of the 
Palestinian people for a sovereign State of their own 
has now reached a turning point. The Palestinian 
Authority, backed by the League of Arab States, has 
stated its intention to seek United Nations membership 
for the State of Palestine. South Africa fully supports 
this position. It is a decisive step towards achieving 
lasting peace, economic cooperation and prosperity for 
the millions of people in the Middle East, and we urge 
that it be viewed favourably. 
 We also support the ongoing struggle for self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara. We 
urge the international community to support their quest 
for freedom, human rights and dignity. 
 We reiterate our call for the lifting of the 
economic and financial embargo against the people of 
Cuba in order to help them gain their economic 
freedom. 
 All Member States have a duty to safeguard the 
future and relevance of the United Nations. Recent 
international developments have made more urgent our 
efforts to intensify the reform agenda of the United 
Nations, particularly the Security Council, as well as 
the Bretton Woods institutions. No reform can be 
complete without the substantive reform of the 
Security Council, whose membership must be 
consistent with the principle of equitable geographical 
representation. In this regard, we reiterate our call for 
Africa to be represented in the category of permanent 
membership of the Security Council. 
 South Africa is preparing to welcome the 
international community and all stakeholders to the 
seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and to the seventh Meeting of the Parties to the 
Kyoto Protocol, in November and December this year. 
The success of the Conference is highly dependent on 
the willingness of all parties to reach an agreement. It 
does not depend on South Africa alone. As leaders, we 
are accountable to the global citizenry, the ordinary 
people that suffer daily from the impacts of climate 
change. They hold high expectations of their leaders to 
be responsible and to find effective solutions to the 
threat that climate change poses to their livelihood, 
quality of life, dignity and, in many cases, their very 
survival. We dare not fail them. 
 We are witnessing the catastrophic effects of 
famine in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Our 
response should not be left to the United Nations alone; 
it requires united action from all of us. South Africa 
has been humbled to contribute in a small way to the 
alleviation of human suffering. The people of Somalia 
still need more support, and we urge the world to focus 
its attention more sharply on Somalia and its 
neighbours in the Horn of Africa. 
  
 
11-50702 24 
 
 It is commendable that the Millennium 
Development Goals and their realization by 2015 
continue to feature on the agenda of the General 
Assembly. We now have four years to go before we 
reach the target date. It is clear that many of the Goals 
will not be attained on time, particularly in 
sub-Saharan Africa. We call on the international 
community and the United Nations to redouble efforts 
to assist countries that are lagging. 
 At this session, we will be commemorating the 
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban 
Declaration and Programme of Action — the outcome 
document of the World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance, which was held in Durban in 2001. Racism 
and racial discrimination continue to pose a challenge 
to humankind and to negate the principles of the 
Charter of the United Nations. We should continue to 
work together to eradicate the scourge of racism. 
 On 8 January 2012, the African National 
Congress (ANC), the oldest liberation movement in 
Africa, will mark 100 years of existence since its 
establishment in 1912. The ANC spearheaded the 
struggle against racial oppression, colonialism and 
apartheid in South Africa. It inspired many in the 
African continent to fight for their freedom and 
independence from colonialism. 
 The United Nations declared apartheid a crime 
against humanity and in that way endorsed the struggle 
against racial oppression in our country. The centenary 
of the ANC recognizes the immense contribution of the 
United Nations and the international community in 
working to eradicate racism and racial discrimination 
in the world. We will, tomorrow, host a symposium on 
South Africa’s contribution to the fight against racism 
and racial discrimination. 
 Working together, let us remain committed to 
multilateralism and cooperation in this session of the 
General Assembly and beyond, and promote the 
realization of a more equitable and just world.I 
wish to begin by congratulating Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz 
Al-Nasser on having assumed the presidency of the 
General Assembly at its current session. I am confident 
that, with his outstanding ability and great experience, 
he will fulfil his lofty mission. I also wish to thank 
Mr. Deiss for his contribution as President at the 
previous session. I further wish to take this opportunity 
to warmly congratulate the Republic of South Sudan on 
becoming the 193rd member of the United Nations 
family.  
 The first decade of the twenty-first century is 
now behind us. During that decade, the trend towards a 
multipolar world and economic globalization gained 
momentum. Countries became increasingly 
interdependent. Revolutions in science and technology 
brought profound transformations to human society. 
However, various traditional and non-traditional 
security threats and global challenges were intertwined 
with those changes, and the world was far from a 
peaceful place.  
 As the second decade of the new century begins, 
the world has entered an extraordinary historical stage 
in its pursuit of peace and development, and continues 
to undergo profound and complex changes. Uncertainty 
and instability are increasing despite the generally 
peaceful international environment. Development is 
becoming an increasingly serious issue, and promoting 
common development has become a more important 
and pressing task than ever before. 
 Global development is now at a new critical 
juncture. Global recovery remains fragile, international 
financial markets are volatile and the pursuit of 
sustainable development faces daunting challenges. 
The world economy therefore has to meet the crucial 
test of maintaining growth. Some countries in West 
Asia and North Africa are in continual political 
turmoil. Terrorist threats are spreading and global 
challenges growing. The international community faces 
a critical test in maintaining stability.  
 The gap in development between the South and 
the North is as wide as ever. The number of people 
living in absolute poverty has increased by 64 million 
owing to the international financial crisis. Nearly 
1 billion people suffer from starvation. Urgent action is 
needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. 
It is imperative to step up international cooperation to 
help the least developed countries (LDCs) meet the 
basic needs of their people. In the face of these 
challenges, we share an important mission to achieve 
common development, and we also have rare new 
opportunities.  
 Economic globalization has made the interests of 
countries more closely interconnected. Ensuring 
security through cooperation and promoting 
development through stability has become our shared 
desire. Countries are addressing development 
challenges in innovative ways. To overcome the crisis, 
developed countries have taken steps to improve their 
fiscal conditions, adopted stimulus measures and 
accelerated economic structural adjustment. 
Developing countries as a whole have maintained good 
growth momentum. In particular, the rapid growth in 
some emerging economies has driven the growth of the 
world economy.  
 Progress has been made in the reform of the 
global economic governance structure, and various 
regional cooperation mechanisms are expanding. 
Efforts to accelerate the development of a green 
economy and explore new modes of sustainable growth 
have created new momentum and space for common 
development. Faced with new opportunities and 
challenges, we should work as a team to overcome our 
difficulties and pursue mutual benefit and common 
development. This is the responsibility and mission 
that history bestows upon all of us. To fulfil our 
mission, we need to take the following steps.  
 We should foster sound momentum for global 
economic recovery. The underlying impact of the 
international financial crisis has yet to dissipate, and 
economic recovery is still fragile and uneven. We 
should intensify consultation and coordination, and 
send a strong message of solidarity and win-win 
cooperation so as to strengthen international 
confidence in global recovery and growth. We should 
work for a fair, just, inclusive and orderly international 
monetary and financial system, and promote the voice 
and representation of emerging markets and developing 
countries.  
 China supports the transition of the Group of 
20 (G-20) from a short-term crisis response mechanism 
to a long-term mechanism of economic governance. 
The G-20 should play a bigger role in global economic 
governance and in promoting the full recovery and 
growth of the world economy.  
  
 
11-51384 42 
 
 We support the efforts of emerging markets to 
explore new modes of international economic 
cooperation. We strongly oppose protectionism in all 
its forms and call for strengthening the multilateral 
trading regime. The concerns of the least developed 
countries should be addressed, and efforts made to 
make the Doha Round achieve its development 
objectives. 
 We should lay the political foundation for 
cooperative development. All countries, big or small, 
strong or weak, rich or poor, are equal members of the 
international community, and their equal right to 
development should be protected. Mutual respect and 
equality are the basic norms governing international 
relations and constitute an important guarantee for 
common development. In the current context, it is of 
particular and practical importance to adhere to the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations, to uphold the authority and role of the United 
Nations, to observe in good faith the principle of 
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and to 
promote democracy in international relations.  
 We should respect the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of all countries. The internal affairs of each 
country should be decided by its own people. We 
oppose interference in other countries’ internal affairs 
by whatever means and under whatever pretext.  
 The diversity of the world is a valuable asset for 
the development of human society. It should be seen as 
a positive factor that allows countries to learn from one 
another, and should not be used as an excuse for the 
big to bully the small or the rich to ride roughshod over 
the poor in international relations. We should respect 
the right of each country to pursue the development 
path of its choice and we should respect the diversity 
of civilizations. We should seek common progress by 
drawing on one another’s strength with an open and 
inclusive mind, pursuing common ground while 
preserving differences. 
 We should foster a security environment 
conducive to stability and development. History has 
repeatedly shown that stability and development go 
hand in hand. Without stability, there can be no 
development; without development, there can be no 
stability. In keeping with the purposes and principles of 
the United Nations Charter, we should always use 
peaceful means to settle international disputes and 
hotspot issues. We should oppose the wilful use or 
threat of force, terrorism, separatism and extremism in 
all their forms, and we should uphold the common 
security of humankind. 
 China respects the independent choice of the 
people of the Sudan and South Sudan, and hopes that 
the new-born country of South Sudan will enjoy 
stability and development. The international 
community should continue to support and encourage 
the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their outstanding 
issues appropriately through dialogue and consultation, 
pursue amicable relations and common development, 
and uphold regional peace and stability. China has 
encouraged the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their 
dispute through peaceful negotiation and has worked 
hard to advance the peace process between them. We 
support the proper settlement of the Darfur issue. We 
will continue to work with the international community 
to play a constructive role in advancing regional peace, 
stability and development. 
 China has consistently supported the just cause of 
establishing an independent Palestinian State, and 
supports Palestine’s membership in the United Nations. 
We support efforts to achieve a two-State solution 
through political negotiation so as to establish, on the 
basis of the 1967 borders, an independent Palestinian 
State that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem 
as its capital. We believe that progress should be made 
in parallel in the peace talks between Syria and Israel 
and Lebanon and Israel, with an ultimate view to 
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in 
the Middle East along with peaceful coexistence 
between the Arab countries and Israel. We hope that 
the international community and the parties concerned 
will make unremitting efforts to this end and sustain 
the Middle East peace process. 
 China is greatly concerned about the turbulence 
in West Asia and North Africa. We stand for the 
principle of non-interference. We respect and support 
the efforts of countries in those regions to 
independently handle their internal affairs, and we 
respect their aspirations. We hope that the parties 
concerned will resolve their differences through 
political dialogue and speedily restore stability and 
order in their respective countries.  
 Libya has now entered a critical transition from a 
state of war and turmoil to national reconstruction. 
China respects the choice of the Libyan people and 
recognizes the National Transitional Council (NTC) as 
 
 
43 11-51384 
 
the governing authority of Libya and the representative 
of its people. We hope that, under the leadership of the 
NTC, the parties in Libya will launch an inclusive 
process of political transition through which they will 
maintain ethnic harmony and national unity, restore 
stability as soon as possible and begin economic 
reconstruction. China supports the leading role of the 
United Nations in Libya’s post-conflict reconstruction, 
and urges the speediest possible operationalization of 
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.  
 China is also greatly concerned about 
developments in Syria. We hope that parties in Syria 
will exercise restraint, avoid all violence, further 
bloodshed and conflict, and act quickly to ease 
tensions. We believe that a Syria-led, inclusive political 
process aimed at promoting reform through dialogue 
and consultation is the right way to resolve the current 
crisis in Syria. The international community should 
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial 
integrity of Syria, and address the Syrian issue 
cautiously so as to prevent further turbulence and 
repercussions on regional peace. 
 China welcomes the positive developments on the 
Korean peninsula. We believe that dialogue and 
consultation are the only effective way to address the 
issues of the peninsula. The Six-Party Talks are an 
effective mechanism for advancing the denuclearization 
of the Korean peninsula and for upholding peace and 
stability both on the peninsula and in North-East Asia.  
 China has worked hard to promote peace through 
dialogue, and has played a unique role in easing 
tensions and maintaining peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula. China welcomes the recent 
resumption of dialogue between the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, 
as well as between the Democratic People’s Republic 
of Korea and the United States. We hope that the 
parties concerned will seize the opportunity, remain 
engaged in dialogue and work for an early resumption 
of the Six-Party Talks. 
 We should promote balanced development 
between the South and the North. The uneven 
development between South and North is the biggest 
imbalance in the global economy. Without balanced 
development, there can hardly be sustainable 
development. Unless underdeveloped countries shake 
off poverty and grow their economies, there can be no 
common global prosperity.  
 Achieving the Millennium Development Goals on 
a global scale and on schedule is an urgent and arduous 
task. Developed countries should honour their 
commitments on official development assistance, open 
their markets, reduce and cancel debt, and their step up 
financial and technological support to developing 
countries. International financial institutions should 
use their resources to help developing countries, and 
particularly the LDCs, on a priority basis. Developing 
countries, on their part, should explore growth models 
that are conducive to development and poverty 
alleviation in order to achieve a higher level of 
development. 
 Food security has emerged as a major challenge. 
The Horn of Africa is suffering from massive famine 
triggered by the most severe drought in 60 years. The 
international community should scale up assistance, 
stabilize the price of food and other commodities, and 
help developing countries enhance their capacity for 
autonomous development so that all countries and 
regions can enjoy the benefits of common 
development. 
 The world witnessed major development, 
transformation and adjustment in the first decade of the 
twenty-first century. During this period, China enjoyed 
sustained and fast development, and its relations with 
the outside world underwent profound changes. 
China’s achievements in development, and its possible 
future course, have become a focus of international 
attention. Over the past 10 years, China’s economy 
continued to grow, and its people’s living standards 
rose markedly, thanks to the hard work of the Chinese 
people. Today, China has become the world’s second-
largest economy, largest exporter, second-largest 
importer and largest emerging market. The basic living 
needs of China’s 1.3 billion people are being 
adequately met, and the number living in absolute 
poverty has fallen drastically. 
 On the other hand, the difficulties China faces in 
terms of development should not be ignored. We 
remain a developing country with a large population, a 
weak economic foundation and serious imbalances and 
lack of coordination in our development. China will 
have to make persistent and strenuous efforts to 
achieve its development goals. Guided by our recently 
adopted twelfth five-year plan for economic and social 
development, we will pursue scientific development, 
accelerate the shift in our growth model, advance 
scientific and technological innovation and increase 
  
 
11-51384 44 
 
reforms and openness designed to promote long-term, 
steady and fast economic development, as well as 
social harmony and progress. The world will see a 
more open China, with more sustainable development 
and greater social harmony. 
 China’s development has brought real benefits to 
the Chinese people and contributed to global 
development and prosperity. During the past 10 years, 
China imported close to, on average, $750 billion 
worth of goods annually, creating more than 14 million 
jobs for the relevant countries and regions. At the end 
of the twelfth five-year period in 2015, China’s total 
economic output will be around $8.6 trillion. It is 
expected that China will import about $10 trillion in 
goods in the next five years, which will further boost 
world economic growth. China needs the world in 
order to be able to continue to develop, and China’s 
development will in turn contribute more to the shared 
development of the world as a whole. 
 As a developing country, China is committed to 
enhancing mutually beneficial cooperation with other 
developing countries, based on equality, and to 
enhancing its efforts to provide them with assistance 
and support. China has cancelled 380 debts incurred by 
50 heavily indebted poor countries and LDCs, and will 
phase in zero-tariff treatment for 95 per cent of exports 
from the African LDCs with which China has 
diplomatic relations. We have completed more than 
2,100 projects, including building schools and 
hospitals, in other developing countries, and trained 
150,000 professionals in various fields for them. In 
sympathy with the pain of the countries and people in 
the Horn of Africa hit by famine, China has decided to 
provide those countries with RMB443.2 million in 
emergency food assistance and cash for purchasing 
food to help them overcome the famine. 
 China has made notable efforts to achieve the 
Millennium Development Goals. As it continues to 
develop, China will create more opportunities for 
world peace, development and cooperation. To advance 
common development, we must foster a sound 
international environment. Over the years, China has 
been dedicated to creating a peaceful international 
environment in which it can develop. At the same time, 
it has contributed to enhancing world peace through its 
own development. China has actively assumed 
international responsibilities as its capacity permits, 
and has worked to promote the peaceful settlement of 
issues in troubled areas.  
 China participates actively in international 
peacekeeping operations; with a total of more than 
19,000 personnel deployed in 28 United Nations 
peacekeeping missions, China is the largest contributor 
of United Nations peacekeeping personnel among 
Security Council permanent members. China has 
provided assistance in cash and kind to countries hit by 
earthquakes and tsunamis, and has sent rescue teams to 
carry out humanitarian relief operations in the affected 
areas. China is actively involved in the fight against 
piracy and in other areas of international cooperation. 
All these efforts have contributed to maintaining world 
peace and stability. 
 The tide of history is surging forward. In the next 
decade, peace, development and cooperation will 
remain trends of the times, and China will not waver in 
its pursuit of development and progress. Peaceful 
development is the strategic choice that China has 
made to build a modern, strong and prosperous country 
and to make a greater contribution to the progress of 
human civilization. China will stay on that path, 
pursuing an independent, peaceful foreign policy and a 
win-win strategy of opening up its society. 
 We are committed to achieving a better life for 
the Chinese people and greater development and 
prosperity for all humankind. We will achieve those 
goals through hard work, reforms and innovation, and 
by conducting long-term friendly exchanges and 
establishing equality-based, win-win cooperation with 
other countries. A prosperous, harmonious and stable 
China that lives up to its responsibilities will make a 
greater contribution to the prosperity and stability of 
the world and the common development of humankind. 
Let us work together to deepen cooperation and 
achieve development by sharing opportunities and 
meeting challenges together, and thus build a 
harmonious world of lasting peace and common 
prosperity.Seldom has 
people’s yearning for freedom, dignity and self-
determination played such a dominant role as it has this 
year. Until now, we have experienced globalization 
 
 
49 11-51384 
 
first and foremost through the ever-greater integration 
of the world economy. Today, we see that globalization 
means so much more; that it has also brought about a 
globalization of values. Those are the values enshrined 
in the United Nations Charter, the inalienable rights 
contained in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. 
 In North Africa and in the Arab world, millions of 
people have shaken off the shackles of decades of 
oppression. They want freedom, democracy and human 
rights, as well as better lives for themselves and their 
families. That road is anything but easy. A new 
political system must mature in order to become stable. 
That takes time and patience. However, even the 
longest road begins with the very first step. This is a 
year of momentous steps. 
 We have not forgotten the moving images of 
people who won dignity and self-respect by their own 
efforts, the proud faces on Bourguiba Boulevard in 
Tunis and in Tahrir Square in Cairo. Those people want 
to shape their own future, and their yearning is by no 
means limited to the Arab world. In Belarus, too, 
people long for an end to repression and tyranny and 
for the opportunity to fully develop their individual 
personalities. 
 With the fall of the Berlin Wall and reunification 
more than 20 years ago, Germany experienced for 
itself the joy of a peaceful revolution. Today we have a 
fundamental interest in the success of the political 
awakening in the southern Mediterranean region. We 
Germans offer our support for the reforms in Morocco 
and Jordan, the political awakening in Egypt and 
Tunisia, and the fresh start in Libya following the 
overthrow of the dictator. 
 Every country and every society will find its own 
way into the modern world, either through revolution 
or through reform. We want to provide advice and 
support. We want to help create an independent 
judiciary, a pluralistic media landscape, and a vibrant 
civil society. We want to help people come to terms 
with their past and we want to support the 
constitutional process. Above all, however, we want to 
assist in the crucial process of building a new social 
and economic order, for we all know that the success of 
social change largely hinges on economic success. 
People who take to the streets for freedom and self-
determination must see first-hand that they, too, can 
succeed with the help of their ideas, their creativity and 
their commitment. 
 Germany is therefore working not only for close 
partnerships but for increased market access. We want 
to foster change through increased trade. We are 
offering investments, especially in the small and 
medium-sized enterprises that form the backbone of an 
open and successful society. Most important of all, 
however, will be to offer young people education and 
training so that they can make the most of their 
opportunities. That is of key importance to successful 
transitions and fresh starts in those countries. 
 The courageous men and women of Syria deserve 
a clear sign of our solidarity. The Syrian Government 
has responded to the legitimate demands of the Syrian 
people with brutal force. Germany will continue to 
press for a Security Council resolution. This is not only 
about showing solidarity with the Syrian people; it is 
also about the credibility of the international 
community. If the repression continues, we Europeans 
will further tighten sanctions against the regime. The 
Syrian people should be free to shape their own future. 
 This week has been dominated by the unresolved 
conflict in the Middle East. On Friday here in New 
York, President Abbas expressed the Palestinians’ 
expectations and understandable frustration with the 
lack of progress made (see ). On the same 
day, Prime Minister Netanyahu reaffirmed Israel’s 
justified desire to exist in peace within secure borders 
(see ). Both sides have legitimate interests. 
However, these interests are certainly not 
irreconcilable. They can be overcome if the parties 
involved are willing to do so. 
 Germany is backing a two-State solution. We 
support a Palestinian State that will allow the 
Palestinians to live in dignity and self-determination 
and that is independent, sovereign, contiguous and 
democratic, as well as politically and economically 
viable. Over the past few years, we have been heavily 
involved in the practical development of this statehood 
by helping to build an administration, infrastructure 
and vocational training, as well as politically, in the 
German-Palestinian Steering Committee. And we do 
not want that State to be founded sometime in the 
distant and indeterminate future. 
 Let there be no doubt, however, that the security 
of Israel is and will continue to be part of the raison 
d’être of the Federal Republic of Germany. Peace 
  
 
11-51384 50 
 
between Israelis and Palestinians is possible. A 
Palestinian State is possible. Two States existing 
peacefully side by side are possible. However, they can 
be achieved only through negotiations. The statement 
issued by the Middle East Quartet on Friday identified 
the milestones along the way. Germany worked hard 
for that Quartet statement and staunchly supports it. 
 The confrontation of words here in New York 
must not be allowed to lead to an escalation in violence 
in the Middle East. I therefore call on both sides, 
Palestinians and Israelis, to enter into direct 
negotiations without delay. On Friday, the two sides 
reaffirmed their desire for a negotiated peace. The task 
now is to channel the energy and pressure of recent 
days into a constructive process. The two sides have 
been called on to come forward within three months 
with comprehensive proposals on territory and security, 
and to refrain from all provocative actions. The 
international community will continue to support the 
difficult road to peace. This includes the Moscow 
conference as part of the negotiating timetable for the 
coming months. 
 I would like to express my appreciation to all 
who have worked so hard in the past few days to create 
this opportunity for a constructive solution. As a 
European, I would like to extend my special thanks to 
the European Union’s High Representative, Lady 
Ashton. Let us make use of the impetus provided by 
the intensive efforts here in New York for the benefit of 
the people of Israel and the Palestinian territories. 
 The international community has worked 
tirelessly for years to ensure that Afghanistan ceases to 
harbour a threat to international peace and security. 
Many, indeed too many people have already lost their 
lives as a result of that threat. On 5 December in Bonn, 
under Afghanistan’s chairmanship, we will discuss the 
way forward. The Conference will focus on three major 
issues. The first is the complete handover of 
responsibility for security. This summer saw the start 
of a process whereby the Afghans are to gradually 
assume responsibility for security in their country by 
2014. This is a responsible handover of responsibility. 
 Secondly, the international community will 
remain engaged in Afghanistan after 2014. Afghanistan 
will continue to need economic initiatives and more 
regional cooperation to help strengthen its sovereignty. 
The New Silk Road initiative, which we launched here 
in New York last week, is intended to serve this aim.  
 Thirdly, Afghanistan’s internal reconciliation and 
support from States in the region are critical to lasting 
peace. The brutal murder of former President Rabbani 
shows that the reconciliation process will continue to 
suffer setbacks. Nevertheless, it must and will go on. 
Germany will play its part on the road to Bonn. 
 While people are seizing the opportunity to build 
a better future for themselves in freedom and self-
determination in a growing number of countries around 
the world, millions in the Horn of Africa are struggling 
to survive. The United Nations has played a valuable 
role in providing swift humanitarian assistance. 
Germany is doing everything in its power in this and 
many other crises to alleviate the suffering. 
 The collapse of State authority and the impact of 
climate change are aggravating the already disastrous 
situation. Germany will continue to be in the vanguard 
of the fight against climate change. As with 
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, as well as 
the protection of human rights, the fight against 
climate change is an integral element of preventive 
diplomacy. It is part of a farsighted peace policy. 
 By the end of this year, our planet will have more 
than 7 billion inhabitants. In that world, Germany will 
place its hopes in a strong United Nations as a forum 
for political consensus-building, a source of rules with 
international legitimacy, and a player in the crisis 
regions of this world. The United Nations Charter and 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights offer more 
people than ever before the direction and inspiration 
they need to strive for a cooperative world order and a 
fairer global community. 
 However, the United Nations has to adapt to our 
changing world. Only then will the decisions made 
here gain political force, effectiveness and acceptance. 
New centres of power are emerging in global politics. 
Their economic dynamism has prompted them to 
demand political participation. The sixty-fifth session 
of the General Assembly considered United Nations 
reform, but no real progress has been achieved so far. 
We welcome the fact that the new President intends to 
again personally champion this reform. We will do 
everything we can to him. 
 In September 38 years ago, two German States 
were admitted to the United Nations. At that time, my 
predecessor in office, Walter Scheel, stated before the 
Assembly: 
 
 
51 11-51384 
 
 “Where there is a question of international 
cooperation, of preserving peace and of 
protecting the rights of man, there the Federal 
Republic of Germany will always be found. If 
there is anything we have learned from our own 
bitter experience it is this: man is the measure of 
all things”. 
 Man is the measure of all things. Germany 
remains committed to this principle.When we 
met in this very place in September last year, who 
among us could have imagined that in barely one year 
the world, already shaken by an unprecedented 
economic crisis, would undergo such change? Within a 
few months, the Arab Spring gave rise to immense 
hope. 
 The Arab peoples, too long crushed by 
oppression, were able to raise their heads and claimed 
the right to be free at last. They fought back against the 
violence and brutality with their bare hands. To those 
who proclaimed that the Arab Muslim world was by 
nature hostile to democracy and human rights, the 
young Arabs produced the most cogent denial. 
 We do not have the right to disappoint the hope of 
the Arab peoples. We do not have the right to destroy 
their dreams. For shattering the dreams of those 
peoples would vindicate the fanatics who have not 
stopped pitting Islam against the West by stirring up 
hatred and violence everywhere. 
 That appeal for justice shook the world, and the 
world cannot respond to that call for justice by 
perpetuating an injustice. That miraculous spring of the 
 
 
23 11-50692 
 
Arab peoples imposes on us the moral and political 
obligation at last to find a solution to the Middle East 
conflict. We cannot wait any longer. The method used 
to date — I weigh my words carefully — has failed. So 
we must change the method. 
 We must stop believing that a single country — 
whether the largest or a small group of countries — can 
resolve so complex a problem. Too many large actors 
have been sidelined for our efforts to succeed. I mean 
that no one can believe that the peace process can 
succeed without Europe, without all the permanent 
members of the Security Council and without the Arab 
States that have already chosen peace. A collective 
approach has become indispensable in order to create 
trust and to provide guarantees to each of the parties. 
 Peace will indeed be made by the Israelis and the 
Palestinians, and by no one else. No one can expect to 
impose it on them. But we must help them.  
 The method no longer works. Let us together 
acknowledge that setting preconditions for negotiation 
is to condemn ourselves to failure. Preconditions are 
the opposite of negotiation. If we wish to enter into 
negotiation, which is the only possible path for peace, 
there must be no preconditions. 
 Let us change the method. All the elements of a 
solution are known — the Madrid Conference of 1991, 
President Obama’s speech of 19 May, the Road Map, 
the Arab Peace Initiative and the parameters agreed by 
the European Union. So, let us stop endlessly 
discussing the parameters and allow negotiation to 
begin in line with a concrete and ambitious timetable. 
Sixty years without one centimetre’s progress — does 
that not compel us to change the method and time 
frame to one month to resume discussions, six months 
to reach agreement on borders and security, and one 
year to reach a definitive settlement? 
 As of this autumn, France proposes hosting a 
donor conference so that the Palestinians can complete 
the construction of their future State. France wishes to 
say that we must not immediately seek the perfect 
solution, because there are no perfect solutions. Let us 
choose the path of compromise, which is neither 
renunciation nor repudiation, but which allows us to 
move forward, step by step. 
 Thus, for 60 years the Palestinians have been 
waiting for their State. Has the time not come to give 
them hope? For 60 years, Israel has suffered from not 
being able to live in peace. For 60 years, the question 
of the peaceful coexistence of the two peoples — 
Palestinian and Israeli — has continued to fester. We 
can no longer wait to take the path of peace. Let us put 
ourselves in the place of the Palestinians. Is it not 
legitimate that they claim their State? Of course it is. 
And who does not see that creating a democratic, 
viable and peaceful Palestinian State would be, for 
Israel, the best guarantee of its security? 
 Let us put ourselves in the place of the Israelis. Is 
it not legitimate that, after 60 years of war and attacks, 
they demand guarantees of that peace, so long awaited? 
Of course it is. I say that forcefully. If anyone 
anywhere in the world were to threaten the existence of 
Israel, France would immediately and wholeheartedly 
stand alongside Israel. Threats made against a State 
Member of the United Nations are unacceptable, and 
they will not be accepted. 
 Today, we are facing a very difficult choice. Each 
of us knows — and let us stop with hypocrisy and one-
off diplomacy — that full recognition of the status of a 
State Member of the United Nations cannot be attained 
at once. The first reason for that is the lack of trust 
between the main parties. But let us tell the truth: who 
can doubt that a veto in the Security Council will 
engender a cycle of violence in the Middle East? Who 
can doubt that? 
 Must we therefore exclude an intermediate stage? 
Why not envisage offering Palestine the status of 
United Nations Observer State? That would be an 
important step forward. After 60 years of immobility, 
which has paved the way for extremists, we would be 
giving hope to the Palestinians by making progress 
towards final status. 
 To show their determined commitment to a 
negotiated peace, the Palestinian authorities should, as 
part of that approach, reaffirm Israel’s right to exist 
and to its security. They should commit to avoiding 
using this new status to resort to actions that are 
incompatible with the pursuit of negotiations. 
 We have but one alternative — immobility and 
negotiations that go nowhere or an intermediate 
solution that would give hope to the Palestinians with 
the status of an Observer State.  
 In parallel, Israel must observe the same restraint. 
It must abstain from any actions that would prejudge 
the final status.  
  
 
11-50692 24 
 
 The ultimate goal must be mutual recognition of 
two nation-States for two peoples established on the 
basis of the 1967 lines with agreed and equivalent 
exchanges of land.  
 The General Assembly, which has a power to do 
so, should decide to move ahead, leave behind the fatal 
trap of paralysis, missed appointments and short-lived 
attempts to relaunch the process. Let us change our 
approach. Let us change our state of mind. Each should 
try to understand the reasoning, sufferings and fears of 
the other. Each must open its eyes and be ready to 
make concessions. 
 In conclusion, I would like to say to the 
Palestinian people with the deep and sincere friendship 
I hold for them: “Think of the Israeli mothers grieving 
for their family members killed in terrorist attacks. 
They feel the same pain as the Palestinian mothers 
confronted with the brutal death of one of theirs”. 
 I would like to say to the Israeli people with the 
deep and sincere friendship I hold for them: “Listen to 
what the young people of the Arab Spring are saying: 
‘Long live freedom!’ They are not crying ‘Down with 
Israel’. You cannot remain immobile when this wind of 
freedom and democracy is blowing in your region”. 
 I say with deep and sincere friendship for these 
two peoples who have suffered so much that the time 
has come to build peace for the children of Palestine 
and for the children of Israel. But it would be a great 
shame if the General Assembly did not seize the 
opportunity of the reawakening of the Arab peoples to 
democracy to settle a problem that brings unhappiness 
to these two peoples, who are in any event condemned 
to live alongside each other. If we take a compromise 
solution, we will rebuild trust and we will give people 
hope. 
 I say that with the utmost gravity to the 
representatives of all nations. We must assume an 
historic responsibility. It is the General Assembly of 
the United Nations that must keep this appointment 
with History. 
 Let us reassure Israel and give hope to the 
Palestinian people. The solution is on the table. Let us 
take this compromise solution over deadlock. Deadlock 
might satisfy everyone here, but it will create violence, 
bitterness and opposition that will imperil the 
resurgence of the Arab peoples. To that, France says 
that the tragedy must cease for a simple reason: it has 
gone on for too long. 
It is an honour 
to address the General Assembly for the first time, and 
it is a particular honour to do so as such momentous 
events unfold in the Arab world. Last week I was in 
Tripoli and Benghazi. I saw the hunger of a people 
eager to get on with reclaiming their country, writing 
themselves a new chapter of freedom and democracy. 
This has been the most dramatic episode of what has 
been called the Arab Spring. 
 My argument today is that Libya and the Arab 
Spring show that the United Nations needs a new way 
of working, because the Arab Spring is a massive 
opportunity to spread peace, prosperity, democracy 
and, vitally, security, but only if we really seize the 
opportunity.  
 So the events of this year present a challenge to 
all of us — a challenge to Europe to show it can reform 
its aid and trade strategy to be truly progressive; a 
challenge to the African Union, to meet the 
opportunities of this century with the same courage 
that won liberation in the last; a challenge to the 
Israelis and Palestinians, to take the bold steps to come 
to the table and make lasting peace; a challenge to Iran 
and to Syria, to give their peoples the freedoms they 
deserve; and a challenge to the United Nations. 
 One can sign every human rights declaration in 
the world, but if one stands by and watches people 
being slaughtered in their own country when one could 
 
 
25 11-50865 
 
act, then what are those signatures really worth? The 
United Nations has to show that we can be not just 
united in condemnation, but united in action, acting in 
a way that lives up to the United Nations founding 
principles and meets the needs of peoples everywhere. 
 The peoples of the Arab world have made their 
aspirations clear. They want transparency and 
accountability of Government, an end to corruption, 
the fair and consistent rule of law, the chance to get a 
job and to have a stake in how their country is run, the 
freedom to communicate and the chance to participate 
in shaping society as citizens with rights and 
responsibilities. 
 No one says that achieving those ambitions will 
be easy. There will be false starts and wrong turns 
along the way, not least where countries have inherited 
sectarian and regional divisions, weak political parties, 
State institutions enfeebled by misuse and a politics 
distorted by the false choice between repression on the 
one hand and Islamist extremism on the other. 
 The long process of developing a new and 
accountable Government is just beginning. And across 
the region, we cannot guarantee that the process of 
reform is irreversible. But let us be clear. These 
developments present a great opportunity for many 
who have long been sold short by their Governments, 
and there is an opportunity and responsibility for all of 
us, too. 
 Just as after 1989 we helped those who tore down 
the Berlin Wall to build robust democracies and market 
economies, just as in 1994 we welcomed South Africa 
back into the commonwealth of nations when it chose 
the path of reconciliation and democracy instead of 
racial conflict, so now in 2011, as people in North 
Africa and the Middle East stand up and give voice to 
their hopes for more open and democratic societies, we 
have an opportunity, and, I would say, a responsibility 
to help them. 
 Now the mistake we often make in the West is to 
think that because the people in this region want 
democracy, they will want it in the same way and with 
the same outcomes that we do. We should not be trying 
to impose Western values or a single template on the 
region. Democracy is a process, not an event. 
Participatory Government involves so much more than 
just the simple act of voting. The Assembly heard not 
long ago from President Ahmadinejad. He did not 
remind us that he runs a country where they may have 
elections, of a sort, but they also repress freedom of 
speech. They do everything they can to avoid the 
accountability of a free media. They violently prevent 
demonstrations. And yes, they detain and torture those 
who argue for a better future. So we should never 
pretend that having elections is enough. The building 
blocks of democracy have to be patiently developed 
from the grass roots up. The process will be different in 
every country. And it is not for us to dictate how Arab 
nations should respond to those challenges, or to 
lecture them about how to do it. But there is an 
important opportunity for us to help, and we must seize 
it.  
 There are important lessons from what has 
happened in Libya. The Libyans liberated themselves. 
Ordinary Libyans from all walks of life came together 
and showed incredible resilience and bravery as they 
rose up and drove out Al-Qadhafi. The people of 
Benghazi, the brave fighters of Misurata, the people of 
Zawiyah, the warriors from the Nafusa Mountains, all 
of them showed incredible courage in liberating their 
country. The National Transitional Council, which 
demonstrated great leadership, not least as Tripoli fell, 
urged people to avoid reprisals and to look to the 
future — a message that still holds true today.  
 That revolution truly belongs to the Libyan 
people. The United Nations played a vital role 
authorizing international action. But let us be clear; the 
United Nations is no more effective than the nation 
States that come together to enforce its will. And on 
this occasion a coalition of nations across the Western 
and Arab world had the will to act. In doing so, they 
stopped Benghazi from joining Srebrenica and Rwanda 
in history’s painful roll call of massacres that the world 
failed to prevent. Today, Tripoli and Benghazi are 
cities transformed. Where there was fear, now there is 
hope and an optimism and belief that are truly 
inspiring.  
 But there are challenges ahead, not just in Libya 
but all across the region. Economies in the region have 
underperformed when compared with their peers. In 
1960, Egypt’s gross domestic product per capita was 
comparable with Korea’s. Today it has fallen to around 
just one fifth of the size. Across the region, some 
countries dependent on oil revenues, and others held 
back by heavy State control have failed to diversify 
and create jobs in productive new sectors and failed to 
connect themselves to the economies of the region and 
the wider world.  
  
 
11-50865 26 
 
 Indeed, less than four per cent of North African 
trade is within the region, making it the least integrated 
neighbourhood in our world. And the promise of 
economic reform has not been fulfilled. Too often 
people were told economic reform would bring them 
market economies with greater freedom to start up 
businesses, to trade, to grow and to create wealth. But 
it did not. It brought them corrupt and crony 
capitalism. Now the future is for the people of this 
region to determine, but I would urge them not to reject 
something they have never had — a genuine, open, fair 
and transparent market economy, which has proved the 
world over to be the best way to create jobs and 
wealth. And the need for economic success is vital, 
because this is a region where 60 per cent of the 
population is under 25, and youth unemployment is 
nearly double the world average. 
 It is a region that must create 50 million new jobs 
by 2020 just to keep pace with its population; that 
means 700,000 new jobs every year in Egypt alone. 
And these jobs should not be just for men. Let us be 
honest. It is not just the men of the region who want a 
job and a voice. The unemployment rate for Egyptian 
women is more than three times that of men. And it is 
not only the economy where they are denied the chance 
to play a fuller role. It is society and politics and 
culture too. But look at the crowds in Freedom Square 
and we see it is the women too, finding their voices, 
showing clearly that they want to play a part in 
building their future. 
 So, in this historic period, when the voice of this 
region is finally being heard, there is now a unique 
opportunity for women to fulfil their ambitions too. 
This is not just in the interests of women. It is in the 
interests of those countries as a whole. Let us be clear. 
You cannot build strong economies, open societies and 
inclusive political systems if you lock out women. So 
the Arab Spring will not succeed if the opportunities 
that are opening up are denied to half of the 
population.  
 Now, of course, the actions we take to support the 
people in each country must be tailored to that country, 
with respect for its particular culture, history and 
tradition. What is right for Libya will not necessarily 
be right for everywhere else. But the international 
community has found its voice in Libya, and we must 
not now lose our nerve. We must have the confidence 
to speak out and act as necessary to support those who 
seek new freedoms.  
 In the European Union, it is time to ensure that 
the billions of euros we spend in this region each year 
are used to support reform that will meet the 
aspirations of the people. And there should be no more 
excuses for denying the people of the region fair access 
to our markets, including in agriculture. Here at the 
United Nations, we have a responsibility to stand up 
against regimes that persecute their people. We need to 
see reform in Yemen. And above all, on Syria, it is time 
for the members of the Security Council to act. We 
must now adopt a credible resolution, threatening 
tough sanctions. 
 Of course we should always act with care when it 
comes to the internal affairs of a sovereign State. But 
we cannot allow this to be an excuse for indifference in 
the face of a regime that, week after week, arrests, 
intimidates, tortures and kills people who are 
peacefully trying to make their voices heard.  
 The voice of the African Union is vital too. Africa 
has rightly challenged the world to meet its aid 
commitments. I am proud that Britain will meet its 
commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross national 
income from 2013. And all the countries that made 
promises at Gleneagles and elsewhere must meet those 
promises too. In the case of Britain, it means we have 
been able to provide £124 million of emergency aid to 
3 million people facing starvation in the Horn of 
Africa. But at the same time, Africa must meet its 
responsibilities too.  
 Many will find it hard to understand why 
countries in southern Africa which fought so hard to 
throw off oppression themselves, have been so slow to 
respond to the Arab Spring. Of course, I recognize that 
many have long been committed to non-intervention. 
But my argument is that where action is necessary, 
legal and right, to fail to act is to fail those who need 
our help. So it is welcome that the African Union is 
taking steps to recognize the National Transitional 
Council in Libya, as many African countries have 
already done. Africa’s responsibility now is to embrace 
and support Libya’s new, inclusive and democratic 
future. And this must include ensuring that those 
wanted for serious crimes are brought to justice, and 
that the wealth stolen from the Libyan people is 
returned to them.  
 We all have a responsibility to the Palestinians 
too. A key part of the Arab Spring is the right of 
Palestinians to have a viable State of their own, living 
 
 
27 11-50865 
 
in peace, alongside a safe and secure State of Israel. 
And I strongly support this. There has been much 
speculation about what will happen here this week. Let 
us be clear about one fact. No resolution can, on its 
own, substitute for the political will necessary to bring 
peace. Peace will only come when Palestinians and 
Israelis sit down and talk to each other, make 
compromises, build trust and agree. So our role must 
be to support this, to defeat those who embrace 
violence, to stop the growth of settlements and to 
support Palestinians and Israelis alike to make peace.  
 But the opportunity in Libya and elsewhere in the 
region is not just about achieving a more open society, 
prosperity and the building blocks of democracy for 
their own sake — it is about security too. Some have 
argued that stability in the Arab world can only be 
achieved by the tight control of strong authoritarian 
regimes and that reform is a threat to stability. In fact, 
the opposite is true. Reform is the basis of long-term 
stability. Authoritarianism threatens it.  
 While there is never a justification for resorting 
to terror, if people’s hunger for a job and a voice are 
denied, there is a real risk that the frustration and the 
alienation they feel will cause them to be drawn to 
more violent and extremist responses. That is not just a 
problem for one region. It is a problem for all of us. 
Here, in this great city, where 10 years ago, people of 
90 different nationalities were killed in the most 
horrific terrorist attack in history, we must recognize 
that political and economic reform in the Middle East 
is not just good in its own right, but that it is also a key 
part of how, in the end, we will defeat Al-Qaida.  
 Of course, we must meet terrorist activity with a 
strong and resolute security response. Al-Qaida and its 
offshoots must know that they will have no safe hiding 
place to plot or recruit young men to train as terrorists. 
But in the long term, we must defeat not only the 
terrorists, but the extremist ideology that feeds them. 
Al-Qaida’s poisonous ideology has thrived on 
repression. Democracy is what it fears most. People are 
not in Tahrir Square in Cairo and Freedom Square in 
Libya for an Islamist caliphate, but for a job, a voice 
and a future. And we must heed their call, for their 
freedom and for the security of us all.Allow me at the outset to 
congratulate Mr. Al-Nasser on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. I wish to assure 
him of India’s full cooperation in the conduct of the 
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly. 
 It is also my great pleasure to welcome in our 
midst the new State of South Sudan. 
 We meet during this session of the General 
Assembly at a time of great uncertainty and profound 
change. Until a few years ago, the world had taken for 
granted the benefits of globalization and global 
interdependence. Today we are being called upon to 
cope with the negative dimensions of those very 
phenomena. Economic, social and political events in 
different parts of the world have coalesced, and their 
adverse impact is now being felt across countries and 
continents. 
 The world economy is in trouble. The shoots of 
recovery which were visible after the economic and 
financial crisis of 2008 have yet to blossom. In many 
respects, the crisis has deepened even further. 
 The traditional engines of the global economy, 
including the United States, Europe and Japan, which 
are also the sources of global economic and financial 
stability, are today faced with continued economic 
slowdown. Recessionary trends in those countries are 
affecting confidence in world financial and capital 
markets. These developments are bound to have a 
negative impact on developing countries, which also 
have to bear the additional burden of inflationary 
pressures. 
 There has been unprecedented social and political 
upheaval in West Asia, the Gulf and North Africa. The 
peoples of those regions are demanding the right to 
shape their own future. Energy and food prices are 
once again spiralling and introducing fresh instability, 
especially for developing countries. 
 The Palestinian question remains unresolved and 
a source of great instability and violence. India is 
steadfast in its support for the Palestinian people’s 
struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable and united 
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, 
living within secure and recognizable borders side by 
side and at peace with Israel. We look forward to 
welcoming Palestine as an equal Member of the United 
Nations. 
 Terrorism continues to rear its ugly head and take 
a grievous toll of innocent lives. New threats to 
international security have emerged. At a time when 
the world needs more international commerce, the sea 
lanes of communication across the Indian Ocean are 
under siege. Acts of piracy are being carried out with 
impunity from lands that are beyond the writ of any 
functioning State or international accountability. 
 Iniquitous growth, inadequate job and education 
opportunities and the denial of basic human freedoms 
are leading to a growing radicalization of the youth, 
intolerance and extremism. 
  
 
11-51360 10 
 
 We have no choice but to meet these challenges 
head-on. We will succeed if we adopt a cooperative 
rather than a confrontational approach. We will 
succeed if we embrace once again the principles on 
which the United Nations was founded: 
internationalism and multilateralism. More importantly, 
we will succeed if our efforts have legitimacy and are 
pursued not just within the framework of the law but 
also in the spirit of the law. 
 The observance of the rule of law is as important 
in international affairs as it is within countries. 
Societies cannot be reordered from outside through 
military force. People in all countries have the right to 
choose their own destiny and decide their own future. 
 The international community has a role to play in 
assisting in the processes of transition and institution-
building, but the idea that prescriptions should be 
imposed from outside is fraught with danger. 
 Action taken under the authority of the United 
Nations must respect the unity, territorial integrity, 
sovereignty and independence of individual States. 
Correspondingly, governments are duty-bound to their 
citizens to create conditions that enable them to freely 
determine their pathways to development. This is the 
essence of democracy and fundamental human 
freedoms. 
 There are many other things that we can do. We 
must address the issue of the deficit in global 
governance. We need a stronger and more effective 
United Nations. We need a United Nations that is 
sensitive to the aspirations of everyone, rich or poor, 
big or small. For this, the United Nations and its 
principal organs, the General Assembly and the 
Security Council, must be revitalized and reformed. 
 The reform and expansion of the Security 
Council are essential if it is to reflect contemporary 
reality. Such an outcome will enhance the Council’s 
credibility and effectiveness in dealing with global 
issues. Early reform of the Security Council must be 
pursued with renewed vigour and urgently enacted. 
 We should not allow the global economic 
slowdown to become a pretext for building walls 
around ourselves through protectionism or erecting 
barriers to the movement of people, services and 
capital. Effective ways and means must be deployed to 
promote the coordination of the macroeconomic 
policies of the major economies. The reform of the 
governance systems of international financial 
institutions should be pursued with speed and 
efficiency. 
 The development agenda must be brought firmly 
back to centre stage in United Nations priorities. We 
need a much more determined effort to ensure 
balanced, inclusive and sustainable development for 
the benefit of vast sections of humanity. Each of us can 
contribute to this task, but we can achieve far more if 
we act in partnership. 
 In the past few decades, India has lifted tens of 
millions of its people out of abject poverty. We are in a 
position to feed our population better, educate them 
better and widen their economic choices. However, we 
still have a very long way to go. 
 We wish to accelerate the pace of India’s 
transformation in partnership with the international 
community. A fast-growing India can expand the 
boundaries of the global economy. A democratic, plural 
and secular India can contribute to tolerance and 
peaceful coexistence among nations. 
 Developing countries need investment, 
technology and market access for their products. They 
need assistance in the areas of education, health, 
women’s empowerment and agriculture. During the 
recently held fourth United Nations Conference on the 
Least Developed Countries Conference in Istanbul in 
May 2011, India strengthened its partnership with the 
least developed countries through significantly 
enhanced lines of credit and assistance in capacity-
building. 
 We should pay particular attention to Africa. 
Africa’s richest resources are not its minerals but its 
people. We must empower them and open the doors for 
them to human advances through technology, education 
and skills development. 
 At the second India-Africa Forum Summit in 
Addis Ababa earlier this year, India offered lines of 
credit worth $5 billion and an additional $700 million 
in grant assistance for human resource development, 
technology transfer and building new institutions. 
 The United Nations should lead efforts in the area 
of food security. We need more cooperation in 
agricultural technologies, water conservation, land 
usage and productivity, and stability in commodity 
prices. 
 
 
11 11-51360 
 
 Developing countries need a peaceful external 
environment in which to grow. The fight against 
terrorism must be unrelenting. There cannot be 
selective approaches in dealing with terrorist groups or 
the infrastructure of terrorism. Terrorism has to be 
fought across all fronts. In South Asia there are 
encouraging signs of cooperation in the area of 
security, as exemplified in India’s cooperation with 
Bangladesh. Such cooperation is adding to the security 
of both our countries. 
 However, the recent assassination of 
Mr. Burhanuddin Rabbani in Kabul is a chilling 
reminder of the designs of the enemies of peace in 
Afghanistan. It is essential that the process of nation-
building and reconciliation in that country succeed. 
This is vital for ensuring peace and security in the 
region. India will play its part in helping the people of 
Afghanistan build a better future for themselves, just as 
we are doing in other countries in South Asia. We will 
do so because prosperity and stability in our region are 
indivisible. 
 We wish to see an open, inclusive and transparent 
architecture of regional cooperation in the Asia-Pacific 
region and peaceful settlement of disputes. I call upon 
the United Nations to evolve a comprehensive and 
effective response to the problem of piracy in the Red 
Sea and off the coast of Somalia. As a littoral State of 
the Indian Ocean, India is ready to work with other 
countries in that regard. Simultaneously, the 
international community should continue with efforts 
to restore stability in Somalia. We have joined 
international efforts to provide humanitarian assistance 
to the countries afflicted with severe famine and 
drought in the Horn of Africa, specifically Somalia, 
Kenya and Djibouti. 
 Nuclear proliferation continues to be a threat to 
international security. The action plan put forward by 
former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world provides, even 
today, a concrete road map for achieving nuclear 
disarmament in a time-bound, universal, 
non-discriminatory, phased and verifiable manner. I 
commend the United Nations for its efforts in focusing 
world attention on nuclear safety. Our plans for 
utilizing nuclear power to meet our energy needs hinge 
on full satisfaction of our concerns about the safety of 
nuclear energy. We have undertaken a thorough review 
of the safety of our nuclear plants. 
 The perspectives I have outlined to the Assembly 
are those that have guided our actions in the Security 
Council since India became a non-permanent member 
of the Council in January. There are still millions of 
people living in poverty across the world. Their plight 
has worsened, through no fault of theirs, due to the 
global economic and financial crisis of recent years. 
The actions of Governments around the world are 
therefore under close scrutiny. It is vitally important 
that through our actions and deeds we renew the 
people’s faith in the Charter and objectives of the 
United Nations. I am confident that we can do this 
through acts of statesmanship, foresight and collective 
effort. India stands ready to play its part in this noble 
endeavour.Israel has extended its 
hand in peace from the moment it was established 
63 years ago. On behalf of Israel and the Jewish 
people, I extend that hand again today. I extend it to 
the people of Egypt and Jordan, with renewed 
friendship for neighbours with whom we have made 
peace. I extend it to the people of Turkey, with respect 
and goodwill. I extend it to the people of Libya and 
Tunisia, with admiration for those trying to build a 
democratic future. I extend it to the other peoples of 
North Africa and the Arabian peninsula, with whom we 
want to forge a new beginning. I extend it to the people 
of Syria, Lebanon and Iran, with awe at the courage of 
those fighting brutal repression.  
 Most especially, I extend my hand to the 
Palestinian people, with whom we seek a just and 
lasting peace. 
 In Israel, our hope for peace never wanes. Our 
scientists, doctors and innovators apply their genius to 
improving the world of tomorrow. Our artists and our 
writers enrich the heritage of humanity. Now, I know 
that this is not exactly the image of Israel that is often 
portrayed in this Hall. After all, it was here in 1975 that 
the age-old yearning of my people to restore our 
national life in our ancient biblical homeland was 
branded, shamefully, as racism. It was right here in 
1980 that the historic peace agreement between Israel 
and Egypt was not praised, but denounced. It is here, 
year after year, that Israel is unjustly singled out for 
condemnation. It is singled out for condemnation more 
often than all the nations of the world combined. 
Twenty-one out of 27 relevant General Assembly 
resolutions condemn Israel, the one true democracy in 
the Middle East.  
 This is an unfortunate part of the United Nations 
institution. It is the theatre of the absurd. It not only 
casts Israel as the villain, it often casts real villains in 
leading roles. Al-Qadhafi’s Libya chaired the 
Commission on Human Rights. Saddam’s Iraq headed 
the Conference on Disarmament.  
 One might say that is the past. Well, here is what 
is happening now — right now, today. Hizbullah-
controlled Lebanon now presides over the Security 
Council. This means, in effect, that a terror 
organization presides over the body entrusted with 
guaranteeing the world’s security. One could not make 
this up. Here in the United Nations, automatic 
majorities can decide anything. They can decide that 
the sun rises in the west. They can also decide — they 
have decided — that the Western Wall in Jerusalem, 
Judaism’s holiest place, is occupied Palestinian 
territory. 
 Yet, even here in the General Assembly, the truth 
can sometimes break through. In 1984, when I was 
appointed Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I 
 
 
37 11-51185 
 
visited the great rabbi of Lubavitch. He said to me — 
and I do not want anyone here to be offended, because 
from personal experience of serving here, I know there 
are many honourable men and women, many capable 
and decent people, serving their nations here — but 
here is what the rebbe said to me. He said, “You will be 
serving in a house of many lies”. And then he said, 
“Remember that, even in the darkest place, the light of 
a single candle can be seen far and wide”. Today I hope 
that the light of truth will shine, if only for a few 
minutes, in a Hall that for too long has been a place of 
darkness for my country.  
 As Israel’s Prime Minister, I did not come here to 
win applause. I came here to speak the truth. The truth 
is that Israel wants peace. The truth is that I want 
peace. The truth is that in the Middle East, at all times 
but especially during these turbulent days, peace must 
be anchored in security. The truth is that we can 
achieve peace not through United Nations resolutions, 
but only through direct negotiations between the 
parties. The truth is that so far the Palestinians have 
refused to negotiate. The truth is that Israel wants 
peace with a Palestinian State, but the Palestinians 
want a State without peace. The truth is that the 
Assembly should not let that happen. 
 When I first came here 27 years ago, the world 
was divided between East and West. Since then, the 
Cold War ended, great civilizations have risen from 
centuries of slumber, hundreds of millions have been 
lifted out of poverty, countless more are poised to 
follow, and the remarkable thing is that, so far, this 
monumental historic shift has largely occurred 
peacefully.  
 Yet a malignancy is now growing between East 
and West that threatens the peace of all. It seeks not to 
liberate, but to enslave; not to build, but to destroy. 
That malignancy is militant Islam. It cloaks itself in the 
mantle of a great faith, yet it murders Jews, Christians 
and Muslims alike with unforgiving impartiality. On 
11 September 2001, it killed thousands of Americans 
and left the twin towers in smouldering ruins. Last 
night, I laid a wreath on the 9/11 memorial. It was 
deeply moving. However, as I was going there, one 
thing echoed in my mind: the outrageous words of the 
President of Iran at this rostrum yesterday. He implied 
that 9/11 was an American conspiracy. Some left this 
Hall; everyone should have. 
 Since 9/11, militant Islamists have slaughtered 
countless other innocents in London and Madrid, in 
Baghdad and Mumbai, in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, and 
in every part of Israel. I believe that the greatest danger 
facing our world is that this fanaticism will arm itself 
with nuclear weapons, and that is precisely what Iran is 
trying to do. Can we imagine that man who ranted here 
yesterday armed with nuclear weapons? 
 The international community must stop Iran 
before it is too late. If Iran is not stopped, we will all 
face the spectre of nuclear terrorism, and the Arab 
Spring could soon become an Iranian winter. That 
would be a tragedy. Millions of Arabs have taken to the 
streets to replace tyranny with liberty, and no one 
would benefit more than Israel if those committed to 
freedom and peace would prevail. 
 That is my fervent hope, but as the Prime 
Minister of Israel, I cannot risk the future of the Jewish 
State on wishful thinking. Leaders must see reality as it 
is, not as it ought to be. We must do our best to shape 
the future, but we cannot wish away the dangers of the 
present. 
 The world around Israel is definitely becoming 
more dangerous. Militant Islam has already taken over 
Lebanon and Gaza. It is determined to tear apart the 
peace treaties between Israel and Egypt and between 
Israel and Jordan. It has poisoned many Arab minds 
against Jews and Israel, and against America and the 
West. It opposes not the policies of Israel but the 
existence of Israel. 
 Now, some argue that if we want to slow down 
the spread of militant Islam, especially in these 
turbulent times, Israel must hurry to make concessions, 
including territorial compromises. And this theory 
sounds simple. Basically it goes like this: leave the 
territory and peace will be advanced. The moderates 
will be strengthened; the radicals will be kept at bay. 
And do not worry about the pesky details of how Israel 
will actually defend itself; international troops will do 
the job. 
 These people say to me constantly, “Just make a 
sweeping offer, and everything will work out”. There is 
only one problem with that theory. We have tried it and 
it has not worked. In 2000, Israel made a sweeping 
peace offer that met virtually all the Palestinian 
demands. Chairman Arafat rejected it. The Palestinians 
then launched a terror attack that claimed 1,000 Israeli 
lives. 
  
 
11-51185 38 
 
 In 2008, Prime Minister Olmert afterwards made 
an even more sweeping offer. President Abbas did not 
even respond to it. But Israel did more than just make 
sweeping offers. We actually left territory. We 
withdrew from Lebanon in 2000 and from every square 
inch of Gaza in 2005. That did not calm the militant 
Islamic storm that threatens us. It only brought the 
storm closer and made it stronger. Hizbullah and 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets against our cities 
from the very territories we had vacated.  
 When Israel left Lebanon and Gaza, the 
moderates did not defeat the radicals; the moderates 
were devoured by the radicals. And I regret to say that 
international troops, including those of the United 
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the European 
Union Border Assistance Mission in Gaza, did not stop 
the radicals from attacking Israel. 
 We left Gaza hoping for peace. We did not freeze 
the settlements in Gaza; we uprooted them. We did 
exactly what the theory says. We got out, went back to 
the 1967 borders and dismantled the settlements. I do 
not think people remember how far we went to achieve 
this. We uprooted thousands of people from their 
homes. We pulled children out of their schools and 
their kindergartens. We bulldozed synagogues. We 
even moved loved ones from their graves. And then, 
having done all that, we gave the keys of Gaza to 
President Abbas. 
 The theory says that it should have all worked 
out, and that President Abbas and the Palestinian 
Authority could now build a peaceful state in Gaza. We 
all remember that the entire world applauded our 
withdrawal as an act of great statesmanship and a bold 
act of peace. But we did not get peace. We got war. We 
got Iran, which, through its proxy, Hamas, promptly 
kicked out the Palestinian Authority. The Palestinian 
Authority collapsed in a day — in one day.  
 President Abbas just said from this rostrum that 
the Palestinians are armed only with their hopes and 
dreams. Yes, they are armed with their hopes, dreams 
and 10,000 missiles and Grad rockets supplied by Iran, 
not to mention the river of lethal weapons now flowing 
into Gaza from the Sinai, from Libya and from 
elsewhere. 
 Thousands of missiles have already rained down 
on our cities. So it might be understand, given all this, 
why Israelis rightly ask, “What is to prevent this from 
happening again in the West Bank?” Most of the major 
cities in the south of our country are within a few 
dozen kilometres from Gaza, but in the centre of the 
country opposite the West Bank, our cities are a few 
hundred metres or at most a few kilometres from the 
edge of the West Bank. 
 So I want to ask: Would anyone here bring danger 
so close to their cities and families? Would they act so 
recklessly with the lives of their citizens? Israel is 
prepared to have a Palestinian State in the West Bank, 
but we are not prepared to have another Gaza there. 
And that is why we need to have real security 
arrangements, which the Palestinians simply refuse to 
negotiate with us. 
 Israelis remember the bitter lessons of Gaza. 
Many of Israel’s critics ignore them. They 
irresponsibly advise Israel to go down this same 
perilous path again. We read what these people say and 
it is as if nothing happened. They just repeat the same 
advice and the same formulas as though none of this 
happened. And these critics continue to press Israel to 
make far-reaching concessions without first assuring 
Israel’s security. They praise those who unwittingly 
feed the insatiable crocodile of militant Islam as bold 
statesmen. They cast as enemies of peace those of us 
who insist that we must first erect a sturdy barrier to 
keep the crocodile out, or at the very least jam an iron 
bar between its gaping jaws. 
 So in the face of the labels and the libels, Israel 
must heed better advice. It is better to receive bad press 
than a good eulogy, and better still would be a fair 
press whose sense of history extends beyond breakfast 
and that recognizes Israel’s legitimate security 
concerns. I believe that in serious peace negotiations, 
these needs and concerns can be properly addressed, 
but they will not be addressed without negotiations.  
 And the needs are many, because Israel is such a 
tiny country. Without Judea and Samaria — the West 
Bank — Israel is all of nine miles wide. I want to put 
that in perspective for all of us in this city. It is about 
two-thirds the length of Manhattan. It is the distance 
between Battery Park and Columbia University. And 
let us not forget that the people who live in Brooklyn 
and New Jersey are considerably nicer than some of 
Israel’s neighbours.  
 So how does one protect such a tiny country, 
surrounded by people sworn to its destruction and 
armed to the teeth by Iran? Obviously, one cannot 
defend it from within that narrow space alone. Israel 
 
 
39 11-51185 
 
needs greater strategic depth, and that is exactly why 
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) did not require 
Israel to leave all of the territories it captured in the 
Six-Day War. It talked about withdrawal from 
territories to secure and defensible boundaries. And to 
defend itself, Israel must therefore maintain a long-
term Israeli military presence in critical strategic areas 
in the West Bank. 
 I explained this to President Abbas. He answered 
that if a Palestinian State was to be a sovereign 
country, it could never accept such arrangements. Why 
not? The United States has had troops in Japan, 
Germany and South Korea for more than a half a 
century. Britain has an air base in Cyprus. France has 
forces in three independent African nations. None of 
those States claim that they are not sovereign countries.  
 There are many other vital security issues that 
also must be addressed. Take the issue of airspace. 
Again, Israel’s small dimensions create huge security 
problems. The United States can be crossed by jet 
airplane in six hours. To fly across Israel, it takes three 
minutes. So is Israel’s tiny airspace to be chopped in 
half and given to a Palestinian State not at peace with 
Israel?  
 Our major international airport is a few 
kilometres from the West Bank. Without peace, will 
our planes become targets for anti-aircraft missiles 
placed in the adjacent Palestinian State? And how will 
we stop the smuggling into the West Bank? It is not 
merely the West Bank; it is the West Bank mountains, 
which dominate the coastal plain below where most of 
Israel’s population sits. How could we prevent the 
smuggling into those mountains of missiles that could 
be fired at our cities?  
 I bring up these problems because they are not 
theoretical problems. They are very real, and for 
Israelis, they are life-and-death matters. All of these 
potential cracks in Israel’s security have to be sealed in 
a peace agreement before a Palestinian State is 
declared, not afterwards, because if it is left until 
afterwards they will not be sealed. And these problems 
will explode in our face and explode the peace.  
 The Palestinians should first make peace with 
Israel and then get their State. But I also want to say 
this. After such a peace agreement is signed, Israel will 
not be the last country to welcome a Palestinian State 
as a new Member of the United Nations. We will be the 
first.  
 There is one more thing. Hamas has been 
violating international law by holding our soldier Gilad 
Shalit captive for five years. They have not allowed 
even one Red Cross visit. He is held in a dungeon, in 
darkness, against all international norms. Gilad Shalit 
is the son of Aviva and Noam Shalit. He is the 
grandson of Zvi Shalit, who escaped the Holocaust by 
coming to the land of Israel as a boy in the 1930s. 
Gilad Shalit is the son of every Israeli family. Every 
nation represented here should demand his immediate 
release. If we want to adopt a resolution about the 
Middle East today, that is the resolution we should 
adopt.  
 Last year in Israel at Bar-Ilan University, and this 
year in the Knesset and the United States Congress, I 
laid out my vision for peace, in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State. Yes, the 
Jewish State. After all, this is the body that recognized 
the Jewish State 64 years ago. Now, does the Assembly 
not think that it is about time that Palestinians did the 
same?  
 The Jewish State of Israel will always protect the 
rights of all of its minorities, including the more than 
1 million Arab citizens of Israel. I wish I could say the 
same thing about a future Palestinian State, for as 
Palestinian officials made clear the other day — in 
fact, I think they did so right here in New York — the 
Palestinian State would not allow any Jews. They 
would be Jew-free — Judenrein. That is ethnic 
cleansing. There are laws today in Ramallah that make 
the selling of land to Jews punishable by death. That is 
racism. And the Assembly knows which laws this 
evokes.  
 Israel has no intention whatsoever of changing 
the democratic character of our State. We just do not 
want the Palestinians to try to change the Jewish 
character of our State. We want them to give up the 
fantasy of flooding Israel with millions of Palestinians.  
 President Abbas just stood here and said that the 
settlements lie at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian 
conflicts. Well, that is odd. Our conflict was raging for 
nearly half a century before there was a single Israeli 
settlement in the West Bank. So, if what President 
Abbas is saying was true, then I guess that the 
settlements he is talking about are Tel Aviv, Haifa, 
Jaffa and Be?er Sheva. Maybe that is what he meant the 
other day when he said that Israel had been occupying 
  
 
11-51185 40 
 
Palestinian land for 63 years. He did not say from 
1967; he said from 1948.  
 I hope that somebody will bother to ask him this 
question, because it illustrates a simple truth. The core 
of the conflict is not the settlements; the settlements 
are a result of the conflict. The settlements are an issue 
that has to be addressed and resolved in the course of 
negotiations. But the core of the conflict has always 
been, and unfortunately remains, the refusal of the 
Palestinians to recognize a Jewish State within any 
border.  
 I think it is time that the Palestinian leadership 
recognize what every serious international leader from 
Lord Balfour and David Lloyd George in 1917, to 
President Truman in 1948, to President Obama just two 
days ago right here, has recognized — that Israel is the 
Jewish State.  
 I would ask President Abbas to stop walking 
around this issue, recognize the Jewish State, and make 
peace with us. In such a genuine peace, Israel is 
prepared to make painful compromises. We believe that 
the Palestinians should be neither the citizens of Israel 
nor its subjects. They should live in a free State of their 
own. But they should be ready, like us, for 
compromise. And we will know that they are ready for 
compromise and peace when they start taking Israel’s 
security requirements seriously and when they stop 
denying our historical connection to our ancient 
homeland. I often hear them accuse Israel of Judaizing 
Jerusalem. That is like accusing America of 
Americanizing Washington, D.C., or the British of 
Anglicizing London. Why are we called Jews? Because 
we come from Judea.  
 In my office in Jerusalem, there is an ancient 
seal. It is a signet ring of a Jewish official from the 
time of the Bible. The seal was found right next to the 
Western Wall and it dates back 2,700 years to the time 
of King Hezekiah. Now, the name of a Jewish official 
is inscribed on the ring in Hebrew. His name was 
Netanyahu. That is my last name. My first name, 
Benjamin, can be traced back a 1,000 years to 
Benjamin — Binyamin — the son of Jacob, who was 
also known as Israel. Jacob and his 12 sons roamed 
these same hills of Judea and Samaria 4,000 years ago, 
and there has been a continuous Jewish presence in the 
land ever since.  
 Those Jews who were exiled from our land — 
Jews in Spain, on the eve of their expulsion; Jews in 
Ukraine, fleeing the pogroms; Jews fighting in the 
Warsaw Ghetto, as the Nazis were circling around it — 
never stopped dreaming of coming back. They never 
stopped praying, they never stopped yearning. They 
whispered: “Next year in Jerusalem. Next year in the 
promised land”.  
 As the Prime Minister of Israel, I speak for a 
hundred generations of Jews who were dispersed 
throughout the lands and suffered every evil under the 
sun, but who never gave up hope of restoring their 
national life in the one and only Jewish State.  
 I continue to hope that President Abbas will be 
my partner in peace. I have worked hard to advance 
that peace. The day I came into office, I called for 
direct negotiations without preconditions. President 
Abbas did not respond. I outlined a vision of peace of 
two States for two peoples. He still did not respond. I 
removed hundreds of roadblocks and checkpoints to 
ease freedom of movement in the Palestinian areas. 
This facilitated fantastic growth in the Palestinian 
economy. But again, there was no response. I took the 
unprecedented step of freezing new building in the 
settlements for 10 months. No Prime Minister had done 
that before, ever. Once again, I hear applause, but there 
was no response. No response.  
 In the past few weeks, American officials have 
put forward ideas to restart peace talks. There were 
things in those ideas about borders that I did not like. 
There were things there about the Jewish State that I 
am sure the Palestinians did not like. But despite all of 
my reservations, I was willing to move forward on 
those American ideas. Why does President Abbas not 
join me? We have to stop negotiating about the 
negotiations. Let us just get on with it. Let us negotiate 
peace.  
 I spent years defending Israel on the battlefield. I 
spent decades defending Israel in the court of public 
opinion. President Abbas has dedicated his life to 
advancing the Palestinian cause. Must this conflict 
continue for generations, or will we enable our children 
and our grandchildren to speak in the years ahead of 
how we found a way to end it? That is what we should 
aim for, and that is what I believe we can achieve.  
 In two and a half years, President Abbas and I 
have met in Jerusalem only once, even though my door 
has always been open to him. If he wishes, I will come 
to Ramallah. Actually, I have a better suggestion. We 
have both just flown thousands of miles to New York. 
 
 
41 11-51185 
 
Now we are in the same city; we are in the same 
building. So let us meet here today, at the United 
Nations. Who is there to stop us? What is there to stop 
us? If we genuinely want peace, what is there to stop 
us from meeting today and beginning peace 
negotiations? 
 I suggest that we talk openly and honestly. Let us 
listen to one another. Let us, as we say in the Middle 
East, talk dugri. That means “straightforward”. I will 
tell him my needs and concerns; he will tell me his. 
And with God’s help, we will find the common ground 
of peace.  
 There is an old Arab saying that one cannot 
applaud with one hand. Well, the same is true of peace. 
I cannot make peace alone. I cannot make peace 
without an interlocutor. President Abbas, I extend my 
hand — the hand of Israel — in peace. I hope that he 
will grasp that hand. We are both the sons of Abraham. 
My people call him Avraham; his people call him 
Ibrahim. We share the same patriarch. We dwell in the 
same land. Our destinies are intertwined. Let us realize 
the vision of Isaiah: “The people who walk in darkness 
will see a great light”. (The Holy Bible, Isaiah 9:2). Let 
that light be the light of peace.As we say in Maori, 
to all peoples and to all voices, greetings, greetings, 
greetings to all. 
 I speak at the end of a period of intense United 
Nations dialogue and engagement. This year’s general 
debate provides unparalleled opportunities to reaffirm 
the unique multilateral role of the United Nations. And 
there has been much to debate. The events set in 
motion by a single Tunisian street vendor have 
transformed much of the Middle East and North Africa. 
People have displayed extraordinary courage in 
claiming their rights and freedoms. The transition from 
dictatorship to democracy will not be easy; it will not 
be quick; but it must be achieved. 
 For others, the struggle continues. We still look 
for change in Yemen; we still look for change in Syria. 
Other challenges are highlighted by this debate. We 
heard from the President of South Africa and others 
how the global community must move swiftly to avert 
humanitarian disaster in the Horn of Africa. 
 We heard from the President of Nigeria how 
terror networks threaten international peace and 
security, and from the President of Tanzania about 
growing piracy on Africa’s eastern coast, from Somalia 
to Mozambique. We heard calls from the Indonesian 
Foreign Minister for bold measures to avert a renewed 
global financial crisis, and we heard from the President 
of Brazil about the challenge of empowering women to 
participate in political decision-making. 
 As this debate has demonstrated, much more 
remains to be done. Lives have also been wrenched by 
natural disasters in many countries, including my own. 
On 22 February 2011, we experienced what my Prime 
Minister called New Zealand’s darkest day. An 
earthquake struck Christchurch, our second-largest 
city. A total of 181 people were killed, a loss we share 
with 15 other countries whose citizens also died. We 
were humbled by the support we received, and, once 
again, I thank those who gave that help. 
  
 
11-51681 32 
 
 Despite that disaster and the literally thousands of 
aftershocks that have followed, New Zealanders remain 
resilient and optimistic. Christchurch is being rebuilt. 
Our economy is bouncing back and the country is 
returning to normal, not least by currently hosting the 
Rugby World Cup, a celebration of a game we love, in 
the country we love.  
 Despite some cause for economic optimism, the 
events of just the past week suggest that the world still 
faces what we have long feared: a second and even 
more disastrous decline into a double-dip recession. 
We do not relish the prospect of being dragged into 
another recession that is not of our own making. We 
caution others larger than ourselves against repeating 
the mistakes of the 1930s, when autarkic protectionism 
only deepened the Depression and led to war. 
 Instead, a successful conclusion of the Doha 
Round is one of the keys to prosperity, particularly for 
those of the global South. The February Christchurch 
earthquake was followed by the devastation wrought 
on our close friend and neighbour Japan. I reiterate our 
heartfelt sympathy to Japan, so steadfast in its support 
for New Zealand in our time of need. Those disasters, 
and others elsewhere, reinforced the importance of 
effective disaster preparedness, response and recovery. 
 New Zealand will work with the United Nations, 
non-governmental organizations and international 
agencies so that the lessons learned from Christchurch 
are shared with others so that those in regions as 
vulnerable as ours can be better prepared. Indeed, in 
those regions, disaster preparedness is no desktop 
exercise; it is a matter of survival. 
 Likewise, for our Pacific neighbours, another 
high risk, climate change, is no abstract threat, 
confined to thousands of pages of reports and esoteric 
debate; it is a fundamental question of existence. For 
the Pacific, climate change is a grave and present threat 
to livelihoods, security and well-being. 
 The Secretary-General experienced those 
challenges first-hand when he visited several Pacific 
States, including one post-conflict society, and another 
whose people see, on a daily basis, the dangers of 
rising oceans. He experienced real vulnerability when 
he saw that his hotel room, in addition to the towels 
and the telephone, was equipped with a lifejacket. And 
he saw the impact of rising oceans on the viability and 
survival of many communities when his plane had to 
be “wheels up” from the country’s airport — its major 
link with the world — before the tide came in. 
 Much more of that, and whole populations will be 
on the move, as they will be in other regions of the 
world as well, and that will have with implications for 
regional and international stability and security. Faced 
with that, it is self-evident that all relevant 
international forums, including the Security Council, 
must play their part in addressing the challenge. That 
means taking urgent and effective action on emissions 
reduction. It means strengthening adaptation in 
developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable. 
And it means acknowledging and planning for the 
security implications before they become threats to 
regional and international security. 
 This year’s Durban meeting must set us on the 
road to full implementation of the Cancun agreements. 
New Zealand is committed, both through the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
negotiations and its active assistance in the Pacific and 
elsewhere, to integrate adaptation and mitigation 
measures into its development activities. 
 New Zealand also initiated the Global Research 
Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Supported 
by more than 30 countries, the Alliance seeks to ensure 
that reducing agricultural emissions does not 
compromise global food security. 
 Increased agricultural productivity — the ability 
of many countries to feed themselves — is one of the 
great achievements of recent decades. Constraining 
agricultural production would put much of the world’s 
population at risk, and no country will do that. We 
must therefore maintain investment in agricultural 
research, so that productivity and efficiency gains can 
continue, but with fewer greenhouse-gas emissions. 
That is what the Global Alliance is all about.  
 New Zealand takes pride in its diversity. We are 
indigenous Maori; we are European; and we are the 
many peoples from the Asia-Pacific region and 
elsewhere who now call New Zealand home. We are 
also proud to be part of the Pacific Islands Forum, the 
foremost regional body. For 40 years, it has been 
central to the region’s efforts to address its own 
problems, be they the special development challenges 
of small, isolated, vulnerable island States, or halting 
and healing the impacts of violent conflict. It has done 
that in the time-honoured Pacific way, through 
 
 
33 11-51681 
 
respectful dialogue and cooperation and then through 
joint action. 
 Three weeks ago, at the Forum’s fortieth 
anniversary meeting in Auckland, Pacific leaders 
honoured that legacy by agreeing on measures aimed at 
converting Pacific potential into Pacific prosperity. 
 The themes of their discussions will resonate in 
other regions: strong, sustainable economic growth, 
protecting vulnerable populations and ensuring that 
they are healthy and educated and that they can have 
long lives. 
 A key focus of that meeting was the alarming 
incidence of non-communicable diseases, a scourge 
that is rapidly encircling the globe. Almost half of all 
New Zealand deaths relate to cancer and heart disease, 
but the situation is even more critical in many Pacific 
island countries, where diabetes in particular 
approaches epidemic proportions. We thank those who 
brought that cause here to the United Nations, 
particularly the countries members of the Caribbean 
Community. 
 With the 2012 United Nations Conference on 
Sustainable Development (Rio+20) very much in mind, 
Pacific Forum leaders also focused on sustainable 
development. Rio+20 will be an opportunity to assess 
the progress made since the 1992 Conference, take its 
agenda forward and highlight best practices. For 
example, New Zealand’s aid programme includes 
energy, agriculture and tourism initiatives that promote 
sustainable development. 
 Pacific peoples were navigating their ocean, the 
world’s largest, at a time when others were still 
confined to their coastal waters. New Zealand Maori 
call the Pacific the ocean guarded by the god Kiwa. 
Our region is uniquely dependent on its ocean. For 
those who call the Pacific home, the “green economy” 
is in reality a blue economy. Our ocean underpins 
livelihoods, food security and economic development. 
That is why Pacific leaders have focused on ensuring 
its sustainable development, management and 
conservation. That is why they made addressing 
acidification, pollution and illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing urgent matters. That is why our 
leaders want us to work towards integrated ocean 
management, with our own Pacific Oceanscape 
framework as a very good model. And that is why they 
called for Rio+20 to recognize the Pacific’s economic 
and environmental significance, and its contribution to 
sustainable development. At Rio+20, we will seek the 
support of the United Nations for that blue economy. 
 We work to protect the health of people and their 
environment, but we must also enhance collective 
security by advancing the disarmament agenda. Over 
the coming year, we must focus on the full 
implementation of the action plan agreed at the 2010 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As coordinator 
for the New Agenda Coalition, a group of non-nuclear-
weapon States committed to a nuclear-weapon-free 
world, New Zealand will soon introduce a draft 
resolution highlighting the work that will be required 
to achieve its implementation during the coming 
review cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons. We commend that draft resolution 
for the Assembly’s consideration. 
 There have been gains over the past year with 
respect to conventional disarmament, but we have yet 
to see the results of those achievements. There has 
been pleasing progress towards an arms trade treaty, 
but hard work remains. Next year’s Diplomatic 
Conference must deliver a treaty establishing the 
highest possible common international standards for 
conventional arms transfers. 
 We must also maintain focus on small arms and 
light weapons, which for many regions are their 
weapons of mass destruction. The year 2011 marks the 
tenth anniversary of the United Nations Programme of 
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit 
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its 
Aspects. There has been much to celebrate, including 
the first Open-Ended Meeting of Governmental Experts 
on the implementation of the Programme of Action, 
which I had the honour of chairing in May. But next 
year’s Review Conference must work to ensure that the 
Programme delivers on its potential for keeping 
communities safe from such weapons. 
 To deal with all of that, we need a strong, nimble 
and effective United Nations, and we need a Security 
Council that reflects geopolitical realities — realities 
that have changed since 1945. Today, some States 
might credibly seek a fuller, longer-term Council role. 
New Zealand supports change that acknowledges those 
realities. 
 But most United Nations Members are not major 
or emerging Powers, they are small States. They too 
are crucial to the universality and legitimacy of the 
  
 
11-51681 34 
 
United Nations; they too must contribute at the Council 
table. Let me put it simply: if we reform the Security 
Council to provide a fuller, longer-term role for 
emerging Powers, we must also ensure a role for small 
States. Speaking as a small State, I say that we are the 
United Nations. And so we agreed with the Minister for 
Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago when he said 
that the smallness of a country is not a deterrent to the 
realization of big dreams (see ), and with 
the Prime Minister of Cape Verde, who told us that 
small States must have a greater voice in international 
decision-making (see ). 
 There are real risks if we cannot achieve genuine 
Security Council reform. Emerging Powers will be 
denied a role consistent with their global significance, 
and small States will continue to be squeezed out of 
positions of responsibility. It is in everyone’s interests 
that the Security Council be more representative. As 
we saw earlier this year with respect to Libya, the 
Council is an extraordinarily powerful instrument for 
maintaining international peace and security. But with 
extraordinary power comes extraordinary responsibility — 
responsibility that must be exercised with regard for the 
views of all countries, large and small. 
 The Council must also build on its partnerships 
with regional groups, such as the African Union, which 
increasingly plays a critical role in maintaining 
regional and global peace and security. Recognizing 
the importance of closer relations with Africa, we are 
encouraging New Zealand investment in and trade with 
Africa, supporting peace and security and providing 
development assistance. Last week, we increased our 
diplomatic engagement by appointing a dedicated 
ambassador to the African Union and the Federal 
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. 
 New Zealand is proud of its history of active 
contribution right across the United Nations agenda. 
We have a strong record as an independent and  
 
principled voice advocating collective security and the 
rule of law. We take an even-handed approach to 
security issues, as has been shown by our voting record 
and our tangible contributions to peace processes. We 
take seriously our international responsibilities. 
 That is why, in 2004, we announced that we 
would seek a non-permanent Security Council seat for 
the 2015-2016 term. Nearly 20 years have passed since 
New Zealand’s last time on the Council. The time is 
right for us to again bring the fresh, independent 
perspective of a small Asia-Pacific country to the 
Council. That candidature, which I confirm here today, 
is based on the belief that States, large and small, have 
a place at the Council table. Modern New Zealand was 
founded on a compact, a treaty-based partnership with 
its indigenous Maori people. That, and our diversity, 
means a unique history and perspective on promoting 
tolerance and conflict resolution; a perspective that we 
have previously brought, to good effect, to the Council 
table, and which we will bring again. 
 For the United Nations, 2011 has been a truly 
historic year. The Organization has quickly responded 
to change in the Middle East and North Africa. It 
stands ready to provide post-conflict support, and not 
just in Libya. It has been critical to relief in the Horn 
of Africa. Its essential role in State recognition has 
been at global centre stage. Even the most cynical, the 
most jaded, have had to relearn that the United Nations 
is at the epicentre of much that happens, and much that 
matters. We need the United Nations. We need it to 
address the woes of the world and to consolidate its 
successes. Its fundamental importance stems from its 
universality, its legitimacy and its mechanisms to 
confront challenges. Its effectiveness depends on its 
ability to adapt as those challenges emerge and on its 
ability to address them together. Member States, large 
and small, come together in that collective endeavour. 
New Zealand, as always, stands ready to play its part.This year the session of the General 
Assembly is opening at a time when international 
relations are in a state of turbulence. The Middle East 
and North Africa have gone through a period of large-
scale changes, and the situation is volatile in certain 
other parts of the world. We have not yet been able to 
put the global economy back on the track of 
progressive sustainable development. The increasing 
number of alarming factors has been accompanied by 
an exacerbation of social, inter-ethnic and intercultural 
conflicts as well as outbreaks of extremism. 
 Just as a ship caught in adverse weather 
conditions needs a united crew and a compass to find 
the right course, the international community today 
needs in particular to deploy joint efforts to respond to 
common challenges and set clear guidelines to 
strengthen global governance mechanisms. We are 
convinced that such guidelines should include, first and 
foremost, the rule of international law; clear, strict and 
responsible reliance on the fundamental principles of 
the Charter of the United Nations; and the will to 
implement a positive unification agenda. 
 The United Nations remains a pillar of 
international relations and equitable multilateral 
cooperation in the interests of all States. It has a unique 
legitimacy and the necessary authority to respond 
adequately to the variety of contemporary risks and 
threats. It is the United Nations that should continue to 
provide political, legal and moral leadership in dealing 
with global challenges, to establish equitable principles 
and standards of interaction, to monitor their 
implementation and to render necessary assistance and 
support for the States that need it. 
 Ten years ago on September 11, a horrible 
terrorist attack was committed in this city. We are 
convinced that it is necessary to strengthen multilateral 
cooperation in countering international terrorism on 
both the global and regional levels. However, the 
additional mechanisms to be created in this area should 
be incorporated in our common work within the United 
Nations, with due account taken of its central 
coordinating role in combating terrorism. 
 Wide international cooperation is needed to keep 
the situation in the global economic and financial 
system under control. One can hardly deny the 
importance of the role that the Group of Twenty (G-20) 
plays in the post-crisis recovery of the world economy. 
Today, it is important to finalize the process of 
reforming the global financial and economic 
architecture and to implement everything we have 
agreed on, rather than to stop halfway. The efficiency 
of these efforts will only grow if the G-20 strengthens 
its dialogue with the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies.  
 A significant contribution to the reform of the 
global economy and finance is being made by 
BRICS — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — a global-scale association of five major, 
rapidly growing economies that reflects the realities of 
the evolving multipolar world. BRICS does not aim at 
confrontation with anyone. Its goal is to enhance 
productive multilateral collaboration to address the 
urgent problems of the contemporary world. 
 Sustainable development requires a reliable 
supply of energy resources for the global economy. 
Russia has proposed drafting a convention on 
international energy security that would cover all 
aspects of global energy cooperation, taking into 
account the balance of interests of all actors in the 
international market. We call for the start of the 
practical preparation of this document. 
 As in economics, the logic of joint consolidated 
actions should prevail in matters of security and the 
elimination of surplus weapons worldwide. Russia and 
the United States made another important step towards 
nuclear disarmament when they signed the Treaty on 
Strategic Offensive Arms and began its 
implementation. Its practical realization will allow us 
to make sure that the Treaty is effective and viable and 
  
 
11-51670 16 
 
to see how its fundamental principles are implemented. 
We call on all States with nuclear weapons capability 
to join the Russian-American efforts. We believe that 
further progress in nuclear arms reductions is possible 
only on a multilateral basis. 
 Moreover, progress in this area is inseparable 
from coordinated efforts to move forward on all 
aspects of strengthening international security and 
strategic stability. This includes development of 
universally acceptable approaches to missile defence 
issues, an accounting on the impact of strategic 
conventional arms, prevention of the weaponization of 
space and elimination of qualitative and quantitative 
imbalances in conventional arms. 
 The deployment of strategic missile defence 
elements in various parts of the world alters the overall 
configuration of international security. It is not enough 
to make statements that the increase in global missile 
defence capabilities would not undermine the basics of 
strategic stability. The issue is far too serious. We need 
solid legal guarantees that missile defence potential 
will actually be adequate to the declared objectives and 
will not disrupt global and regional balances. This 
holds equally true for both Europe and the Asia-Pacific 
region, where the missile defence factor is beginning to 
affect the strategic environment. 
 It is of primary importance for us to prevent the 
undermining of the non-proliferation regime. We call 
for universalization of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons, strengthening of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system and 
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. Russia has been one of the main 
initiators of the proposal to convene in 2012 a 
conference on establishing a zone free of weapons of 
mass destruction and their means of delivery in the 
Middle East and is now working intensively, together 
with its partners, on the preparations for this important 
forum. 
 The early resolution of the nuclear problems of 
Iran and the Korean Peninsula would contribute to the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime. We see 
no alternative to their political and diplomatic 
settlement and to taking concrete steps to create the 
conditions for the resumption of negotiations. We call 
on all partners to address these tasks with utmost 
responsibility. 
 The situation around Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi-1 
nuclear power plant has highlighted the need to 
improve the international legal framework in order to 
ensure the safety of nuclear power facilities. The 
Russian Federation has made proposals to enhance the 
mechanisms of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and 
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and to strengthen the relevant IAEA norms. 
We urge support for these initiatives. 
 In the age of new telecommunications 
technologies, international information security has 
become a challenge that requires coordinated efforts by 
the international community. Reliable protection of the 
field of information from malicious and criminal 
attacks is the goal of the initiative that Russia and its 
partners are promoting at the United Nations. During 
this session, we will put forward proposals on 
developing specific rules of conduct in this area. 
 In a polycentric world, an effective international 
architecture can be created only if it rests on regional 
building blocks. The enhancing of global governance at 
the regional level and the increasing role of regional 
organizations are an integral part of modern 
international relations. Integration associations and 
organizations in the Commonwealth of Independent 
States area contribute to these processes. The Eurasian 
Economic Community, with its $10 billion anti-crisis 
fund, operates in the financial and economic sphere. A 
customs union between Russia, Kazakhstan and 
Belarus has been created, and single economic space is 
taking shape with a view to establishing a Eurasian 
union. 
 The Collective Security Treaty Organization 
(CSTO) is a key tool for ensuring stability within the 
area of its responsibility. The signing of the joint 
declaration on cooperation between the United Nations 
Secretariat and the CSTO secretariat in March 2011 
was a major step in the collaboration between these 
two organizations, primarily in the field of 
peacekeeping. We are ready to start working on its 
practical modalities. Russia consistently calls for 
interaction between regional organizations, under the 
auspices of the United Nations, to strengthen global 
stability on the basis of the solid legal framework of 
the Charter. 
 Priority should be given to equal and indivisible 
security, predictability, transparency and mutual 
respect, taking into account one other’s interests. This 
 
 
17 11-51670 
 
is exactly the aim of Russian President Medvedev’s 
initiative to sign a treaty on European security. Its 
practical implementation would allow us to finally put 
a period to the post-cold war era, to establish a 
universal and clear framework for a reliable solution to 
such issues as missile defence and arms control, and to 
create a common space of security and development 
without dividing lines. 
 Achieving equal and indivisible security is an 
urgent issue for the Asia-Pacific region, with the 
Russian Far East and Eastern Siberia as integral parts. 
The joint initiative launched by the leaders of China 
and Russia in September 2010 is aimed at creating a 
comprehensive architecture for security and 
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region on a bloc-free 
legal basis. We could move closer to this goal by 
promoting a network of multilateral diplomacy, an idea 
that has been supported by the members of the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. 
 Progress in the settlement of regional conflicts 
would contribute to a more stable international 
environment. Today, special attention is given to the 
developments in the Arab world.  
 Russia condemns the use of violence against 
civilians and supports the aspirations of Arab peoples 
for the revival of their States and their democratic 
development and social and economic prosperity. At 
the same time, actions by the outside forces must be 
based on full respect for international law and be 
instrumental to the search for a political settlement 
between the authorities and the opposition. The 
attempts to go beyond the Security Council mandate 
are unacceptable, since they undermine its authority 
and compound the suffering of innocent civilians. 
 In this context, it seems quite pertinent that States 
and regional organizations commit themselves to 
strictly complying with the existing norms of 
international law, including humanitarian law, in order 
to protect civilians during armed conflict. This step, 
which further enhances the existing legal basis of 
international relations, would contribute to the 
strengthening of regional and global security in its 
modern, multidimensional interpretation. 
 The leading role in elaborating modalities for 
post-conflict resolution in Libya must be played by the 
United Nations and in particular the Security Council. 
That is precisely the goal of Security Council 
resolution 2009 (2011) of 16 September 2011, which 
established the United Nations Support Mission in 
Libya. We believe that it is time to take additional 
steps, including the lifting of the no-fly zone. 
 As for Syria, it is inadmissible to boycott 
proposals for a national dialogue, stir up confrontation 
and provoke violence, while neglecting the reforms — 
late in coming, but still achievable — proposed by 
President Al-Assad. It is important to encourage the 
authorities and the opposition to start negotiations and 
agree on the future of their country. We hope that the 
League of Arab States will make the necessary efforts. 
 The situation in the Middle East could be 
significantly improved by progress in the negotiation 
process, on the basis of the main parameters defined 
and recorded in Security Council resolutions, the 
Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace 
Initiative, and reiterated in the Quartet ministerial 
statement of 23 September. The only viable basis for a 
settlement is the coexistence of Palestinian and Israeli 
States in peace and security. We support the 
Palestinians’ application to the Security Council and 
welcome the readiness reiterated by the President of 
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Abbas, to hold 
talks with Israel on the basis of the existing 
international legal framework. 
 We encourage the Cypriot communities to 
continue negotiations under United Nations auspices to 
achieve a comprehensive, just and viable settlement on 
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
 We call upon all parties to the Nagorno-Karabakh 
settlement process to take advantage of the additional 
opportunities arising from the efforts made in the 
context of Russia’s mediation. We will promote 
confidence-building and ceasefire enforcement 
measures within the framework of the Troika of the 
co-Chairs of the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group, together with 
American and French partners. 
 We hope that the decision taken in Moscow on 
22 September on resuming official talks on a 
Transdniestrian settlement will encourage the parties to 
seek ways to arrive at mutually acceptable agreements. 
 We are strongly committed to doing our utmost to 
prevent a repetition of a scenario involving the use of 
force in the Caucasus, as happened in August 2008 as a 
result of a reckless venture by the ruling regime in 
Tbilisi. Russia is ready to act as a guarantor of 
  
 
11-51670 18 
 
arrangements on the non-use of force between 
Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, taking into 
account the earlier relevant statements made by the 
leaders of these three parties. We would welcome it if 
the United States and the European Union made similar 
commitments. As guarantors, we would be ready to 
take steps to prevent the resumption of violence in the 
region and, in the case of the wrongful use of force by 
either side, to work towards an early resolution of the 
situation on the basis of the existing norms of 
international law. 
 Russia is providing significant support for the 
efforts to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. At the 
same time, we call on the International Security 
Assistance Force to more effectively fight the growing 
Afghan drug threat. Central Asia and Russia are 
already facing a “heroin aggression”, while the profits 
from drug trafficking are being used as the main source 
of financing the clandestine extremist underground in 
the region. The fight against this evil should be 
uncompromising, and it should target the entire drug 
business chain. 
 The problems on the African continent should be 
a focus of continuous attention on the part of the 
United Nations. Such attention should include 
development assistance as well as efforts to overcome 
the current humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa 
and resolve the numerous ongoing conflicts, while 
maintaining the leading role of the African Union. 
 The eradication of piracy remains a priority. It is 
necessary to accelerate the establishment of an 
international anti-piracy court mechanism in the 
region, in accordance with the Security Council 
resolution adopted on the initiative of Russia. 
 Experience has shown that pressure and unilateral 
sanctions cannot be a cure-all in addressing various 
conflict situations; they only complicate efforts to 
resolve them. We urge that an end be put to any actions 
that circumvent the Security Council. We also call for 
the lifting of the blockade of Cuba. Cooperation rather 
than isolation should be the method for settling 
conflicts in the twenty-first century. 
 The ongoing transformation in contemporary 
international relations makes it a priority task on the 
global agenda to expand intercultural, interreligious 
and inter-civilization dialogue in order to devise 
approaches to the problems of the modern world that 
are based on shared values. The degradation of 
fundamental moral values leads to the degradation of 
society. The recent tragic events in Norway, riots in 
Great Britain, protests by young people in other 
countries, and calls to suppress Christian minorities in 
the Middle East and North Africa — all of those events 
are the result of a deterioration in moral and ethical 
values. There can be no freedom without responsibility 
and no democracy without self-restraint. There is a 
clear and urgent need to counter the threats posed by 
nationalism, ethnic and religious intolerance. We 
therefore reiterate the importance of the recent High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly to 
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of 
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and 
related intolerance. 
 Attempts to falsify or revise history are 
inadmissible, all the more so given that we are marking 
the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Nuremberg Tribunal 
verdict. Political correctness and talk of freedom of 
speech cannot serve as a cover when, in certain 
European countries, people who brought disgrace upon 
themselves by cooperating with the Nazis are being 
talked and written about in an increasingly elevated 
tone. Russia will never forget the countless military 
crimes committed by Hitler and his associates in our 
land and throughout Europe during the years of the 
Nazi aggression. 
 The rapid changes taking place in the world make 
it imperative to strengthen the role of the United 
Nations and to adapt it to contemporary realities while 
preserving — naturally — its inter-State character and 
the immutability of its Charter principles. A 
fundamental element of the Organization’s renewal is 
the reform of the Security Council. We support a 
solution that is based upon the broadest possible 
agreement. 
 The world community faces many challenges, 
and the United Nations, as a major mechanism for 
global regulation, is today in demand as never before. 
Together we will find practical ways to effectively 
overcome the threats of the twenty-first century.It is a great honour for me to 
be here today. I would like to talk to the General 
Assembly about a subject that is at the heart of the 
United Nations — the pursuit of peace in an imperfect 
world. 
 War and conflict have been with us since the 
beginning of civilization. But in the first part of the 
twentieth century, the advance of modern weaponry led 
to death on a staggering scale. It was that killing that 
  
 
11-50692 10 
 
compelled the founders of this body to build an 
institution that was focused not just on ending one war, 
but on averting others; a union of sovereign States that 
would seek to prevent conflict while also addressing its 
causes. 
 No American did more to pursue that objective 
than President Franklin Roosevelt. He knew that a 
victory in war was not enough. As he said at one of the 
very first meetings on the founding of the United 
Nations, “We have got to make not merely peace, but a 
peace that will last”. 
 The men and women who built this institution 
understood that peace is more than the absence of war. 
A lasting peace — for nations and individuals — 
depends upon a sense of justice and opportunity; of 
dignity and freedom. It depends upon struggle and 
sacrifice; on compromise and on a sense of common 
humanity. 
 One delegate to the San Francisco Conference, 
which led to the creation of the United Nations, put it 
well: 
 “Many people have talked as if all we had to do 
to get peace was to say loudly and frequently that 
we loved peace and hated war. Now we have 
learned that no matter how much we love peace 
and hate war, we cannot avoid having war 
brought upon us if there are convulsions in other 
parts of the world”. 
 The fact is, peace is hard, but our people demand 
it. Over nearly seven decades, even as the United 
Nations helped avert a third world war, we still live in 
a world scarred by conflict and plagued by poverty. 
Even as we proclaim our love for peace and hatred of 
war, there are still convulsions in our world that 
endanger us all. 
 I took office at a time of two wars for the United 
States. Moreover, the violent extremists who drew us 
into war in the first place — Osama bin Laden and his 
Al-Qaida organization — remained at large. Today, we 
have set a new direction. 
 At the end of this year, America’s military 
operation in Iraq will be over. We will have a normal 
relationship with a sovereign nation that is a member 
of the community of nations. That equal partnership 
will be strengthened by our support for Iraq — for its 
Government and its security forces, for its people and 
their aspirations. 
 As we end the war in Iraq, the United States and 
our coalition partners have begun a transition in 
Afghanistan. Between now and 2014, an increasingly 
capable Afghan Government and security forces will 
step forward to take responsibility for the future of 
their country. As they do, we are drawing down our 
own forces, while building an enduring partnership 
with the Afghan people. 
 So let there be no doubt: the tide of war is 
receding. When I took office, roughly 180,000 Americans 
were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. By the end of 
this year, that number will be cut in half, and it will 
continue to decline. This is critical for the sovereignty 
of Iraq and Afghanistan, and to the strength of the 
United States as we build our nation at home. 
 Moreover, we are poised to end these wars from a 
position of strength. Ten years ago, there was an open 
wound and twisted steel; a broken heart in the centre of 
this city. Today, as a new tower is rising at Ground 
Zero, it symbolizes New York’s renewal, even as 
Al-Qaida is under more pressure than ever before. Its 
leadership has been degraded. Osama bin Laden, a man 
who murdered thousands of people from dozens of 
countries, will never endanger the peace of the world 
again. 
 Yes, this has been a difficult decade. But today 
we stand at a crossroads of history, with the chance to 
move decisively in the direction of peace. To do so we 
must return to the wisdom of those who created this 
institution.  
 The founding Charter of United Nations calls 
upon us, to unite our strength to maintain international 
peace and security. Article 1 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights reminds us that, “All 
human beings are born free and equal in dignity and in 
rights”. Those bedrock beliefs — in the responsibility 
of States and the rights of men and women — must be 
our guide. 
 In that effort, we have reason to hope. This year 
has been a time of extraordinary transformation. More 
nations have stepped forward to maintain international 
peace and security. More individuals are claiming their 
universal right to live in freedom and dignity. 
 Think about it. One year ago, when we met here 
in New York, the prospect of a successful referendum 
in South Sudan was in doubt. But the international 
community overcame old divisions to support the 
 
 
11 11-50692 
 
agreement that had been negotiated to give South 
Sudan self-determination. Last summer, as a new flag 
went up in Juba, former soldiers laid down their arms, 
men and women wept with joy and children finally 
knew the promise of looking to a future that they will 
shape. 
 One year ago, the people of Côte d’Ivoire 
approached a landmark election. When the incumbent 
lost and refused to respect the results, the world 
refused to look the other way. United Nations 
peacekeepers were harassed, but they did not leave 
their posts. The Security Council, led by the United 
States, Nigeria and France, came together to support 
the will of the people. Côte d’Ivoire is now governed 
by the man who was elected to lead. 
 One year ago, the hopes of the people of Tunisia 
were suppressed. But they chose the dignity of 
peaceful protest over the rule of an iron fist. A vendor 
lit a spark that took his own life, but ignited a 
movement. In the face of a crackdown, students spelled 
out the word freedom. The balance of fear shifted from 
the ruler to those whom he ruled. Now the people of 
Tunisia are preparing for elections that will move them 
one step closer to the democracy that they deserve. 
 One year ago, Egypt had known one President for 
nearly 30 years. But for 18 days, the eyes of the world 
were glued to Tahrir Square, where Egyptians from all 
walks of life — men and women, young and old, 
Muslim and Christian — demanded their universal 
rights. We saw in those protesters the moral force of 
non-violence that has lit the world from Delhi to 
Warsaw, from Selma to South Africa — and we knew 
that change had come to Egypt and to the Arab world. 
 One year ago, the people of Libya were ruled by 
the world’s longest-serving dictator. But faced with 
bullets and bombs and a dictator who threatened to 
hunt them down like rats, they showed relentless 
bravery. We will never forget the words of the Libyan 
who stood up in those early days of the revolution and 
said, “Our words are free now”. It is a feeling one 
cannot explain. Day after day, in the face of bullets and 
bombs, the Libyan people refused to give back that 
freedom. And when they were threatened by the kind 
of mass atrocity that often went unchallenged in the 
past century, the United Nations lived up to its Charter. 
The Security Council authorized all necessary 
measures to prevent a massacre. The Arab League 
called for that effort. Arab nations joined a NATO-led 
coalition that halted Al-Qadhafi’s forces in their tracks. 
 In the months that followed, the will of the 
coalition proved unbreakable, and the will of the 
Libyan people could not be denied. Forty-two years of 
tyranny were ended in six months. From Tripoli to 
Misurata to Benghazi — today, Libya is free. 
Yesterday, the leaders of a new Libya took their 
rightful place beside us, and this week the United 
States is reopening our embassy in Tripoli. 
 This is how the international community is 
supposed to work — nations standing together for the 
sake of peace and security, and individuals claiming 
their rights. Now, all of us have a responsibility to 
support the new Libya and the new Libyan 
Government as they confront the challenge of turning 
this moment of promise into a just and lasting peace 
for all Libyans. 
 So this has been a remarkable year. The 
Al-Qadhafi regime is over. Gbagbo, Ben Ali and 
Mubarak are no longer in power. Osama bin Laden is 
gone, and the idea that change could come only 
through violence has been buried with him. Something 
is happening in our world. The way things have been is 
not the way that they will be. The humiliating grip of 
corruption and tyranny is being pried open. Dictators 
are on notice. Technology is putting power into the 
hands of the people. Youth are delivering a powerful 
rebuke to dictatorship and rejecting the lie that some 
races, some peoples, some religions and some 
ethnicities do not desire democracy. The promise 
written down on paper — “all human beings are born 
free and equal in dignity and rights” — is closer at 
hand. 
 But let us remember: Peace is hard. Peace is hard. 
Progress can be reversed. Prosperity comes slowly. 
Societies can split apart. The measure of our success 
must be whether people can live in sustained freedom, 
dignity and security. And the United Nations and its 
Member States must do their part to support those 
basic aspirations. And we have more work to do. 
 In Iran, we have seen a Government that refuses 
to recognize the rights of its own people. As we meet 
here today, men, women and children are being 
tortured, detained and murdered by the Syrian regime. 
Thousands have been killed, many during the holy time 
of Ramadan. Thousands more have poured across 
Syria’s borders. The Syrian people have shown dignity 
  
 
11-50692 12 
 
and courage in their pursuit of justice, protesting 
peacefully, standing silently in the streets and dying for 
the same values that this institution is supposed to 
stand for. And the question for us is clear: Will we 
stand with the Syrian people or with their oppressors? 
 Already, the United States has imposed strong 
sanctions on Syria’s leaders. We supported a transfer of 
power that would be responsive to the Syrian people. 
And many of our allies have joined in this effort. But 
for the sake of Syria — and the peace and security of 
the world — we must speak with one voice. There is 
no excuse for inaction. Now is the time for the Security 
Council to sanction the Syrian regime and to stand with 
the Syrian people. 
 Throughout the region, we will have to respond 
to the calls for change. In Yemen, men, women and 
children gather by the thousands in towns and city 
squares every day with the hope that their 
determination and spilled blood will prevail over a 
corrupt system. America supports those aspirations. We 
must work with Yemen’s neighbours and our partners 
around the world to seek a path that allows for a 
peaceful transition of power from President Saleh, and 
a movement to free and fair elections as soon as 
possible. 
 In Bahrain, steps have been taken towards reform 
and accountability. We are pleased with that, but more 
is required. America is a close friend of Bahrain, and 
we will continue to call on the Government and the 
main opposition bloc — al-Wifaq — to pursue a 
meaningful dialogue that brings peaceful change that is 
responsive to the people. We believe the patriotism that 
binds Bahrainis together must be more powerful than 
the sectarian forces that would tear them apart. It will 
be hard, but it is possible. 
 We believe that each nation must chart its own 
course to fulfil the aspirations of its people. America 
does not expect to agree with every party or person 
who expresses themselves politically, but we will 
always stand up for the universal rights that were 
embraced by this Assembly. Those rights depend on 
elections that are free and fair, governance that is 
transparent and accountable, respect for the rights of 
women and minorities, and justice that is equal and 
fair. That is what our people deserve. Those are the 
elements of peace that can last. 
 Moreover, the United States will continue to 
support, with greater trade and investment, those 
nations that transition to democracy, so that freedom is 
followed by opportunity. We will pursue deeper 
engagement with Governments, but also with civil 
society — students and entrepreneurs, political parties 
and the press. We have banned those who abuse human 
rights from travelling to our country and we have 
sanctioned those who trample on human rights abroad. 
And we will always serve as a voice for those who 
have been silenced. 
 Now, I know, particularly this week, that for 
many in this Hall, there is one issue that stands as a test 
of these principles and a test of American foreign 
policy, and that is the conflict between the Israelis and 
the Palestinians. 
 One year ago, I stood at this podium and I called 
for an independent Palestine. I believed then, and I 
believe now, that the Palestinian people deserve a State 
of their own, but what I also said is that a genuine 
peace can be realized only between the Israelis and the 
Palestinians themselves. One year later, despite 
extensive efforts by America and others, the parties 
have not bridged their differences. Faced with this 
stalemate, I put forward a new basis for negotiations in 
May of this year. That basis is clear. It is well known to 
all of us here. Israelis must know that any agreement 
provides assurances for their security. Palestinians 
deserve to know the territorial basis of their State. 
 I know that many are frustrated by the lack of 
progress; I assure them that I am too. But the question 
is not the goal that we seek. The question is: How do 
we reach that goal? And I am convinced that there is no 
shortcut to the end of a conflict that has endured for 
decades. Peace is hard work. Peace will not come 
through statements and resolutions at the United 
Nations. If it were that easy, it would have been 
accomplished by now. Ultimately, it is the Israelis and 
the Palestinians who must live side by side. Ultimately, 
it is the Israelis and the Palestinians — not us — who 
must reach agreement on the issues that divide them: 
on borders and on security, on refugees and on 
Jerusalem. 
 Ultimately, peace depends upon compromise 
among people who must live together long after our 
speeches are over, long after our votes have been 
tallied. That is the lesson of Northern Ireland, where 
ancient antagonists bridged their differences. That is 
the lesson of the Sudan, where a negotiated settlement 
led to an independent State. And that is and will be the 
 
 
13 11-50692 
 
path to a Palestinian State — negotiations between the 
parties. 
 We seek a future where Palestinians live in a 
sovereign State of their own, with no limit to what they 
can achieve. There is no question that the Palestinians 
have seen that vision delayed for too long. It is 
precisely because we believe so strongly in the 
aspirations of the Palestinian people that America has 
invested so much time and so much effort in the 
building of a Palestinian State and in the negotiations 
that can deliver a Palestinian State. 
 But understand this as well: America’s 
commitment to Israel’s security is unshakeable. Our 
friendship with Israel is deep and enduring. And so we 
believe that any lasting peace must acknowledge the 
very real security concerns that Israel faces every 
single day. 
 Let us be honest with ourselves: Israel is 
surrounded by neighbours that have waged repeated 
wars against it. Israel’s citizens have been killed by 
rockets fired at their houses and suicide bombs on their 
buses. Israel’s children come of age knowing that 
throughout the region other children are taught to hate 
them. Israel, a small country of less than 8 million 
people, looks out at a world where leaders of much 
larger nations threaten to wipe it off of the map. The 
Jewish people carry the burden of centuries of exile 
and persecution and fresh memories of knowing that 
6 million people were killed simply because of who 
they are. Those are facts. They cannot be denied. 
 The Jewish people have forged a successful State 
in their historic homeland. Israel deserves recognition. 
It deserves normal relations with its neighbours. And 
friends of the Palestinians do them no favours by 
ignoring that truth, just as friends of Israel must 
recognize the need to pursue a two-State solution with 
a secure Israel next to an independent Palestine. 
 That is the truth. Each side has legitimate 
aspirations, and that is part of what makes peace so 
hard. And the deadlock will be broken only when each 
side learns to stand in the other’s shoes and each side 
can see the world through the other’s eyes. That is 
what we should be encouraging. That is what we 
should be promoting. 
 This body — founded as it was out of the ashes 
of war and genocide, and dedicated as it is to the 
dignity of every single person — must recognize the 
reality that is lived by the Palestinians and the Israelis 
alike. The measure of our actions must always be 
whether they advance the right of Israeli and 
Palestinian children to live lives of peace and security 
and dignity and opportunity. And we will succeed in 
that effort only if we can encourage the parties to sit 
down, to listen to each other and to understand each 
other’s hopes and each other’s fears. That is the project 
to which America is committed. There are no shortcuts. 
And that is what the United Nations should be focused 
on in the weeks and months to come. 
 Even as we confront these challenges of conflict 
and revolution, we must also recognize — and we must 
also remind ourselves — that peace is not just the 
absence of war. True peace depends on creating the 
opportunity that makes life worth living. And to do 
that, we must confront the common enemies of 
humanity: nuclear weapons and poverty, ignorance and 
disease. Those forces corrode the possibility of lasting 
peace and together we are called upon to confront 
them. 
 To lift the spectre of mass destruction, we must 
come together to pursue the peace and security of a 
world without nuclear weapons. Over the past two 
years, we have begun to walk down that path. Since 
our Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., 
nearly 50 nations have taken steps to secure nuclear 
materials from terrorists and smugglers. Next March, a 
summit in Seoul will advance our efforts to lock down 
all of them. The New START Treaty between the 
United States and Russia will cut our deployed arsenals 
to the lowest level in half a century, and our nations are 
pursuing talks on how to achieve even deeper 
reductions. America will continue to work for a ban on 
the testing of nuclear weapons and the production of 
fissile material needed to make them. 
 And so we have begun to move in the right 
direction. And the United States is committed to 
meeting our obligations. But even as we meet our 
obligations, we have strengthened the treaties and 
institutions that help stop the spread of those weapons. 
And to do so, we must continue to hold accountable 
those nations that flout them. 
 The Iranian Government cannot demonstrate that 
its programme is peaceful. It has not met its obligations 
and it rejects offers that would provide it with peaceful 
nuclear power. North Korea has yet to take concrete 
steps towards abandoning its weapons and continues 
  
 
11-50692 14 
 
belligerent action against the South. There is a future 
of greater opportunity for the people of those nations if 
their Governments meet their international obligations. 
But if they continue down a path that is outside 
international law, they must be met with greater 
pressure and isolation. That is what our commitment to 
peace and security demands. 
 To bring prosperity to our people, we must 
promote the growth that creates opportunity. In this 
effort, let us not forget that we have made enormous 
progress over the past several decades. Closed societies 
gave way to open markets. Innovation and 
entrepreneurship have transformed the way we live and 
the things that we do. Emerging economies from Asia 
to the Americas have lifted hundreds of millions of 
people from poverty. It is an extraordinary 
achievement.  
 And yet, three years ago, we were confronted 
with the worst financial crisis in eight decades. And 
that crisis proved a fact that has become clearer with 
each passing year. Our fates are interconnected. In a 
global economy, nations will rise or fall together. 
 Today, we confront the challenges that have 
followed on the heels of that crisis. Around the world 
recovery is still fragile. Markets remain volatile. Too 
many people are out of work. Too many others are 
struggling just to get by. We acted together to avert a 
depression in 2009. We must take urgent and 
coordinated action once more. 
 Here in the United States, I have announced a 
plan to put Americans back to work and jump-start our 
economy, at the same time as I am committed to 
substantially reducing our deficits over time. 
 We stand with our European allies as they 
reshape their institutions and address their own fiscal 
challenges. For other countries, leaders face a different 
challenge as they shift their economy towards more 
self-reliance, boosting domestic demand while slowing 
inflation. So we will work with emerging economies 
that have rebounded strongly so that rising standards of 
living create new markets that promote global growth. 
That is what our commitment to prosperity demands. 
 To combat the poverty that punishes our children, 
we must act on the belief that freedom from want is a 
basic human right. The United States has made it a 
focus of our engagement abroad to help people to feed 
themselves. And today, as drought and conflict have 
brought famine to the Horn of Africa, our conscience 
calls on us to act. Together, we must continue to 
provide assistance and support organizations that can 
reach those in need. And together, we must insist on 
unrestricted humanitarian access so that we can save 
the lives of thousands of men and women and children. 
Our common humanity is at stake. Let us show that the 
life of a child in Somalia is as precious as any other. 
That is what our commitment to our fellow human 
beings demands. 
 To stop disease that spreads across borders, we 
must strengthen our system of public health. We will 
continue the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and 
malaria. We will focus on the health of mothers and of 
children. And we must come together to prevent and 
detect and fight every kind of biological danger — 
whether it is a pandemic like H1N1 or a terrorist threat 
or a treatable disease. 
 This week, America signed an agreement with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) to affirm our 
commitment to meeting that challenge. And today, I 
urge all nations to join us in meeting the WHO goal of 
making sure all nations have core capacities to address 
public health emergencies in place by 2012. That is 
what our commitment to the health of our people 
demands. 
 To preserve our planet, we must not put off action 
that climate change demands. We have to tap the power 
of science to save those resources that are scarce. And 
together, we must continue our work to build on the 
progress made in Copenhagen and Cancún, so that all 
the major economies represented here today follow 
through on the commitments that were made. Together, 
we must work to transform the energy that powers our 
economies and support others as they move down that 
path. That is what our commitment to the next 
generation demands. 
 To make sure our societies reach their potential, 
we must allow our citizens to reach theirs. No country 
can afford the corruption that plagues the world like a 
cancer. Together, we must harness the power of open 
societies and open economies. That is why we have 
partnered with countries across the globe to launch a 
new partnership on open Government that helps ensure 
accountability and helps to empower citizens. No 
country should deny people their rights to freedom of 
speech and freedom of religion, but also no country 
should deny people their rights because of whom they 
 
 
15 11-50692 
 
love, which is why we must stand up for the rights of 
gays and lesbians everywhere. 
 No country can realize its potential if half its 
population cannot reach theirs. This week, the United 
States signed a new declaration on women’s 
participation. Next year, we should each announce the 
steps we are taking to break down the economic and 
political barriers that stand in the way of women and 
girls. That is what our commitment to human progress 
demands. 
 I know there is no straight line to that progress, 
no single path to success. We come from different 
cultures, and carry with us different histories. But let 
us never forget that even as we gather here as Heads of 
different Governments, we represent citizens who share 
the same basic aspirations to live with dignity and 
freedom, to get an education and pursue opportunity, to 
love our families and love and worship our God, to live 
in the kind of peace that makes life worth living. 
 It is the nature of our imperfect world that we are 
forced to learn these lessons over and over again. 
Conflict and repression will endure so long as some 
people refuse to do unto others as we would have them 
do unto us. Yet that is precisely why we have built 
institutions like this — to bind our fates together, to 
help us recognize ourselves in each other — because 
those who came before us believed that peace is 
preferable to war, and freedom is preferable to 
suppression, and prosperity is preferable to poverty. 
That is the message that comes not from capitals, but 
from citizens, from our people. 
 When the cornerstone of this very building was 
put in place, President Truman came here to New York 
and said, “The United Nations is essentially an 
expression of the moral nature of man’s aspirations” — 
the moral nature of man’s aspirations. As we live in a 
world that is changing at a breathtaking pace, that is a 
lesson that we must never forget. 
 Peace is hard, but we know that it is possible. So, 
together, let us be resolved to see that it is defined by 
our hopes and not by our fears. Together, let us make 
peace — but a peace, most importantly, that will last.On behalf of the Government 
and the people of South Africa, I wish to extend our 
sincere congratulations to Ambassador Nassir 
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election as President of the 
General Assembly. We wish him a successful tenure in 
the stewardship of this body and assure him of our 
delegation’s full support. We also congratulate his 
predecessor, Mr. Joseph Deiss, for the diligent manner 
in which he guided the work of the Assembly at its 
sixty-fifth session. 
 I would further like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his re-appointment as 
Secretary-General. 
 It is also an honour for South Africa to welcome 
the Republic of South Sudan to the community of 
nations as the 193rd State Member of the United 
Nations. 
 This month, the United States and the world 
marked the tenth anniversary of the horrendous 
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, which affected 
the United States and 89 other countries. That horrific 
incident united the international community and 
strengthened its resolve to cooperate in the fight 
against terrorism. We pay our respects to the victims of 
the tragedy and their families. We reaffirm our 
commitment to working with other Member States to 
eradicate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
 The theme of this session — “The role of 
mediation in the settlement of disputes by peaceful 
means” — is timely and well chosen. The Charter of 
the United Nations mandates the Organization to 
utilize mediation as one of the tools to prevent and 
resolve conflicts across the globe. The role of 
mediation as a tool for the settlement of disputes has 
renewed relevance today, given the number of conflicts 
in the world. We should defend the independence and 
impartiality of the United Nations and promote the 
principles of its Charter during conflicts and crises. 
The United Nations should never take sides in any 
conflict but should always maintain its impartiality. 
The United Nations must not allow itself to be used by 
any country, regardless of its history or size. All 
citizens of the world should feel confident and secure 
in the knowledge that the United Nations is above all 
partisan interests and serves only those of the citizens 
of the globe. 
 We are of the view that regional organizations 
play a crucial role in the resolution of conflicts and in 
regional mediation processes. The Charter of the 
United Nations itself provides for the role of regional 
organizations in cooperation with the United Nations. 
This role of the regions must always be enforced and 
enhanced, and not undermined. In our continent, the 
African Union (AU) continues to play a significant role 
in mediation and the resolution of conflicts, trying at 
 
 
23 11-50702 
 
all times to produce African solutions to African 
problems, of course with the support of the world. 
 This year, the world witnessed the so-called Arab 
Spring in North Africa and the Middle East. With 
regard to the situation in Libya, the AU played a 
crucial role in seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis, 
in line with its mandate of working for peace and 
stability in the continent. However, it is a matter of 
record now that the AU efforts were never given a 
chance. Military actions were preferred over peaceful 
means. 
 Nonetheless, the AU continues to be seized with 
the Libyan conflict, as it should be. South Africa, 
through the AU and the United Nations, will work with 
the National Transitional Council, the representative of 
the Libyan people, as it proceeds to form an inclusive 
transitional Government that will take the Libyan seat 
in the African Union. During this period of working 
towards normalcy in Libya, we call for a cessation of 
hostilities and an end to the NATO aerial 
bombardment. We also call for the lifting of the no-fly 
zone, whose imposition was necessary for the 
protection of civilians. 
 The proliferation of arms in Libya is a major 
concern. The transitional Government will need to be 
supported in addressing this security issue. It may pose 
a serious challenge affecting the entire subregion if it is 
not adequately attended to. We also urge the new 
Libyan authorities to ensure the protection of migrant 
workers, especially those from sub-Saharan African 
countries, who number approximately 2.5 million. 
Immediate measures should be taken to put an end to 
the killing, arbitrary arrest and detention of migrant 
workers and black Libyans. 
 We will fully support the people of Libya as they 
go through the transition towards a new, united and 
democratic Libya that protects human rights, human 
dignity and freedom. 
 South Africa continues to support international 
efforts to assist the people of Palestine and Israel to 
find lasting peace. The decades-old struggle of the 
Palestinian people for a sovereign State of their own 
has now reached a turning point. The Palestinian 
Authority, backed by the League of Arab States, has 
stated its intention to seek United Nations membership 
for the State of Palestine. South Africa fully supports 
this position. It is a decisive step towards achieving 
lasting peace, economic cooperation and prosperity for 
the millions of people in the Middle East, and we urge 
that it be viewed favourably. 
 We also support the ongoing struggle for self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara. We 
urge the international community to support their quest 
for freedom, human rights and dignity. 
 We reiterate our call for the lifting of the 
economic and financial embargo against the people of 
Cuba in order to help them gain their economic 
freedom. 
 All Member States have a duty to safeguard the 
future and relevance of the United Nations. Recent 
international developments have made more urgent our 
efforts to intensify the reform agenda of the United 
Nations, particularly the Security Council, as well as 
the Bretton Woods institutions. No reform can be 
complete without the substantive reform of the 
Security Council, whose membership must be 
consistent with the principle of equitable geographical 
representation. In this regard, we reiterate our call for 
Africa to be represented in the category of permanent 
membership of the Security Council. 
 South Africa is preparing to welcome the 
international community and all stakeholders to the 
seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties to 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and to the seventh Meeting of the Parties to the 
Kyoto Protocol, in November and December this year. 
The success of the Conference is highly dependent on 
the willingness of all parties to reach an agreement. It 
does not depend on South Africa alone. As leaders, we 
are accountable to the global citizenry, the ordinary 
people that suffer daily from the impacts of climate 
change. They hold high expectations of their leaders to 
be responsible and to find effective solutions to the 
threat that climate change poses to their livelihood, 
quality of life, dignity and, in many cases, their very 
survival. We dare not fail them. 
 We are witnessing the catastrophic effects of 
famine in Somalia and neighbouring countries. Our 
response should not be left to the United Nations alone; 
it requires united action from all of us. South Africa 
has been humbled to contribute in a small way to the 
alleviation of human suffering. The people of Somalia 
still need more support, and we urge the world to focus 
its attention more sharply on Somalia and its 
neighbours in the Horn of Africa. 
  
 
11-50702 24 
 
 It is commendable that the Millennium 
Development Goals and their realization by 2015 
continue to feature on the agenda of the General 
Assembly. We now have four years to go before we 
reach the target date. It is clear that many of the Goals 
will not be attained on time, particularly in 
sub-Saharan Africa. We call on the international 
community and the United Nations to redouble efforts 
to assist countries that are lagging. 
 At this session, we will be commemorating the 
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban 
Declaration and Programme of Action — the outcome 
document of the World Conference against Racism, 
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related 
Intolerance, which was held in Durban in 2001. Racism 
and racial discrimination continue to pose a challenge 
to humankind and to negate the principles of the 
Charter of the United Nations. We should continue to 
work together to eradicate the scourge of racism. 
 On 8 January 2012, the African National 
Congress (ANC), the oldest liberation movement in 
Africa, will mark 100 years of existence since its 
establishment in 1912. The ANC spearheaded the 
struggle against racial oppression, colonialism and 
apartheid in South Africa. It inspired many in the 
African continent to fight for their freedom and 
independence from colonialism. 
 The United Nations declared apartheid a crime 
against humanity and in that way endorsed the struggle 
against racial oppression in our country. The centenary 
of the ANC recognizes the immense contribution of the 
United Nations and the international community in 
working to eradicate racism and racial discrimination 
in the world. We will, tomorrow, host a symposium on 
South Africa’s contribution to the fight against racism 
and racial discrimination. 
 Working together, let us remain committed to 
multilateralism and cooperation in this session of the 
General Assembly and beyond, and promote the 
realization of a more equitable and just world.