I wish
to congratulate Mr. Jeremić on his election as President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
I am confident that with his ability and experience he
will successfully fulfil that lofty mission. I also wish to thank Mr. Al-Nasser for his positive contribution as
President at the last session.
The world is undergoing major and profound
changes. The trends towards multipolarity, economic
globalization and the application of information
technology are gaining momentum. Countries have
never been as interconnected and interdependent as they
are today. Emerging markets and developing countries
have never had such strong influence, and cross-
civilizational dialogue and exchanges are flourishing
as never before. To promote peace, development
and cooperation has become the shared aspiration of
people across the world and the common pursuit of the
international community.
On the other hand, the world is still far from being
peaceful. The underlying impact of the international
financial crisis and the European debt crisis remains
strong. Destabilizing factors and uncertainties affecting
global growth have increased. Regional turbulence
persists, hotspot issues keep emerging and traditional
and non-traditional security issues have become
intertwined. The international security environment is
highly complex.
Facing both unprecedented opportunities and
challenges, we must not allow the outdated Cold War
mentality and zero-sum game theory to stand in our
way. We should act like passengers who stick together
in a boat when crossing a torrential river and seek
win-win progress through cooperation. That is the only
option for countries around the world. To ensure one’s
own security, a country should respect and accommodate
the security of other nations. To achieve one’s own
development, a country should actively promote
common development. In pursuing one’s own interests,
a country should take into account the interests of
other nations. Only by promoting common security and
development for all its members can the international
community effectively address complex and multiple
security threats and global challenges, resolve
increasingly serious difficulties facing development and
ensure durable peace and sustainable development in
the world. With that in mind, China believes that it is
important to do the following.
We should promote equality and democracy in
international relations. Mutual respect and equality
are basic norms governing international relations. All
countries, large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor,
are equal members of the international community. Respect for each other’s sovereignty, core interests
and choice of social system and development path is a
fundamental principle guiding State-to-State relations.
We should resolutely promote greater democracy in
international relations. A country should deal with its
internal affairs itself. Issues involving the interests of
various countries should be handled by those countries
through consultation. We should remain true to
multilateralism and uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the central role
of the United Nations in international affairs.
China strives to strengthen political mutual trust
and to address problems and differences with other
countries through dialogue and exchanges. China does
not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries or
impose its will on others. China does not allow outside
forces to interfere in its internal affairs.
We should seek win-win progress through
cooperation on development. As economic globalization
deepens, all countries have a high stake in each other’s
success. We should therefore enhance cooperation
and develop common interests to achieve win-win
progress with benefits for all. We should tap the
potential for cooperation in all countries, increase and
develop cooperation, improve cooperation mechanisms
and work together to make economic globalization
balanced, inclusive and beneficial to all.
We should accelerate the development of
developing countries and narrow the North-South gap.
We should enhance global development cooperation to
ensure that the benefits of development reach everyone.
Since the start of the international financial crisis,
while maintaining its own robust growth, China has
significantly increased contributions to international
financial institutions, extended a helping hand to other
developing countries and bought more bonds from
certain developed countries. That has helped to stabilize
the international economic and financial situation and
to maintain the economic and social development of the
relevant countries.
We should ensure fairness and effectiveness in
conducting global governance. Facing increasing
global challenges, the international community should
strengthen coordination and cooperation, establish a
fair, equitable, flexible and effective system of global
governance, properly address the various global issues
and promote the common well-being of humanity.
China supports the United Nations in enhancing its authority, efficiency and ability to address new threats
and challenges through the required proper reform.
It is important to advance the building of a global
system of economic governance with a focus on
reforming the international financial system, rapidly
implement the quota and governance reform plans of
the International Monetary Fund and other financial
institutions, and increase the representation and voice of
emerging markets and developing countries. We should
fully implement the outcome and consensus of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex), further develop international
cooperation on sustainable development and discuss the
establishment of a post-2015 international development
agenda based on actively implementing the Millennium
Development Goals.
We should launch a process of open, transparent
and democratic intergovernmental consultation,
with development and poverty reduction as the core
objectives. We should also fully leverage the role of
civil society and the private sector in that task. Together
with all other parties, China is ready to actively
participate in reforming the international system and in
global governance and to jointly face the various global
challenges.
We should pursue common progress by embracing
the diversity of civilizations. According to ancient
Chinese philosophy, the world will be a great place
when all things thrive without harming each another
and when various efforts are pursued in parallel
without their clashing. We should encourage exchanges
and mutual learning among different civilizations and
social systems, draw on each other’s strength through
competition and comparison and make progress by
seeking common ground, while maintaining our
differences. We should respect the diversity of the world
and the right of all countries to independently choose
their development path. China encourages dialogue
and exchanges among civilizations. We should replace
confrontation with dialogue and bridge differences
with inclusiveness in order to make the world more
harmonious and to ensure common progress for
humanity.
We should seek common security amid growing
interdependence. No country is immune to the complex
and multiple security threats and challenges in the
world. We should foster a new thinking on security that
is characterized by mutual trust and benefit, equality and coordination. We should adopt a holistic approach
to address both the symptoms and the root causes of
the various security challenges and should build a
peaceful and stable international and regional security
environment.
The United Nations should fully play its role in
maintaining international peace and security and
in establishing a fair and effective mechanism for
common security. We must resolve disputes through
dialogue and negotiation and oppose the wilful use or
threat of force. We must oppose all forms of terrorism,
separatism and extremism.
West Asia and North Africa are undergoing
profound changes. China respects and supports efforts
by countries in those regions to independently deal
with their internal affairs. We respect the aspirations
and calls of people in those areas for change and
development. The unique features of those regions in
terms of religion, civilization, history and ethnicity
must be respected. We hope that the relevant parties will
settle differences through inclusive and constructive
political dialogue and that they will resolve problems
peacefully.
Safeguarding peace and stability in those areas,
upholding the fundamental and long-term interests of
Arab countries and ensuring the growth of friendly
China-Arab relations will remain a central goal of
China’s policy towards such regions. We will continue
to tirelessly strive, together with countries in those
areas, to promote peace and development in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
China is deeply concerned about the stalled
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks and the economic
and humanitarian difficulties facing the Palestinian
people. The turbulence in the region should not divert
international attention from the Palestinian issue. China
supports the Palestinian people in establishing, on the
basis of the 1967 border, an independent Palestinian State
that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. China supports Palestine’s membership of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
China urges both Palestine and Israel to take concrete
measures to remove obstacles and to work for the early
resumption and substantive progress of the peace talks.
China is deeply concerned about the ongoing
tension and worsening humanitarian situation in
Syria. We call on all relevant parties in Syria to put an immediate end to the fighting and violence, to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
Mr. Kofi Annan’s six-point plan and the communiqué
of the foreign ministers’ meeting of the Action Group
for Syria (A/66/865, annex), and to launch an inclusive
political dialogue and a Syrian-led political transition as
soon as possible. China is open to any political plan that
is acceptable to all parties in Syria. The relevant parties
of the international community should play a positive
and constructive role in that regard, credibly support
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
in conducting impartial mediation, and strive to set
in motion and move forward the process of political
transition in Syria.
The Iranian nuclear issue has reached a new, critical
stage. The relevant parties should remain committed to
a diplomatic solution and begin a new round of dialogue
as soon as possible. In the spirit of respecting each
other’s concerns, we should act with flexibility and
pragmatism to expand common ground and overcome
differences, seek early progress in dialogue and
negotiation and, over time, achieve a comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate solution to the issue. China
has always supported efforts to uphold the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and will continue to
work with the parties concerned and play a constructive
role in seeking a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through dialogue and negotiation.
The Asia-Pacific region has maintained general
stability and rapid growth for many years, thereby
making important contributions to global stability
and prosperity. Given the growing threat of shrinkage
in the global economy and increasing volatility in the
international situation, maintaining peace, stability
and sound growth in the Asia-Pacific region is crucial
to ensuring the well-being of its people and meets the
broader interests of the international community.
We should fully respect the reality of a
diverse and interdependent Asia-Pacific region,
and continue to follow the approach of regional
cooperation — building consensus, making
incremental progress and accommodating each other’s
comfort levels — that has proved effective over the
years. We should promote regional development with
greater determination, advance regional cooperation
with increased resources, and handle differences with
longer-term interests in mind so as to uphold the peace,
stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. As an important participant in building the
international system, China is committed to sharing
development opportunities with other countries and
to working with them to overcome various challenges
and realize security and development for all. China
will stay the course of peaceful development. We seek
a peaceful international environment in which China
can promote its own development. By so doing, China
will contribute to global peace and development. China
is firm in upholding its core interests. At the same
time, it respects the legitimate right of other countries
to protect their interests. We seek to expand common
interests with other parties for the sake of the common
good.
China has contributed a total of some 21,000
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and taken an active part in international cooperation
on counter-terrorism, anti-piracy and non-proliferation
efforts. In our efforts to resolve major international
and regional hotspot issues, we have urged the parties
concerned to seek peaceful solutions through negotiation
and thereby played an important and constructive role
in easing tensions and achieving the political resolution
of those issues. China has made remarkable progress
in pursuing peaceful development and will continue to
follow that path in the years to come.
China will enhance friendly relations and
cooperation with all other countries on the basis of
the five principles of peaceful coexistence and strive
to promote a new type of relationship among major
countries based on mutual respect and win-win
cooperation. Following a policy of building good
relationships and partnerships with neighbouring
countries, China has actively expanded exchanges with
its neighbours.
China has contributed to over 50 per cent of
Asia’s growth for many consecutive years. We have
endeavoured to build mechanisms of mutual trust and
political cooperation with other Asian countries and
appropriately to address differences and frictions among
relevant countries. On the basis of firmly upholding
China’s sovereignty, security and territorial integrity,
we have worked with our neighbours to maintain sound
relations and overall stability in the region. China treats
other developing countries as good friends and good
partners; we therefore support each other and seek
common development on the basis of equality.
By the end of 2011, the Chinese Government had
built over 2,200 projects that are important to the local economies and people’s lives in the countries
concerned. We have cancelled the debts owed to China
by 50 heavily indebted poor and least-developed
countries. We have trained over 60,000 personnel in
various sectors for 173 developing countries and 13
regional and international organizations. All of that has
contributed to the economic and social development of
other developing countries.
China has taken an active part in reforming the
international system and global governance, and
assumed its due share of international responsibilities
and obligations as its capabilities permit. We are
working to build a fair, equitable and non-discriminatory
global trading system and a more equal and balanced
new global partnership for development. We support
a greater role for the Group of Twenty as the premier
forum for international economic cooperation, as well
as the efforts of emerging markets represented by the
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South
Africa — aimed at exploring a new model of global
cooperation.
The global economy is at a critical stage, and
achieving full recovery and sustained growth will be a
long and difficult task. Last year, despite a challenging
economic environment both at home and abroad, China
registered a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
of 9.3 per cent, and made good progress in adjusting its
economic structure and improving people’s lives. Since
the beginning of the year, in order to address some
new problems in economic performance, the Chinese
Government has stepped up anticipatory fine-tuning of
the economy and introduced a series of targeted policy
measures. That has boosted market confidence and
ensured steady growth.
China’s GDP grew by 7.8 per cent in the first half of
the year, and the country has enjoyed sound economic
and social development. China is still in an important
period of strategic opportunities for development.
Industrialization, urbanization, the application of
information technology and agricultural modernization
will continue to unlock our great potential for
development. We have the confidence, means and
ability to maintain steady and robust growth and
achieve long-term, sound and sustainable development.
During its twelfth five-year plan for the period
2011-2015, China’s domestic market will become one of
the largest in the world. Its total imports are expected
to exceed $10 trillion, and direct outbound investment is expected to exceed $500 billion. That will create
enormous business and job opportunities for the world
and provide good opportunities for other countries’
development.
The Diaoyu Islands have been an integral part
of China’s territory since ancient times. China has
indisputable historical and legal evidence in that
regard. Japan seized the islands in 1895 at the end of the
Sino-Japanese War and forced the Chinese Government
of the time to sign an unequal treaty to cede the islands
and other Chinese territories to Japan. After the Second
World War, the Diaoyu Islands and other Chinese
territories occupied by Japan were returned to China
in accordance with the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam
Agreement and other international documents.
By taking such unilateral actions as the so-called
island purchase, the Japanese Government has grossly
violated China’s sovereignty. This is an outright denial
of the outcomes of the victorious anti-fascist World
War and poses a grave challenge to the post-war
international order and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. The moves made by
Japan are totally illegal and invalid. They can in no way
change the historical fact that Japan stole the Diaoyu
Islands from China and that China has territorial
sovereignty over them. The Chinese Government is
firm in upholding China’s territorial sovereignty. China
strongly urges Japan to immediately stop all activities
violating China’s territorial sovereignty, take concrete
action to correct its mistakes and return to the path of
resolving the dispute through negotiation.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold
its eighteenth National Congress. We are confident
that the important meeting will lead China’s reform,
opening-up and modernization drive to a new stage.
The facts have shown and will continue to prove that
China’s development is peaceful, open, cooperative and
win-win in nature. We will work with the international
community to follow the trend of history and the call
of the times and build a harmonious world of enduring
peace and shared prosperity.﻿Freedom,
dignity, self-determination and the hope of a better
life were the driving forces behind the movement for
change in the Arab world.
As Germans, we know from our own bitter
experience that freedom is not a gift. It has to be won
and constantly defended. Freedom is more than just
freedom of thought. It is freedom to express one’s own
opinion and to voice public criticism. For that reason
alone, freedom is not always comfortable. The first
article of the Basic Law, Germany’s Constitution,
states that human dignity shall be inviolable. That
applies to every single individual, regardless of their
origin, culture, creed or sex. As Germans, we have
experienced what it is to lack freedom in the course of
our own history. We will always stand by those who,
wherever they are in the world, call for freedom of
opinion, religion, the press and artistic freedom.

Freedom has a daughter; it is tolerance. And
freedom has a son; it is respect, respect for other people,
respect for what is important to others, respect for what
is sacred to others. Freedom therefore does not mean
freedom from responsibility. Freedom always means
freedom to shoulder responsibility.
We understand the many devout people who feel
wounded by the recent shameful anti-Islam video.
However, legitimate criticism and sincere indignation
cannot be used to justify acts of violence or destruction.
Some would have us believe that the burning of embassy
buildings are proof of a clash of civilizations. We must
not allow ourselves to be deluded by such arguments.
The vast majority of people oppose violence. The
people who have taken to the streets, as well as their
political representatives gathered here in New York
this week, have expressed that forcefully. It is not a
clash of civilizations. It is a clash within societies and
civilizations. It is also a struggle for the soul of the
movement for change in the Arab world.
It is a struggle between open and closed minds,
between moderates and radicals, between understanding
and hate. It is a clash between those seeking peace and
those prepared to resort to violence. The extremists
want to prevent the emergence of freedom by inciting
violence. They must not be allowed to succeed.
Germany has taken a stand in that struggle. We will
continue to expand our support for people in the Arab
world. We are not going to turn our backs on them, but
we will be open to them. Our values and our interests
compel us to take the side of those around the world who
are fighting peacefully for freedom, dignity and self-
determination. Education and work, investment and
growth — our offer of a transformational partnership
still stands.
I will never forget the Syrian father who held out
his emaciated son to me during my visit to the Zaatari
refugee camp in Jordan. Such suffering renders us
speechless, but it also impels us to act. To this very
day, the Security Council has failed to live up to its
responsibility for the people in Syria. I express that
criticism with great sadness. The deadlock in the
Security Council must not continue. Every day, the
violence perpetrated by the Bashar Al-Assad regime
is escalating. The risk of a conf lagration engulfing the
entire region is growing. Together with our partners and
the United Nations, we are helping the many refugees
in Syria itself and in neighbouring countries.

All Syrians who want their country to have a
democratic and pluralistic future based on the rule
of law must work together. We support the efforts of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States, to
find a political approach. Despite the escalating violence
and despite the deadlock in the Security Council, we
must not stop working on a political solution.
During the past 20 months, the Arab League
has demonstrated ever more clearly its adherence
to the values enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We welcome that and we want to build on
it. At Germany’s initiative, during the last week in
September, the Security Council welcomed intensifying
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States (see S/PRST/2012/20). That is
an acknowledgement of the Arab League’s constructive
and positive role.
We also pay tribute to the efforts to gain freedom in
other parts of the world. As a result of the remarkable
opening-up process under way in Myanmar, the country
is emerging from isolation and gradually leaving
repression behind.
We criticize and strongly condemn the ongoing
repression in our own neighbourhood, in Belarus.
In many other Asian and African countries, which
have struck out in a new direction, we are supporting
political transformation by providing assistance for
economic and social development. That is in the
common interest of the international community. For
there is one thing that becomes ever more apparent, and
that is that without development, there can be no security
and without security there can be no development. That
applies to our engagement in Afghanistan, which we
will continue after the withdrawal of combat troops in
2014. It also applies to the efforts to bring stability to
Somalia and Yemen, to the Great Lakes region and to
the countries of the Sahel.
We are very concerned by the still-unresolved
dispute about Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran has still
not produced evidence of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. It has also failed to
date to provide the transparency that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has long demanded. So far, the
talks during the last few months have not made enough
progress towards reaching a solution. The European
Union’s three plus three group has put forward
proposals for a substantive negotiation process. We still
await a serious response from Iran. We want a political
and diplomatic solution. Time is short. Israel’s security
is at stake. Indeed, stability in the entire region is at
stake. However, that is also about averting the risk of
a nuclear arms race with unforeseeable consequences
for international security. I call on Iran to stop playing
for time. The situation is serious indeed, and time is
running out. We want a political solution, and we are
putting all our efforts into achieving that goal.
Those challenges must not lead us to lose sight of
the necessity of a negotiated peace settlement between
Israel and the Palestinians. There is a danger that the
goal of a two-State solution, the only solution that can
reconcile the legitimate interests of the two sides, will
slip away. The two sides must build new trust. At the
same time, they must refrain from doing anything that
might jeopardize a two-State solution.
Germany’s foreign policy is a policy for peace.
Germany’s foreign policy is anchored in Europe. Many
have been wondering whether Europe can successfully
manage its sovereign debt crisis and whether it will
continue to play a leading role in the world. The answer
is an emphatic yes. Europe has a great responsibility in
the world. And Germany is aware of its responsibility
for Europe. The way out of the debt crisis is difficult. It
requires spending discipline, solidarity and growth. We
will continue down that road. Europe is growing closer
together. Europe is consolidating. Europe will emerge
from the crisis stronger than ever before. Europe will
remain a force to be reckoned with as the world’s largest
donor of development assistance, as an inspiration for
peaceful regional cooperation, as a pioneer in climate
action and disarmament, as a champion of rules-based
globalization and as a driving force for United Nations
reform.
My country’s peaceful unification more than 20
years ago also signified the reunification of Europe.
Since then, the world has changed dramatically. Today,
we find ourselves on the threshold of a multipolar
world. The world with its interdependencies needs a
cooperative order. It needs strong and representative
institutions. We will weaken the Security Council if
we fail to adapt it to today’s world. Together with our
partners in the G-4 group, India, Brazil and Japan,
Germany is prepared to assume greater responsibility.
It cannot be that Latin America and Africa have
no permanent seats on the Security Council or that
dynamic Asia has only one. That does not reflect the realities of today’s world, and it definitely does not
reflect the realities of tomorrow.
The challenges are too great for us to simply
accept the status quo. The world is not only growing
together; the pace of change is increasing. We are
living in an age of breathtaking change. That change
brings with it risks and new dangers, as well as new
uncertainties. Above all, however, that change brings
with it great opportunities, especially for young people.
In this changing world we need a clear compass, and
our compass is freedom. The yearning for freedom is
rooted in people’s hearts all over the world. They are
our partners in building a better future.﻿This is the
first time that I speak from this rostrum at the United Nations. It is a very moving moment for me because
I understand what the United Nations represents, for
our world, and what it has represented historically. I am
also aware of a sense of responsibility, because France
is a permanent member of the Security Council and
therefore has duties. I am also here at this rostrum to
talk about values that do not belong to any particular
people, are not owned by any particular continent
and are not the privilege of any particular part of the
population.
I am here to talk about universal values, which
France has always proclaimed, and about the rights
of every human being, wherever they live: liberty,
security and resistance to oppression. Those values
and those rights are all too frequently held in contempt
in our world, especially as we face three main threats,
which we must tackle head-on. The first is the threat
of fanaticism, which fuels violence. We have seen
that yet again in recent days. The second is the global
economy, which has been affected by a crisis and which
perpetuates intolerable inequalities. The third threat is
the disturbance in the climate system, which threatens
the very survival of our planet.
The mission of the United Nations is to tackle these
challenges and to find strong and just responses to them
together. These responses must be just because without
justice, force is blind, and they must be strong because
without strength, justice is powerless.
I am also here to express France’s confidence in
the United Nations. In recent years, we have been able
together, to finally put an end to deadly conflicts, and
we have been able to prevent confrontations. However,
just as we are sending out 100,000 Blue Helmets who
act on our behalf — and I would like to pay tribute to
them — because of divisions, the blocking of our own
institutions and inertia, the United Nations has not been
able to put an end to war, atrocities and attacks on the
rights of peoples.
I would therefore, on behalf of France, draw one
conclusion that I would like to share with the Assembly.
If we want to make our world safer, it is up to us to fully
shoulder our responsibilities. How can we do so?
First of all, we can do so by reforming our own
Organization, the United Nations. The Security Council
must better reflect the realities of the world today. This
is why I would once again recall that France supports
the request for an enlargement of the Council made
by Germany, Japan, India and Brazil. But we are also in favour of an increased African presence, including
among the permanent members. Having a seat on the
Security Council is not a privilege justified by history,
and it is not a matter of satisfying some ambition related
to economic power. No, having a seat on the Security
Council means making the commitment to take action
to promote peace in the world. Indeed, we must act and
act together, but act quickly, because it is urgent.
The most urgent situation is in Syria. The Assembly
has several times denounced the massacres carried out
by the Syrian regime, called for those responsible to be
prosecuted and expressed the desire for a democratic
transition. But the ordeal of the population continues to
this day. There have been almost 30,000 deaths in the
last 18 months. How many more deaths will we wait for
before we take action? How can we allow the paralysis
of the United Nations to continue?
I know one thing for certain: the Syrian regime
will never again take its place among the alliance of
nations. It has no future among us. This is why I have
taken the decision, on behalf of France, to recognize the
provisional Government representing the new Syria as
soon as it is formed. That Government will itself have
to give guarantees that every community in Syria will
be respected and will be able to live in security in their
own country. Without further delay, I would ask that
the United Nations immediately give the Syrian people
all of the assistance and support they are requesting
and, in particular, that the liberated areas be protected
and humanitarian aid be assured for refugees. As for
the leaders in Damascus, they must know that the
international community will not stand by if they take
the unhappy decision to use chemical weapons.
Another situation that is urgent is the fight against
the most serious of threats to stability in the world,
namely, the proliferation of nuclear weapons. For several
years now, Iran has been ignoring the demands of the
international community. It shuns monitoring by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It does not keep
its word or uphold Security Council resolutions. I had
hoped that negotiations could take place in earnest and
that steps could be outlined, but, again, no negotiations
have taken place. France will not accept such actions,
which threaten not only security in the region but peace
throughout the world.
I therefore state once again that we are prepared to
adopt new sanctions, not to punish the great people of Iran, but to tell their leaders that enough is enough and
that negotiations must be resumed before it is too late.
The third urgent issue is at last to find a solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The status quo is not a
response; it is an impasse. France will make every effort
to re-establish the basis for negotiations leading to the
coexistence of the two States in question; everyone
knows that this is the only solution that could lead to a
just and lasting peace in the region.
The last of the urgent issues that I will mention,
although there are many others, might be the most
important one for us to focus on this week: the Sahel.
The situation created by the occupation of territory
in northern Mali by terrorist groups is intolerable,
inadmissible and unacceptable. It is unacceptable not
only for Mali, which is affected by that terrorist threat,
but also for all countries of the region and beyond the
region — all of those that one day might be affected by
terrorism.
The African Union, which I commend, and the
Economic Community of West African States have said
that they are prepared to take courageous decisions.
The authorities of Mali have spoken; there is no time to
lose. France will support any initiative that will enable
the Africans themselves to resolve that issue within the
framework of international law, with a clear mandate
from the Security Council. Mali must recover its
territorial integrity, and terrorism must be eliminated
from that area of the Sahel.
The role of the United Nations is to respond to
urgent situations. But there is another objective that
should unite us here, and that is development. The
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held in Rio, in which I participated, was
a disappointing stage for some and an encouraging one
for others. I believe that today we have an agenda that
should encompass economic growth, poverty reduction,
social progress and environmental protection. That is
what we need to do over the long term.
The 2015 deadline for a climate agreement is fast
approaching. I wish to state here that France is ready to
host the United Nations conference on climate change
to be held at that time, because I want us to succeed
together in meeting that challenge.
In parallel, I would recall that one of the
disappointments of Rio was our failure to agree on
the creation of a major United Nations organization for the environment. That remains France’s objective.
Such an agency would be based in Africa, because
that continent, which has been neglected for too long,
is facing climate-related challenges. It would also be
highly symbolic to entrust Africa with such a global
agency for the environment.
With respect to development, I believe that we
should face reality. We will not achieve the Millennium
Development Goals without new resources. Everyone
knows the budgetary limitations of our respective
States. That is why today, from this rostrum here at the
United Nations, I am making an appeal for innovative
financing, which would give us the means to enable our
organizations to fight effectively against diseases such
as HIV/AIDS and malaria.
I would like to commend the success of the
International Drug Purchase Facility, which was
financed by a tax on airline tickets. That path
has been opened, and today we must take another
step in that direction. I propose a tax on financial
transactions — which several European Union countries
have already agreed to — aimed at slowing down the
movement of capital or at least financing development
and helping to fight health-related scourges. France
has adopted such a tax. We have also made another
commitment: to dedicate at least 10 per cent of the
benefits of that tax to development and to fight health-
related threats and pandemics.
That is the message that I wanted to send to the
Assembly today: let us ensure that a global tax on
financial transactions can be levied and that the benefits
it yields can be spent on development and fighting
pandemics. That would be an excellent example of what
I call the globalization of solidarity, and one of the best
ideas that today’s world could implement.
But the mission of the United Nations is not only
to fight financial instability or ensure that development
remains at the centre of our concerns: it is to work to
counter all forms of instability. I am thinking here about
drug trafficking, a scourge that affects producing, transit
and consuming countries. To combat drug traffickers,
who are frequently allied with terrorist networks, the
United Nations must elaborate and implement a global
strategy to fight against drugs.
Arms trafficking also poses a major threat. France
is firmly committed to the conclusion of a universal
arms trade treaty. What the United Nations must defend
and promote is a worldview that is based on respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. The Arab Spring
showed that those values are universal and apply to all
continents and countries.
I want to welcome the events that took place in
Tunisia, in Libya, in Egypt. It is true that transitions
are not always easy. There are risks, and setbacks can
occur. Some may attempt, through violence, to reverse
the progress made and the achievements gained. France
will call on the new political authorities emanating
from democratic elections in those countries to wage an
unrelenting combat against complacency, extremism,
fanaticism, hatred, intolerance and violence, whatever
the provocation may be, because there can never be any
justification for violence.
France wants to set an example. It is not telling
anyone what to do; that is simply its history and its
message. We want to be an example in the promotion of
fundamental freedoms. That is our combat, and we are
honoured to wage it. That is why France will continue
to fight to abolish the death penalty, to ensure women’s
right to equality and dignity, and to work towards the
universal decriminalization of homosexuality, which
cannot be viewed as a crime but must be recognized as
an orientation.
We will continue to fight for the protection of
civilians. Moreover, I recall that the Assembly affirmed
the principle that all States have the responsibility to
ensure the security of their civilians. If a State fails
in that obligation, it is up to us, the United Nations,
to use the means at its disposal to meet it in its place.
Let us not neglect that promise, as it can serve us. I
am thinking, in particular, of what is happening in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, where civilians are the
main victims of clashes and where foreign interference
must cease as soon as possible.

Those are the goals that France will support and
defend at the United Nations. France has confidence in
the United Nations. We know that no State, however
powerful, can deal with emergencies, undertake the
fight for development or overcome all crises. No State
can do that, but, on the contrary, if we act together, we
will live up to our responsibilities. France wants the
United Nations to be the centre and the framework for
global governance, but do the States that make up the
Organization want that to be our purpose and goal?

I say in all seriousness that when there is paralysis,
inertia and inaction, injustice and intolerance find their
place. What I would like members to understand is that
we must act in order to shoulder our responsibilities
and to deal with urgent situations, such as Syria,
nuclear proliferation and the Sahel. We must also work
for another world that is based on development and
innovative financing and for the fight against health
crises. We must act, always and together. Let us live up
to the mission entrusted to us and to the expectations of
peoples. That is France’s message.﻿I am proud that
this year Britain welcomed the world to the Olympic
and Paralympic games and put on a great display,
showing that while we may have only the twenty-
second-largest population in the world, we can roll out
one of its warmest welcomes.
I am honoured, too, that in the coming year I have
been asked to co-chair the high-level panel designed to
help us build on one of the greatest achievements of the United Nations, the Millennium Development Goals.
Britain takes that work very seriously. I am convinced
that we need to focus more than ever on the building
blocks that take countries and people from poverty to
prosperity. By those building blocks I mean the absence
of conflict and corruption and the presence of property
rights and the rule of law. We should never forget that
for many in the world the closest relative of poverty is
injustice. Development has never been just about aid
or money, but I am proud that Britain is a country that
keeps its promises to the poorest in our world.
A year ago I stood here and argued that the Arab
Spring represented an unprecedented opportunity for
advancing peace, prosperity and security. One year
on, some believe that the Arab Spring is in danger of
becoming an Arab winter. They point to the riots on
the streets, to Syria’s descent into a bloody civil war, to
frustration at the lack of economic progress and to the
emergence of newly elected Islamist-led Governments
across the region.
But I believe those people are in danger of drawing
the wrong conclusion. Today is not the time to turn back,
but to keep the faith and to redouble our support for open
societies and for people’s demands for a job and a voice.
Yes, the path is challenging. But democracy is not, and
never has been, simply about holding an election. It is
not one person, one vote, once. Democracy is about
establishing the building blocks of true democracy:
the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law,
with the majority prepared to defend the rights of the
minority; the freedom of the media; a proper place for
the army in society; and the development of effective
State institutions, political parties and a wider civil
society.
I am not so naive as to believe that democracy
alone has some magical healing power. I am a liberal
Conservative, not a neo-conservative. I respect each
country’s different histories and traditions. I welcome
the steps taken in countries where reform is happening
with the consent of the people. I know that every
country takes its own path, and that progress will
sometimes be slow. Some countries have achieved
stability and success based on tradition and consent.
Others have endured decades in which the institutions
of civil society were deliberately destroyed, political
parties banned, free media abolished and the rule of
law twisted for the benefit of the few. We cannot expect
the damage of decades to be put right in a matter of
months. But the drive for opportunity, justice and the rule of law and the hunger for a job and a voice are not
responsible for the problems in the region. In fact, quite
the opposite: the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not part of the problem. We in the United Nations
must step up our efforts to support the people of those
countries as they build their own democratic future.
Let me take the key arguments in turn. First, there
are those who say there has been too little progress,
that the Arab Spring has produced few tangible
improvements in people’s lives. That is not right. Look
at Libya since the fall of Al-Qadhafi. We have seen
elections to create a new Congress, and now plans to
integrate armed groups into the national police and
army. None of that is to ignore the huge and sobering
challenges that remain.
The murder of Ambassador Chris Stevens was a
despicable act of terrorism. But the right response is
to finish the work that Chris Stevens gave his life to.
That is what the vast majority of Libyans want, too, as
we saw so inspiringly in Benghazi last weekend, when
they took to the streets in the thousands, refusing to
allow extremists to hijack their chance for democracy.
The Arab Spring has also brought progress in
Egypt, where the democratically elected President
has asserted civilian control over the military; in
Yemen and Tunisia, where elections have brought new
Governments to power; and in Morocco, where there
is a new Constitution and a Prime Minister appointed
on the basis of a popular vote for the first time. Even
further afield, Somalia has also taken the first vital step
forward by electing a new President. So there has been
progress. None of it would have come about without
people standing up last year and demanding change,
or without the United Nations having the courage to
respond to those crises.
Secondly, there is the argument that the removal of
dictators has somehow started to unleash a new wave of
violence, extremism and instability. Some argue that in
a volatile region, only an authoritarian strong man can
maintain stability and security. Or even, some argue,
that recent events prove that democracy in the Middle
East brings terrorism, not security, and sectarian
conflict, not peace. Again, I believe we should reject
that argument.
I have no illusions about the danger that political
transition can be exploited by violent extremists. I
understand the importance of protecting people and defending national security. Britain is determined
to work with our allies to do that. But democracy
and open societies are not the problem. The fact is
that, for decades, too many were prepared to tolerate
dictators like Al-Qadhafi and Al-Assad on the basis
that they would keep their people safe at home and
promote stability in the region and the wider world. In
fact, neither was true. Not only were theose dictators
repressing their people, ruling by control not by consent,
plundering the national wealth, and denying people
their basic rights and freedoms, they were funding
terrorism overseas as well. Brutal dictatorships made
the region more dangerous not less; more dangerous
because those regimes dealt with frustration at home
by whipping up anger against their neighbours, against
the West, against Israel; and more dangerous, too,
because people denied a job and a voice were given no
alternative but a dead-end choice between dictatorship
and extremism.
What was heartening about the events of Tahrir
Square was that the Egyptian people found their voice
and rejected that false choice. They withheld their
consent from a Government that had lost all legitimacy,
and they chose instead the road to a more open and fair
society. The road is not easy, but it is the right one. I
believe it will make countries safer in the end.
Next, there are those who say that, whatever may
have been achieved elsewhere, in Syria the Arab Spring
has unleashed a vortex of sectarian violence and hatred
with the potential to destroy the whole region. Syria
does present some profound challenges. But those who
look at Syria today and blame the Arab Spring have got
it the wrong way round. We cannot blame the people
for the behaviour of a brutal dictator. The responsibility
lies with the brutal dictator himself.
Al-Assad is today inf laming Syria’s sectarian
tensions, just as his father did as far back as the slaughter
in Hama 30 years ago. And not only in Syria; Al-Assad
has colluded with those in Iran who are set on dragging
the region into wider conflict. The only way out of
Syria’s nightmare is to move forward towards political
transition and not to give up the cause of freedom. The
future for Syria is a future without Al-Assad. It has to
be based on mutual consent, as was clearly agreed in
the International Conference on Syria held in Geneva
in June. If anyone was in any doubt about the horrors
that Al-Assad has inf licted on his people, just look at
the evidence published this week by Save the Children:
schools used as torture centres, children used for target practice. A 16-year-old Syrian called Wael who was
detained in a police station in Daraa said: “I have seen
children slaughtered. No, I do not think I will ever be
OK again...lf there was even 1 per cent of humanity in
the world, this would not happen”.
The blood of those young children is a terrible stain
on the reputation of the United Nations. In particular,
it is a stain on those who have failed to stand up to
these atrocities and those who in some cases aided
and abetted Al-Assad’s regime of terror. lf the United
Nations Charter is to have any value in the twenty-
first century, we must now join together to support
a rapid political transition. At the same time, no one
of conscience can turn a deaf ear to the voices of
suffering. Security Council members have a particular
responsibility to support the United Nations appeal for
Syria. Britain, already the third biggest donor, is today
announcing a further $12 million in humanitarian
support, including new support for UNICEF’s work
to help Syrian children. We look to our international
partners to do more as well.
Of course, the Arab Spring has not removed
overnight the profound economic challenges that
these countries face. Too many countries face falling
investment, rising food prices and bigger trade deficits.
But it is completely wrong to suggest that the Arab
Spring has somehow created those economic problems.
It is a challenging time for the world economy as
a whole. There was never going to be an economic
transformation overnight, not least because far from
being successful open-market-based economies, many
of these countries were beset by vested interests and
corruption, with unaccountable institutions. That has,
one might say, created a double problem. Not just
fragile economies, but worse, people were told they had
experienced free enterprise and open markets when
they had experienced nothing of the sort.
So we must help these countries unwind the legacy
of endemic corruption, military expenditure they
cannot afford, natural resources unfairly exploited; in
short, the mass kleptocracy that they suffered under for
too long.
While I am on the subject of stolen assets, we also
have a responsibility to help these countries get back
the stolen assets that are rightfully theirs, just as we
have returned billions of dollars of assets to Libya. It
is simply not good enough that the Egyptian people
continue to be denied those assets long after Mubarak
has gone.

Today, I am announcing a new British task force to
work with the Egyptian Government to gather evidence,
trace assets, work to change European Union law and
pursue the legal cases that will return the stolen money
to its rightful owners, the Egyptian people.
Finally, perhaps most challenging of all for Western
countries like mine, is the argument that elections
have simply opened the door to Islamist parties whose
values are incompatible with truly open societies. My
response to this is clear. We should respect the outcome
of elections. But we should not compromise on our
definition of what makes an open society. We should
judge Islamists by what they do.
The test is this. Will they entrust the rights of
citizenship to fellow countrymen and countrywomen
who do not share their specific political or religious
views? Do they accept that, unlike the dictators they
replaced, they should never pervert the democratic
process to hold onto power if they lose the consent
of the people they serve? Will they live up to their
commitments to protect the rule of law for all citizens,
to defend the rights of Christians and minorities and
to allow women a full role in society, in the economy
and in politics? The truth is this: we cannot build
strong economies, we cannot build open societies and
we cannot have inclusive political systems if we lock
out women. The eyes of the world today may be on the
brothers, but the future is as much in the hands of their
mothers, their sisters and their daughters.
Holding Islamists to account must also mean that
if they attempt to undermine the stability of other
countries, encourage terrorism instead of peace or
promote conflict instead of partnership, we will oppose
them. That is why Iran will continue to face the full
force of sanctions and scrutiny from the United Nations
until it gives up its ambitions to spread a nuclear shadow
over the world. It is also why we should not waver from
our insistence that Hamas give up violence. Hamas must
not be allowed to dictate the way forward. Palestinians
should have the chance to fulfil the same aspirations for
a job and a voice as others in the region, and we support
their right to have a State and a home. And Israelis
should be able to fulfil their own aspirations to live in
peace and security with their neighbours.
Of course there are challenges in working with
Governments that have different views and cultural
traditions. But there is a fundamental difference
between Islam and extremism. Islam is a great religion
observed peacefully and devoutly by more than 1 billion people. Islamist extremism is a warped political
ideology supported by a minority that seeks to hijack
that great religion, to gain respectability for its violent
objectives. It is vital that we make that distinction.
In Turkey, we see a Government with roots in
Islamic values but with democratic politics, an open
economy and a responsible attitude to supporting
change in Libya, Syria and elsewhere in the region.
I profoundly believe the same path is open to Egypt,
Tunisia and their neighbours. We must help them take
it. Democracy and Islam can flourish alongside one
another. Let us judge Governments not by their religion,
but by how they act and what they do. Let us engage with
the new democratic Governments in Egypt, Tunisia and
Libya so their success can strengthen democracy, not
undermine it.
There is no doubt that we are in the midst of
profound change and that many uncertainties lie
ahead. But the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not the problem. Indeed, nothing in the last year has
changed my fundamental conviction. The Arab Spring
represents a precious opportunity for people to realize
their aspirations for a job, a voice and a stake in their
future. We in the United Nations must do everything
we can to support them.﻿It is indeed a great privilege
for me to be able to address the General Assembly.
Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Vuk Jeremić on
his election to the office of President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I assure him of
our constructive support in his work over the coming
year.
We are assembled in New York at a time when we
face multiple global challenges that transcend national
boundaries. Developing countries are still to recover
from the downturn in the global economy. Their quest
for poverty eradication and sustainable development
remains an uphill task. Food and energy security as well
as health and education for their populations remain
daunting challenges. The West Asia-North Africa
region is seeing unprecedented sociopolitical upheaval.
The question of Palestine remains unresolved. Threats
emanating from terrorism, maritime piracy, drug
trafficking and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction continue to multiply. Those challenges
demand that we work for solutions in a concerted and
coordinated manner. That is the only path to success.
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20), the international community
renewed its commitment to sustainable development
and recognized poverty eradication as the greatest
global challenge. To act on that, it unequivocally
reaffirmed the sanctity of the Rio principles. India
remains committed to addressing climate change
through a comprehensive, equitable and balanced
outcome based on the principles of equity and common
but differentiated responsibilities. In less than two
weeks, in Hyderabad, we will host the eleventh meeting
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. We seek the support of parties to
fashion an outcome that harmonizes strong biodiversity
action with our basic development objectives.
The process to develop a set of sustainable
development goals has begun. The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) must be integrated in the
new framework so that the unmet development priorities
continue to be the main focus. In the interim, with still
three years to go to the MDG target date of 2015, it
is imperative to ensure that all efforts to achieve the
MDGs are made. In the global discourse on the post-
2015 development agenda, the focus ought to be on the
word “development”. It ought to be firmly entrenched
in the understandings and principles of Rio+20 and be
anchored in the intergovernmental process at the United Nations. Priority must be given to the challenges of
poverty, unemployment, food and energy, water, health,
environmental sustainability, unsustainable lifestyles
and, above all, economic growth.
Ensuring gender equality and women’s
empowerment is essential to the pursuit of building
inclusive societies. It is also an imperative for building
strong and resilient economies. We are happy to support
the efforts of the United Nations. We also need to pay
particular attention to upgrading the skills of young
people and to ensuring employment opportunities for
them. Children and youth are our future. We need to
invest in them to reap the demographic dividend to
secure our future.
India remains firmly committed to scaling up
our development partnership with Africa, including
through the framework of the India-Africa Forum
Summit. Similarly, we will continue to build on our
commitments for enhanced cooperation with least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States within the framework
of South-South cooperation.
India is a multireligious, multi-ethnic and
multilingual society. Our civilizational ethos has been
underpinned by peaceful coexistence and tolerance,
values that the founder of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi,
placed at the core of India’s national life. Those
principles are enshrined in our Constitution, which
provides the foundation for our secular, democratic and
inclusive society.
Mutual respect for deeply held religious sentiments
is the bedrock of tolerance and coexistence. Unfortunate
recent events have highlighted the need for enhanced
dialogue among faiths and civilizations. Violence
cannot lead to greater understanding. It is necessary
to uphold norms of peaceful international discourse.
In particular, the safety and security of diplomatic
personnel should be fully respected.
Terrorism remains one of the most potent threats
to international peace and security. The international
community must adopt a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism and must focus on efforts to dismantle the
infrastructure of terrorism, including its invidious
network of epicentres, training facilities and financing.
It is time we demonstrated the necessary political will to
agree on a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism so as to strengthen the normative framework against the increasingly sophisticated and globalized
terrorist challenge.
India continues to be gravely concerned by the
menace of piracy and armed robbery at sea. Apart from
the major economic and commercial consequences of
that scourge, it has serious humanitarian implications
for the large number of seafarers held hostage by
pirates. The need of the hour is once again concerted
international action under United Nations auspices,
with special attention to addressing the welfare of
seafarers and their families.
Peacekeeping and disarmament are among the
unique pursuits of the United Nations, because
they embody the promise and innate potential of the
Organization to make the world a better place. India
has a proud history of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations dating back to the 1950s,
having taken part in as many as 43 peacekeeping
operations. The challenge before the international
community today is to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping is adequately resourced and enabled to
meet the realities of today, including in post-conflict
and peacebuilding contexts. In that regard, we are
hopeful that progress will be made on all outstanding
issues between the Sudan and South Sudan.
India is committed to achieving a nuclear-
weapon-free world. The principles of the Rajiv Gandhi
action plan of 1988 for achieving nuclear disarmament
in a time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory,
phased and verifiable manner remain relevant, even
after more than two decades. A renewed consensus
on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament must
be forged. Meaningful dialogue among all States
possessing nuclear weapons is needed in order to build
trust and confidence and to reduce the salience of
nuclear weapons in international affairs and security
doctrines.
Measures must be taken to reduce nuclear
risks, including the grave risk of terrorists gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, and thus
to strengthen nuclear security. The Conference on
Disarmament — the international community’s sole
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum — deserves
our support in discharging its mandate of negotiating
treaties on issues on the international disarmament
agenda.
The crisis in Syria continues unabated and is a matter
of serious concern for us. Any further militarization of the crisis can have catastrophic consequences for
the region. We urge all parties to commit themselves
to resolving the crisis without any further bloodshed
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process
that can meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. We support the efforts of the United Nations
and urge all sides to cooperate in good faith with the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Support for the Palestinian cause has been a
cornerstone of India’s foreign policy. We were privileged
to receive President Mahmoud Abbas in India earlier this
month. We support Palestine’s aspirations for enhanced
status at the United Nations. It is imperative that there be
an early realization of a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
India desires constructive and friendly relations
with all its neighbours. We have a vision of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous region with enhanced cooperation
and connectivity linking us with Central Asia, the
Gulf and South-East Asia. Within South Asia, we have
sought to enhance bilateral relations individually with
each of our neighbours and through the aegis of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
We have embarked on a resumed dialogue process
with Pakistan and advocate a step-by-step approach to
normalizing our bilateral relations.
An unwarranted reference has been made from
this rostrum to Jammu and Kashmir. Our principled
position on the issue has been consistent and is well
known. The people of Jammu and Kashmir have chosen
their destiny and reaffirmed it repeatedly through
India’s well-established democratic processes. We wish
to make it abundantly clear that Jammu and Kashmir is
an integral part of India.
India supports the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their endeavour to build a peaceful,
stable, democratic and prosperous country. We are
ready to partner with the Afghan people as they rebuild
their country in accordance with their own priorities
and national circumstances. The continuing existence
beyond Afghanistan’s borders of safe havens and
sanctuaries for terrorists is the major impediment to the
restoration of peace and security in Afghanistan. India is committed to creating an enabling environment in
which the Afghan people can live in peace and security
and decide their future for themselves, without outside
interference, coercion or intimidation.
The United Nations and the norms of international
relations that it has fostered remain the most
efficacious means for converting today’s challenges
into opportunities. However, we need to ensure that the
architecture of global governance reflects contemporary
realities. Sticking to structures designed at the end of
the Second World War only constrains multilateralism
from delivering on its promises.
The most important and decisive step towards
remedying that situation pertains to the Security
Council, which must be expanded in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories. A reformed Council
must include countries that are capable of bearing, and
willing to bear, the additional burdens relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well
as willilng to sustain global campaigns against new and
emerging global threats. Let me also stress that we must
address, sooner rather than later, the incongruity of the
lack of permanent membership for Africa.
Equally, India will promote and lend its weight to
enhancing the voice and participation of developing
countries in decision-making in global economic and
financial institutions. The quota reform process of the
International Monetary Fund must be accelerated with
altered quotas that reflect contemporary economic
weight.
Speaking in the Assembly on 14 October 1968,
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said,
“The United Nations is the trustee of the
world’s peace and represents the hopes of mankind.
Its very existence gives a feeling of assurance that
the justice of true causes can be brought fearlessly
before the world. This Assembly and the agencies
of the United Nations should, in all that they do,
sustain those hopes and promote the causes of
peace”.
Those words remain true to this day.
Let me conclude by assuring the President and the
members of the Assembly that India will continue to
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and will strive to strengthen the
United Nations.﻿It is a pleasure to see the
General Assembly presided over by the Ambassador from Israel, and it is good to see all of the representatives
here.
Three thousand years ago, King David reigned
over the Jewish State in our eternal capital, Jerusalem.
I say that to all those who proclaim that the Jewish
State has no roots in our region and that it will soon
disappear. Throughout our history, the Jewish people
have overcome all the tyrants who have sought our
destruction. It is their ideologies that have been
discarded by history. The people of Israel live on. We
say in Hebrew, the Jewish State will live forever.
The Jewish people have lived in the land of Israel
for thousands of years. Even after most of our people
were exiled from it, Jews continued to live in the land
of Israel throughout the ages. The masses of our people
never gave up the dream of returning to our ancient
homeland. Defying the laws of history, we did just that.
We ingathered the exiles, restored our independence
and rebuilt our national life. The Jewish people have
come home. We will never be uprooted again.
Yesterday was Yom Kippur, the holiest day of
the Jewish year. Every year, for over three millennia,
we have come together on this day of ref lection and
atonement. We take stock of our past. We pray for our
future. We remember the sorrows of our persecution;
we remember the great travails of our dispersion; we
mourn the extermination of a third of our people,
6 million, in the Holocaust.
But at the end of Yom Kippur, we celebrate. We
celebrate the rebirth of Israel. We celebrate the heroism
of our young men and women who have defended our
people with the indomitable courage of Joshua, David
and the Maccabees of old. We celebrate the marvel
of the flourishing modern Jewish State. In Israel we
walk the same paths as those trodden by our patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But we blaze new trails in
science, technology, medicine and agriculture. In Israel
the past and the future find common ground.
Unfortunately, that is not the case in many other
countries. For today, a great battle is being waged
between the modern and the medieval. The forces of
modernity seek a bright future in which the rights of
all are protected, in which an ever-expanding digital
library is available in the palm of every child, in which
every life is sacred.
The forces of medievalism seek a world in which
women and minorities are subjugated, in which knowledge is suppressed, in which not life but death
is glorified. Those forces clash around the globe, but
nowhere more starkly than in the Middle East. Israel
stands proudly with the forces of modernity. We protect
the rights of all our citizens, men and women, Jews and
Arabs, Muslims and Christians — all are equal before
the law.
Israel is also making the world a better place. Our
scientists win Nobel Prizes. Our know-how is in every
cell phone and computer that every one of us uses. We
prevent hunger by irrigating arid lands in Africa and
Asia. Recently, I was deeply moved when I visited
Technion, one of our technological institutes in Haifa,
and I saw a man paralysed from the waist down climb
up a f light of stairs, quite easily, with the aid of an
Israeli invention. And Israel’s exceptional creativity is
matched by our people’s remarkable compassion. When
disaster strikes anywhere in the world — in Haiti,
Japan, India, Turkey, Indonesia and elsewhere — Israeli
doctors are among the first on the scene, performing
lifesaving surgeries.
In the past year, I lost both my father and my
father-in-law. In the same hospital wards where they
were treated, Israeli doctors were treating Palestinian
Arabs. In fact, every year, thousands of Arabs from
the Palestinian territories and Arabs from throughout
the Middle East come to Israel to be treated in Israeli
hospitals by Israeli doctors. I know that that is not
going to be spoken by speakers at this podium, but it
is the truth. It is important that the world be aware of
that truth. It is because Israel cherishes life that Israel
cherishes peace and seeks peace. We seek to preserve
our historic ties and our historic peace treaties with
Egypt and Jordan. We seek to forge a durable peace
with the Palestinians.
President Abbas just spoke here. I say to him and
I say to the Assembly: we will not solve our conflict
with libellous speeches at the United Nations. That is
not the way to solve it. We will not solve our conflict
with unilateral declarations of statehood. We have
to sit together, negotiate together and reach a mutual
compromise, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State
recognizes the one and only Jewish State.
Israel wants to see a Middle East of progress and
peace. We want to see the three great religions that
sprang forth from our region — Judaism, Christianity
and Islam — coexist in peace and in mutual respect. Yet the medieval forces of radical Islam, which
the world just saw storming American Embassies
throughout the Middle East, oppose that. They seek
supremacy over all Muslims. They are bent on world
conquest. They want to destroy Israel, Europe, America.
They want to extinguish freedom. They want to end the
modern world.
Militant Islam has many branches, from the rulers
of Iran with their Revolutionary Guards to Al-Qaida
terrorists to the radical cells lurking in every part of the
globe. But despite their differences, they are all rooted
in the same bitter soil of intolerance. That intolerance
is directed first at their fellow Muslims and then at
Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus, secular people,
and anyone who does not submit to their unforgiving
creed. They want to drag humankind back to an age of
unquestioning dogma and unrelenting conflict.
I am sure of one thing. Ultimately, they will fail.
Ultimately, light will penetrate the darkness. We
have seen that happen before. Some 500 years ago,
the printing press helped pry a cloistered Europe
out of a dark age. Eventually, ignorance gave way to
enlightenment. So too, a cloistered Middle East will
eventually yield to the irresistible power of freedom
and technology. When that happens, our region will be
guided not by fanaticism and conspiracy but by reason
and curiosity.
I think the relevant question is not whether this
fanaticism will be defeated. It is how many lives will
be lost before it is defeated. We have seen that happen
before too. Some 70 years ago, the world saw another
fanatic ideology bent on world conquest. It went down
in flames, but not before it took millions of people with
it. Those who opposed that fanaticism waited too long
to act. In the end they triumphed, but at a horrific cost.
My friends, we cannot let that happen again. At
stake is not merely the future of my own country. At
stake is the future of the world. Nothing could imperil
our common future more than the arming of Iran with
nuclear weapons. To understand what the world would
be like with a nuclear-armed Iran, just imagine the
world with a nuclear-armed Al-Qaida. It makes little
difference whether these lethal weapons are in the
hands of the world’s most dangerous terrorist regime or
the world’s most dangerous terrorist organization. They
are both fired by the same hatred; they are both driven
by the same lust for violence. Just look at what the Iranian regime has done up
until now, without nuclear weapons. In 2009, they
brutally put down mass protests for democracy in their
own country. Today, their henchmen are participating
in the slaughter of tens of thousands of Syrian
civilians, including thousands of children — directly
participating in those murders. They abetted the killing
of American soldiers in Iraq and continue to do so
in Afghanistan. Before that, Iranian proxies killed
hundreds of American troops in Beirut and in Saudi
Arabia. They have turned Lebanon and Gaza into terror
strongholds, embedding nearly 100,000 missiles and
rockets in civilian areas. Thousands of such rockets and
missiles have already been fired at Israeli communities
by their terrorist proxies.
In the past year, they have spread their international
terror networks to two dozen countries across five
continents, from India and Thailand to Kenya and
Bulgaria. They have even plotted to blow up a restaurant
a few blocks from the White House in order to kill a
diplomat. And of course, Iran’s rulers repeatedly deny
the Holocaust and call for Israel’s destruction almost
on a daily basis, as they did again this week from the
United Nations.
So I ask, given this record of Iranian aggression
without nuclear weapons, just imagine Iranian
aggression with nuclear weapons. Imagine their long-
range missiles tipped with nuclear warheads, their
terror networks armed with atomic bombs. Who here
would feel safe in the Middle East? Who would be safe
in Europe? Who would be safe in America? Who would
be safe anywhere?
There are those who believe that a nuclear-armed
Iran can be deterred like the Soviet Union. That is a
very dangerous assumption. Militant jihadists behave
very differently from secular Marxists. There were
no Soviet suicide bombers. Yet Iran produces hordes
of them. Deterrence worked with the Soviets, because
every time the Soviets faced a choice between their
ideology and their survival, they chose their survival.
But deterrence may not work with the Iranians once
they get nuclear weapons.
A great scholar of the Middle East, Professor
Bernard Lewis, put it best. He said that for the ayatollahs
of Iran mutually assured destruction is not a deterrent,
it is an inducement. Iran’s apocalyptic leaders believe
that a medieval holy man will reappear in the wake
of a devastating holy war, thereby ensuring that their brand of radical Islam will rule the Earth. That is not
just what they believe; it is what is actually guiding
their policies and their actions. Just listen to Ayatollah
Rafsanjani who said, “the use of even one nuclear bomb
inside Israel will destroy everything, however it would
only harm the Islamic world.” Rafsanjani said: “It is
not irrational to contemplate such an eventuality”. “Not
irrational” is what he said. And that is coming from one
of the so-called moderates of Iran.
Shockingly, some people have begun to peddle the
absurd notion that a nuclear-armed Iran would actually
stabilize the Middle East. That is like saying a nuclear-
armed Al-Qaida would usher in an era of universal
peace.
I have been speaking about the need to prevent Iran
from developing nuclear weapons for over 15 years.
I spoke about it in my first term in office as Prime
Minister, and then I spoke about it when I left office.
I spoke about it when it was fashionable, and I spoke
about it when it was not fashionable.
I speak about it now because the hour is getting
late, very late. I speak about it now because the Iranian
nuclear calendar does not take time out for anyone or
for anything. I speak about it now because when it
comes to the survival of my country, it is not only my
right to speak, it is my duty to speak. And I believe that
it is the duty of every responsible leader who wants to
preserve world peace.
For nearly a decade, the international community
has tried to stop the Iranian nuclear programme with
diplomacy. That has not worked. Iran uses diplomatic
negotiations as a means to buy time to advance its nuclear
programme. For over seven years, the international
community has tried sanctions with Iran. Under the
leadership of President Obama, the international
community has passed some of the strongest sanctions
to date.
I want to thank the Governments represented here
that have joined in that effort. It has had an effect. Oil
exports have been curbed and the Iranian economy
has been hit hard. It has had an effect on the economy,
but we must face the truth. Sanctions have not stopped
Iran’s nuclear programme either.
According to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, during the last year alone, Iran doubled the
number of centrifuges in its underground nuclear
facility in Qom. At this late hour, there is only one way to peacefully prevent Iran from getting atomic bombs.
That is by placing a clear red line on Iran’s nuclear
weapons programme.
Red lines do not lead to war. Red lines prevent war.
Look at NATO’s charter. It made clear that an attack on
one member country would be considered an attack on
all. NATO’s red line helped keep the peace in Europe
for nearly half a century. President Kennedy set a red
line during the Cuban missile crisis. That red line
also prevented war and helped preserve the peace for
decades.
In fact, it is the failure to place red lines that has
often invited aggression. If the Western Powers had
drawn clear red lines during the 1930s, I believe they
would have stopped Nazi aggression, and the Second
World War might have been avoided. In 1990, if
Saddam Hussein had been clearly told that his conquest
of Kuwait would cross a red line, the first Gulf War
might have been avoided.
Clear red lines have also worked with Iran. Earlier
this year, Iran threatened to close the Straits of Hormuz.
The United States drew a clear red line and Iran backed
off. Now, red lines could be drawn in different parts of
Iran’s nuclear weapons programme, but to be credible,
a red line must be drawn first and foremost in one vital
part of their programme: on Iran’s efforts to enrich
uranium.
Now let me explain why. Basically, any bomb
consists of explosive material and a mechanism to
ignite it. The simplest example is gunpowder and a
fuse — that is, you light the fuse and you set off the
gunpowder. In the case of Iran’s plans to build a nuclear
weapon, the gunpowder is enriched uranium. The
fuse is a nuclear detonator. For Iran, amassing enough
enriched uranium is far more difficult than producing
the nuclear fuse. For a country like Iran, it takes many
years to enrich uranium for a bomb. That requires
thousands of centrifuges spinning in tandem in very
big industrial plants. Those Iranian plants are visible
and they are still vulnerable.
In contrast, Iran could produce the nuclear
detonator, the fuse, in a lot less time — maybe under a
year, maybe only a few months. The detonator can be
made in a small workshop the size of a classroom. It
may be very difficult to find and target that workshop,
especially in Iran. That is a country that is bigger than
France, Germany, Italy and Britain combined. The
same is true for the small facility in which they could assemble a warhead or a nuclear device that could be
placed in a container ship. Chances are you will not
find that facility either.
So in fact, the only way that you can credibly
prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, is to
prevent Iran from amassing enough enriched uranium
for a bomb. So how much enriched uranium do you
need for a bomb, and how close is Iran to getting it?
Let me show you. I brought a diagram for you. Here
is the diagram. This is a bomb. This is a fuse.
In the case of Iran’s nuclear plans to build a bomb,
this bomb has to be filled with enough enriched
uranium, and Iran has to go through three stages. In
the first stage they have to enrich enough low-enriched
uranium; in the second stage they have to enrich enough
medium-enriched uranium. And in the third, and
final, stage they have to enrich enough high-enriched
uranium for the first bomb.
Where is Iran? Iran has completed the first stage. It
took them many years, but they completed it, and they
are 70 per cent of the way there. Now they are well
into the second stage. By next spring, at most by next
summer, at current enrichment rates, they will have
finished the medium enrichment and moved on to the
final stage. From there, it is only a few months, possibly
a few weeks, before they get enough enriched uranium
for the first bomb.
What I told the Assembly just now is not based
on secret information. It is not based on military
intelligence. It is based on public reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Anybody can
read them. They are online.
So if these are the facts — and they are — where
should a red line be drawn? A red line should be drawn
right here, before Iran completes the second stage of
nuclear enrichment necessary to make a bomb and
before Iran gets to a point where it is a few months away
or a few weeks away from amassing enough enriched
uranium to make a nuclear weapon.
Each day, that point is getting closer. That is why
I speak today with such a sense of urgency, and that is
why everyone should have a sense of urgency.
There are some who claim that even if Iran
completes the enrichment process, even if it crosses
that red line that I just drew, our intelligence agencies
will know when and where Iran will make the fuse, assemble the bomb and prepare the warhead. No one
appreciates our intelligence agencies more than the
Prime Minister of Israel. All these leading intelligence
agencies are superb, including ours. They have foiled
many attacks, they have saved many lives, but they
are not foolproof. For over two years, our intelligence
agencies did not know that Iran was building a huge
nuclear enrichment plant under a mountain. Do we
want to risk the security of the world on the assumption
that we would find a small workshop in a country half
the size of Europe in time?
The relevant question is not when Iran will get
the bomb. The relevant question is at what stage can
we no longer stop Iran from getting the bomb? The
red line must be drawn on Iran’s nuclear enrichment
programme because these enrichment facilities are the
only nuclear installations that we can definitely see and
credibly target.
I believe that faced with a clear red line, Iran will
back down. This will give more time for sanctions and
diplomacy to convince Iran to dismantle its nuclear
weapons programme altogether.
Two days ago, from this podium, President Obama
reiterated that the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran cannot
be contained (see A/67/PV.6). I very much appreciate
the President’s position, as does everyone in my country.
We share the goal of stopping Iran’s nuclear weapons
programme. This goal unites the people of Israel. It
unites Americans, Democrats and Republicans alike.
and it is shared by important leaders throughout the
world. What I have said today will help ensure that this
common goal is achieved. Israel is in discussions with
the United States over this issue, and I am confident
that we can chart a path forward together.
The clash between modernity and medievalism
need not be a clash between progress and tradition. The
traditions of the Jewish people go back thousands of
years. They are the source of our collective values and
the foundations of our national strength. At the same
time, the Jewish people have always looked towards the
future. Throughout history, we have been at the forefront
of efforts to expand liberty, promote equality and
advance human rights. We champion those principles
not in spite of our traditions but because of them. We
heed the words of the Jewish prophets Isaiah, Amos and
Jeremiah to treat all with dignity and compassion, to
pursue justice and cherish life and to pray and strive for
peace. Those are the timeless values of my people, and they are the Jewish people’s greatest gift to humankind.
Let us commit ourselves today to defending those
values so that we can defend our freedoms and protect
our common civilization.﻿I bring greetings
from the South Pacific. For the past year, New Zealand
has had the privilege of chairing the Pacific Islands
Forum, a regional body that represents some of the
smallest and most vulnerable States on this planet. For
us that has been an important responsibility.
Because we are a small country with modest
resources, we choose to focus much of our attention
on our own region. Over 60 per cent of our official
development assistance is spent in our own
neighbourhood. Serving as Chair of the Pacific Islands
Forum has caused us to reflect on the role of regional
organizations, and also on the extent to which we all
depend on the United Nations for solutions to challenges
that are truly global in character. I say with some
confidence that we have been making good progress
in dealing with those challenges that are capable of
regional solutions.
But I must also say that we need and expect more
from this institution. The Pacific Islands Forum has
16 members, of which 16 are small island States. I was
pleased this week to attend the first meeting between
the Secretary-General and Pacific Islands Forum
leaders, which I hope will mark a new era of enhanced
high-level engagement between this Organization and
our region and a greater understanding of our needs.
The Pacific has had its share of stability and
security challenges in recent times. As a region, we
have done reasonably well in dealing with them. Most recently it has been in Solomon Islands that a regional
initiative has been required. The Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands has involved a truly
regional approach, with the participation of police
and other personnel from every member of the Pacific
Islands Forum. I am pleased to report that the security
element of that initiative has been significantly scaled
down and will soon be fully withdrawn. But there is
also more that this Organization, particularly the
Security Council, can do to acknowledge and support
regional leadership on peace and security matters in the
Pacific and elsewhere.
Concerns about democracy, the rule of law and
human rights are not mere abstract considerations within
the Pacific. Those principles have been challenged in a
number of States, most notably, in recent years, in Fiji.
In that respect, I am pleased to report that progress is
being made towards the holding of elections in 2014,
and that support has been forthcoming to ensure that
such elections are free and fair.
Stability and security issues are not the only
priorities for our regional body. In our year as Forum
Chair, New Zealand chose to focus on a number of
development priorities, two of which I wish to mention
in my remarks today.
For many of the poorer States within our region,
their fisheries resource is the major economic asset they
hold. Yet due to illegal fishing practices, unreported
catch and inadequate management practices, those
countries have received far too small a return on that
resource. Because of the highly migratory character
of the tuna resource, this is truly a matter requiring
regional management. Solid progress is being made
in such areas as improved surveillance, the training
of monitors and improved management practices, both
to protect the last really healthy fishery on the planet
and to ensure that its owners receive a fair share of the
resource they own.
One of the highest priorities within our region
is the need for practical initiatives in the area of
renewable energy. Ours is a region heavily dependent
upon fossil fuels for the generation of electricity. The
cost of expensive imported diesel in most small Pacific
economies is absolutely crippling. The climate change
impact is obvious.
After a decade of climate change conferences and
hundreds of millions of dollars in so-called climate
change initiatives, one might be forgiven for imagining that the Pacific, overendowed as it is with good sunlight,
would by now be positively festooned with solar power
plants. Sadly, I must report that that is not in fact the
case. Indeed, one of the most striking features of our
region has been the complete lack of progress in putting
lofty climate change rhetoric into any form of renewable
energy practice.
In our year in the Chair of the regional body we
have set out to correct that serious shortcoming. A
small but important illustration lies in our work in
the tiny Tokelau Islands. Until now, Tokelau has been
100 per cent dependent on fossil fuels for the generation
of electricity. By the end 2012, Tokelau will be over
90 per cent resourced with renewable solar electricity.
Good progress has also been made in Tonga, where
I recently participated in the opening of a solar power
plant supplying around 20 per cent of the electricity
requirements of the main island, Tongatapu. And we
are working with the Cook Islands Government, too,
to assist in meeting their bold aspiration to 50 per cent
renewable electricity by 2015, mostly through solar
initiatives.
These New Zealand-funded programmes are
an important part of our overall commitment to our
region. Our parting legacy from our year as Chair
of the regional body is a renewable-energy pledging
conference to be held early next year, with the objective
of matching donors, suppliers of concessional and
commercial finance, and others with the renewable
energy plans of our Pacific neighbours. Here I should
acknowledge the European Union’s commitment in
co-leading this initiative, as well as the support of the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the
Governments of Australia, the United States and other
generous supporters.
While there is much that can be achieved by
regional action, we must acknowledge that sometimes
regional solutions are just not enough. That goes right
to the very heart of the reason for the existence of this
Organization. My point is most vividly illustrated
today in relation to Syria. It would be difficult for
me to overstate the level of frustration of the people
I represent with the complete inability of the Security
Council to act in relation to Syria. And it would be
even more difficult to overstate the extent to which the
Security Council is at risk of losing its credibility in the
eyes of reasonable and fair-minded people through its
inability to act. People in my country ask a very simple question:
If 25,000 deaths, countless thousands injured and
many more displaced and homeless are not enough to
get the Security Council to act, then what does it take?
Just what does it take? I welcome the leadership that
the Arab League and Arab States have shown on this
issue, and we have seen similar leadership from them
on other difficult issues in their region. And I welcome
the fact that the General Assembly has been looking
for opportunities to be more engaged. In the absence of
leadership from the Security Council, 1 suggest that the
Assembly must find ways to play a more activist role.
But from all of this, the case for Security Council
reform has become utterly compelling. Indeed,
increasingly, the future credibility of the United
Nations may depend on it. If we are to make progress
in this area we will need to see Members move past the
extravagant attempts to maximize individual positions
and try to find some meaningful, practical reforms that
actually hold the prospect of widespread support.
I represent a small nation of practical, constructive
people. And it is because we seek practical,
constructive reform that our Government supports the
so-called intermediate solution: the creation of a new
category of seat for the group of larger countries that
feel underrepresented in comparison with the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5), but
seats that they would have to win in open elections
so as to make them fully accountable to the broader
membership.
I do not intend in these remarks to discuss any other
specific proposals we would like to see considered, with
one exception. There are now compelling reasons for us
to ask the P-5 to voluntarily accept restrictions on the
use of the veto. To go further and to seek its abolition is
pointless; it simply will not happen. But to ask the P-5
to acknowledge and respect the genuine concerns of the
wider membership by voluntarily accepting a curb on
the exercise of the veto is an entirely reasonable and
achievable objective.
My country was one of those that led the opposition
to the veto when the Organization was being established;
indeed, it was the only Charter issue that was forced to a
vote. The permanent members argued at that stage that
the veto was necessary in order to protect their vital
national interests. Yet today we routinely see the veto
exercised in circumstances that have little to do with
national interests. My request to the five permanent members is simply that they stick with what they said
to us back in 1945. And my challenge to them today
is to consider a process by which they collectively and
voluntarily agree to confine their use of the veto to
those issues that clearly and directly affect their vital
national interests; and also that they voluntarily agree
not to use their veto in situations that involve mass
atrocities.
While on the topic of the Security Council, I
would like to take the opportunity to urge the Council
and the relevant organs of the General Assembly to
respond positively to the requests from the Economic
Community of West African States for support in
dealing with the conflict in Mali and the Sahel. Too
often we have seen the Council fail to respond in
a timely way to requests for help — in Rwanda, in
Guinea, in Darfur and in Somalia. Too often it has been
a case of too little, too late. In all of these cases we have
seen good leadership from within the African Union,
and that leadership deserves a timely and constructive
response from New York.
Many of those here will be aware that New Zealand
is an energetic candidate for election to the Security
Council for the term from 2015-2016. I can assure the
Assembly that it will hear more from us on these topics
over the next two years. We are a small country with
a big voice and an approach that is fair-minded and
constructive.
In the past few days. the Assembly has heard from
both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas.
We are now on notice that the issue of Palestinian status
in the United Nations will come before the Assembly
during this session. We look forward to seeing the text
of a draft resolution and to engaging in the consultations
that have been signaled to us. I said earlier that New
Zealanders are practical and constructive. They are also
fair-minded people; they expect to see their Government
bring all of those attributes to the consideration of such
a resolution, and that we will surely do. Having said
that, let me also be clear that we see such a resolution
as a very poor substitute for the direct discussions that
should occur between two leaders who live half an hour
down the road from each other.
In his address to the Assembly earlier in the week
(see A/67/PV.12), Prime Minister Netanyahu set out
clearly the grave implications for the Middle East, and
for the global community more generally, of a nuclear
breakout in the region. Like other Member States, New Zealand believes Iran must be told to step back from
a course that risks further dangerous escalation of the
situation. We hope the international community will
stand firm in sending that sort of message. In return,
however, I suggest that it is fair for the international
community to make a request of Prime Minister
Netanyahu. And that is to put the settlements on hold, at
the very least while negotiations proceed, and to engage
in the direct talks with his Palestinian counterpart that
represent the only basis for a durable solution to this
issue, and an essential step in removing the seeds of
wider conflict within the region.
I would like to remind the Assembly that these are
very difficult times for Governments around the world.
Budget economies have affected foreign ministries,
my own included. It is only fair that we should in
turn ask this large institution to find economies and
improve working methods in order to deliver better
value for our taxpayers. Smaller countries, like New
Zealand, depend more than most on good multilateral
institutions. We need a United Nations that is modern,
efficient and able to meet changing needs. We all need
a Security Council that is more responsive to the needs
of the wider membership and more effective in dealing
with the significant challenges that we all confront
today.﻿For over a year and a half, the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa has been the nerve centre
of global politics. The deep changes that have swept
over the region intertwine with the key problems of
modern international relations and require everyone to
take a comprehensive approach and to reject simplistic
and ideology-driven patterns and double standards.
Russia has consistently supported peoples in their
aspiration to determine their destiny and to pave the
way to more effective models of public governance.
We believe it is particularly important to carry out
those transformations in a non-violent way and without
outside interference. We strongly believe that all
members of the international community should be
interested in making the Middle East-North Africa
region peaceful, stable, democratic and free from
domestic and inter-State conflicts. So far, however,
there has been no progress in reaching unanimity in
the efforts of outside players to create conditions for
achieving that goal.
Of particular concern is the deepening internal
conflict in Syria. We have consistently called for
consolidated efforts by the international community
to compel the Government and its opponents to
immediately cease the violence, come to the negotiating
table and work out a compromise on the content and
pace of reforms that would satisfy all Syrians and
ensure the safety and rights of all ethnic and religious
groups. That was the substance of the consensus
recorded in the final communiqué of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), agreed upon in Geneva
as a follow-up to the Kofi Annan plan.
We call upon all members of the Action Group
to fully abide by the commitments we all took on in
Geneva. That is the fastest way to stop the loss of human
life in Syria. We proposed a Security Council resolution
endorsing the Geneva communiqué as the basis for
negotiations at the beginning of the transitional period, but that proposal was blocked. Those who oppose the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué bear an
onerous responsibility. They insist on a ceasefire by
the Government alone and encourage the opposition
to intensify hostilities, in fact pushing Syria even
deeper into the abyss of bloody internecine strife. The
militarization of the conflict continues, with calls for
open intervention.
Extremist organizations including Al-Qaida
have become more active in Syria. They perpetrate
terrorist attacks against innocent civilians and civil
infrastructure. The number of war crimes is growing, on
the part of both Government forces and the opposition,
as recorded in the recent report of the Human Rights
Council’s commission of inquiry (A/HRC/21/50).
Russia resolutely condemns any violence, wherever
it comes from, and is convinced that there is still an
opportunity to undertake collective action. Practical
steps to overcome the crisis need to begin with a
comprehensive ceasefire, the release of prisoners and
hostages and the provision of additional humanitarian
aid. That would create the conditions to start an
inter-Syrian dialogue. We hope that Lakhdar Brahimi,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, will be able to bring his vast
experience to bear on moving towards an agreement on
such arrangements, with the support of the international
community. Russia will provide its full support to
promote the success of his mission.
The changes taking place in the Middle East
should not marginalize the Palestinian problem. The
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting Arab-
Israeli settlement, which should lead, among other
results, to the establishment of an independent, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting in peace
and security with Israel, would be a major contribution
to the normalization of the overall regional situation.
The Arab Peace Initiative fully retains its relevance,
and we support the efforts of the League of Arab States
to move it forward.
I also wish to stress the importance of implementing
the decision on convening in 2012 a conference on
establishing in the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery (see
NPT/CONF/2010/50 (Vol.I)). It is clearly necessary to
ensure the participation in the conference of all States in
the region, and they should agree on key arrangements among themselves. In that matter, the League of Arab
States should play an important role.
On the whole, we support closer ties between the
United Nations and regional entities. I would note
that in our part of the world today a memorandum on
cooperation was signed between the secretariat of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I am
convinced that it will increase the efficiency of common
efforts to ensure stability and security.
All our actions should be founded solidly on the
United Nations Charter, which makes no provision
for the right to change regimes. It is unacceptable to
impose a political system on a country and its people.
Our position was clearly stated by President Vladimir
Putin speaking at the Kremlin on 26 September. The
entire sequence of events in the Arab world and other
regions proves the futility of any such policy, which can
lead to dangerous interethnic and interreligious clashes
in international relations.
We believe it is an obligation of all States to protect
from provocations and blasphemy the religious feelings
of people of any religious affiliation. At the same
time, of course, there can be no justification for acts
of terror, regardless of where they are committed, be
they in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Yemen or anywhere else.
Attacks against diplomats or United Nations personnel
are absolutely unacceptable.
In general, we are convinced that today, when the
world is going through a transition period characterized
by instability in the spheres of the economy, politics and
inter-civilizational relations, it is particularly important
for United Nations Member States to be able to rely
on accepted rules of conduct and to agree on a joint
response to the threats to global stability. We should
not allow irresponsible actions dictated by expedient
interests to shatter the system of international law. The
world order is threatened by arbitrary interpretation
of such essential principles as the non-use or threat of
force, the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their domestic affairs.
Those are the key principles of the United Nations
Charter, which confers the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security on
the Security Council. In advancing the reform of the
United Nations, it is essential to preserve the capacity of
the Security Council to perform those functions. Their erosion would deprive the international community of
an essential mechanism for developing joint approaches
to the settlement of crisis situations.
It is appropriate to mention the compulsory
instruments at the disposal of the United Nations. Under
the United Nations Charter the imposition of sanctions
falls exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Security
Council. Decisions must be made on a collegial basis,
with the understanding that sanctions should not lead
to isolation of the State targeted for sanctions, but
rather encourage it to engage in a dialogue to remove
questions that the Member States may have. It is
essential that sanctions should be well-measured and
that they not cause any suffering to the population. In
the past the Security Council has discussed the issue of
the humanitarian limits of sanctions, but somehow the
discussions have faded away. We believe it is important
to resume them.
Another issue that needs to be discussed in the
Security Council is the consequences of unilateral
sanctions imposed by a State or a group of States
sidestepping the United Nations to advance their
political goals. We have no doubt that such sanctions,
especially when they are applied extraterritorially,
weaken the unity of the international community
and undermine the effectiveness of its efforts. For
many years, the commercial, economic and financial
restrictions imposed by the United States on Cuba
have remained an illustration of the negative impact
of unilateral sanctions. Russia, together with the
overwhelming majority of members of the international
community, calls for the swift lifting of the blockade,
which is a relic of the Cold War.
Special attention should be given to the practical
enforcement of Security Council decisions regarding
sanctions against non-State actors and illegal cross-
border formations. In general, the events of recent
years have clearly shown that unilateral action which
violates international law and circumvents or distorts
the decisions of the Security Council does no good.
Of course, the legal norms of international affairs
will be further adjusted as necessary. But these
transformations should be treated with the greatest
sense of responsibility and full consciousness of the
serious risks involved. Consensus should be the sole
route to their adoption. Violations of international
law should not be portrayed as some sort of creative
development.

All of this is related to the debate regarding the
concept of the so-called responsibility to protect. Further
discussion of this concept should be held on the basis
of the approach agreed on at the 2005 World Summit,
which reaffirmed the need to observe the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations when responding to
conflicts within States. The protection of civilians is an
issue far too serious to be exploited to achieve political
goals. The ambiguity of the so-called responsibility-
to-protect concept can be better understood in light of
initiatives formulated by Brazil and several other States
to move towards consensus.
Let us not forget that the founders of the United
Nations, in their wisdom, agreed upon and endorsed
a Charter that enshrined principles for the regulation
of a multipolar world order. Now that the abnormal
bipolar period of the Cold War is over, and now that
it has become clear to all that there is no place for
monopolarity in the modern world and international
affairs can only be polycentric, we have a unique
chance to fully implement the original potential of that
Charter.
This is a difficult challenge. International relations
are clearly experiencing a lack of credibility. We regard
this as the main obstacle to practical progress towards
the establishment of universal foundations for equal
and indivisible security, whether in the Euro-Atlantic
area, Asia-Pacific region or other parts of the world.
Such a state of affairs clearly contradicts the concept
of collective security embodied in the Charter and the
deep interdependence of the modern world, where most
challenges and threats are common to us all and have a
cross-border dimension.
Strengthening confidence and collective principles
in international affairs, with the emphasis on
negotiating the pursuit of compromise solutions, would
help substantially reduce the level of instability and
move forward in the settlement of crisis situations, not
only in the Middle East, but also with respect to Iran,
Afghanistan, the Korean peninsula and other situations
throughout the world.
The final goal of the efforts to settle a conflict is
to ensure the right to life and other fundamental human
rights, be they political, economic or social. The events
of recent years confirm that, without lasting peace and
sustainable development, it is impossible to ensure
human rights. In turn, the protection of human rights
should contribute to security and development, rather than serve as a pretext for illegal interference in the
domestic affairs of States.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states
that everyone is entitled to an international order in
which their rights can be fully realized. Those who use
military force and sanctions, bypassing the Charter,
engage in illicit supplies of arms, or provide cover for
terrorists grossly violate this right.
Russia stands for the implementation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and respect for
the traditional values on which human civilization is
based and where all world religions converge. This is
a moral foundation of modern society. It is the cement
that bonds together nations and peoples. In recent
years, these values have been put to the test by displays
of immorality, extremism and racial intolerance. Of
similar concern are the even more assertive actions
of those who, citing freedom of speech, condone the
glorification of the Nazis and their accomplices and
desecrate the memory of the victims of the Second
World War and the victors of fascism. Such actions are
incompatible with the obligations of States under the
Charter of the United Nations.
Let me recall that the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights directly prohibits the
propaganda of war and incitement of national and
religious discord. This means that freedom of speech
and assembly cannot be used to justify the promotion
of Nazi or other radical or extremist views, in violation
of the basic principles and norms of international law.
Yesterday, the Human Rights Council endorsed a
resolution proposed by Russia on the interrelation of
human rights and traditional values. It is regrettable
that a number of Western States voted against this
document, which is especially relevant today.
Progress towards genuine partnership in
international relations is possible only on the basis
of equality and mutual respect. The course of events
in the world leaves no alternative for anyone but to
join efforts in order to build a stable, equitable and
democratic international system. It would be possible
to resist this objective trend and try to preserve the old
order for some time, but such resistance would cost yet
more lives, suffering and destruction. Let us display
our vision and, instead of looking back at the history of
previous centuries, take the side of the events unfolding
before us today, and answer the call for strong collective
statesmanship.﻿I would like to begin today by
telling the Assembly about an American named Chris
Stevens. Chris was born in a town called Grass Valley,
California, the son of a lawyer and a musician. As a
young man, Chris joined the Peace Corps and taught English in Morocco, and he came to love and respect
the people of North Africa and the Middle East. He
would carry that commitment throughout his life.
As a diplomat, he worked from Egypt to Syria, from
Saudi Arabia to Libya. He was known for walking the
streets of the cities where he worked, tasting the local
food, meeting as many people as he could, speaking
Arabic, listening with a broad smile. Chris went to
Benghazi, arriving on a cargo ship, in the early days
of the Libyan revolution. As America’s representative,
he helped the Libyan people as they coped with violent
conflict, cared for the wounded and crafted a vision
for the future in which the rights of all Libyans would
be respected. After the revolution, he supported the
birth of a new democracy as Libyans held elections and
built new institutions and began to move forward after
decades of dictatorship.
Chris Stevens loved his work. He took pride in the
country he served, and he saw dignity in the people that
he met.
Two weeks ago, he travelled to Benghazi to review
plans to establish a new cultural center and modernize
a hospital. That is when America’s compound came
under attack. Along with three of his colleagues, Chris
was killed in the city that he had helped to save. He was
52 years old.
I tell this story because Chris Stevens embodied
the best of America. Like his fellow Foreign Service
officers, he built bridges across oceans and cultures and
was deeply invested in the international cooperation
that the United Nations represents. He acted with
humility, but he also stood up for a set of principles, a
belief that individuals should be free to determine their
own destiny and live with liberty, dignity, justice and
opportunity.
The attacks on the American civilians in Benghazi
were attacks on America. We are grateful for the
assistance we received from the Libyan Government
and from the Libyan people. There should be no doubt
that we will be relentless in tracking down the killers
and bringing them to justice. I also appreciate that,
in recent days, the leaders of other countries in the
region — including Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen — have
taken steps to secure our diplomatic facilities and called
for calm. So have religious authorities around the globe.
But it should be understood that the attacks of the
last two weeks are not simply an assault on America.

They are also an assault on the very ideals upon which
the United Nations was founded — the notion that people
can resolve their differences peacefully; that diplomacy
can take the place of war, and that, in an interdependent
world, all of us have a stake in working towards greater
opportunity and security for our citizens.
If we are serious about upholding those ideals, it
will not be enough to put more guards in front of an
Embassy or to put out statements of regret and wait for
the outrage to pass. If we are serious about those ideals,
we must speak honestly about the deeper causes of the
crisis, because we face a choice between the forces that
would drive us apart and the hopes we hold in common.
Today, we must affirm that our future will be
determined by people like Chris Stevens, and not by
his killers. Today, we must declare that such violence
and intolerance has no place among our United Nations.
It has been less than two years since a vendor in
Tunisia set himself on fire to protest the oppressive
corruption in his country and sparked what became
known as the Arab Spring. Since then, the world has
been captivated by the transformation that has taken
place, and the United States has supported the forces
of change.
We were inspired by the Tunisian protests that
toppled a dictator, because we recognized our own
beliefs in the aspirations of the men and women who
took to the streets.
We supported change in Egypt, because our
support for democracy ultimately put us on the side of
the people.
We welcomed a transition of leadership in Yemen,
because the interests of the people were no longer being
served by a corrupt status quo.
We intervened in Libya alongside a broad coalition
and with the mandate of the United Nations Security
Council, because we had the ability to stop the
slaughter of innocents and because we believed that the
aspirations of the people were more powerful than a
tyrant.
And as we meet here, we again declare that the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad must come to an end, so
that the suffering of the Syrian people can stop and a
new dawn can begin.
We have taken those positions because we believe
that freedom and self-determination are not unique to one culture. Those values are not simply American
values or Western values — they are universal values.
And even as there will be huge challenges that come
with a transition to democracy, I am convinced that,
ultimately, Government of the people, by the people and
for the people is more likely to bring about the stability,
prosperity and individual opportunity that serve as the
basis for peace in our world.
So, let us remember that this is a season of progress.
For the first time in decades, Tunisians, Egyptians and
Libyans voted for new leaders in elections that were
credible, competitive and fair. That democratic spirit
has not been restricted to the Arab world. Over the past
year, we have seen peaceful transitions of power in
Malawi and Senegal and a new President in Somalia.
In Burma, a President has freed political prisoners and
opened a closed society, a courageous dissident has
been elected to Parliament, and people look forward to
further reform. Around the globe, people are making
their voices heard, insisting on their innate dignity and
the right to determine their future.
And yet the turmoil of recent weeks reminds us that
the path to democracy does not end with the casting
of a ballot. Nelson Mandela once said, “To be free is
not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way
that respects and enhances the freedom of others”. True
democracy demands that citizens cannot be thrown in
jail because of what they believe and that businesses
can be opened without paying a bribe. It depends on the
freedom of citizens to speak their minds and assemble
without fear and on the rule of law and due process,
which guarantee the rights of all people.
In other words, true democracy — real freedom — is
hard work. Those in power have to resist the temptation
to crack down on dissidents. In hard economic times,
countries may be tempted to rally the people around
perceived enemies at home and abroad, rather than
focusing on the painstaking work of reform.
Moreover, there will always be those who reject
human progress — dictators who cling to power, corrupt
interests that depend upon the status quo, and extremists
who fan the flames of hate and division. From Northern
Ireland to South Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
from the Balkans to the Pacific Rim, we have witnessed
convulsions that can accompany transitions to a new
political order. At times, the conflicts arise along the
fault lines of race or tribe, and often they arise from the difficulties of reconciling tradition and faith with
the diversity and interdependence of the modern world.
In every country, there are those who find different
religious beliefs threatening; in every culture, those
who love freedom for themselves must ask themselves
how much they are willing to tolerate freedom for
others. That is what we saw play out in the last two
weeks, as a crude and disgusting video sparked outrage
throughout the Muslim world. Now, I have made it
clear that the United States Government had nothing
to do with that video, and I believe its message must
be rejected by all who respect our common humanity.
It is an insult not only to Muslims, but to America as
well, for as the city outside these walls makes clear, we
are a country that has welcomed people of every race
and every faith. We are home to Muslims, who worship
across our country. We not only respect the freedom
of religion, we have laws that protect individuals from
being harmed because of how they look or what they
believe. We understand why people take offence at that
video, because millions of our citizens are among those
people.
I know there are some who ask why we do not just
ban such a video. And the answer is enshrined in our
laws; our Constitution protects the right to practice free
speech. Here in the United States, countless publications
provoke offence. Like me, the majority of Americans
are Christian, and yet we do not ban blasphemy against
our most sacred beliefs. As President of our country
and Commander-in-Chief of our military, I accept that
people are going to call me awful things every day, and
I will always defend their right to do so.
Americans have fought and died around the globe
to protect the right of all people to express their views,
even views that we profoundly disagree with. We do not
do so because we support hateful speech, but because
our founders understood that without such protections,
the capacity of individuals to express their own views
and practise their own faith may be threatened. We do
so because in a diverse society, efforts to restrict speech
can quickly become a tool to silence critics and oppress
minorities. We do so because, given the power of faith in
our lives and the passion that religious differences can
inflame, the strongest weapon against hateful speech
is not repression; it is more speech — the voices of
tolerance that rally against bigotry and blasphemy, and
lift up the values of understanding and mutual respect.

I know that not all countries in this body share
that particular understanding of the protection of free
speech. We recognize that. But in 2012, at a time
when anyone with a cell phone can spread offensive
views around the world with the click of a button, the
notion that we can control the f low of information is
obsolete. The question then is how do we respond? And
on this we must agree: there is no speech that justifies
mindless violence. There are no words that excuse the
killing of innocents. There is no video that justifies
an attack on an embassy. There is no slander that
provides an excuse for people to burn a restaurant in
Lebanon, or destroy a school in Tunis, or cause death
and destruction in Pakistan. In our modern world with
modern technologies, for us to respond in that way to
hateful speech empowers any individual who engages
in such speech to create chaos around the world. We
empower the worst of us if that is how we respond.
More broadly, the events of the past two weeks also
speak to the need for all of us to honestly address the
tensions between the West and the Arab world, which
is moving towards democracy. Now, let me be clear:
just as we cannot solve every problem in the world, the
United States has not and will not seek to dictate the
outcome of democratic transitions abroad. We do not
expect other nations to agree with us on every issue,
nor do we assume that the violence of the past weeks or
the hateful speech of some individuals represents the
views of the overwhelming majority of Muslims, any
more than the views of the people who produced that
video represent those of Americans.
However, I do believe that it is the obligation of all
leaders in all countries to speak out forcefully against
violence and extremism. It is time to marginalize those
who, even when not directly resorting to violence, use
hatred of America, or the West, or Israel, as the central
organizing principle of politics. For that only gives
cover, and sometimes provides an excuse, for those who
do resort to violence.
That brand of politics, one that pits East against
West, and South against North, Muslims against
Christians and Hindus and Jews, cannot deliver on the
promise of freedom. To young people, it offers only
false hope. Burning an American f lag does nothing to
provide a child with an education. Smashing apart a
restaurant does not fill an empty stomach. Attacking
an embassy will not create a single job. That brand of
politics only makes it harder to achieve what we must
do together, namely, to educate our children and create the opportunities that they deserve; protect human
rights and extend democracy’s promise.
It should be understood that America will never
retreat from the world. We will bring to justice those
who harm our citizens and our friends, and we will
stand with our allies. We are willing to partner with
countries around the world to deepen ties of trade
and investment, science and technology, energy and
development — all efforts that can spark economic
growth for all our peoples and stabilize democratic
change.
But such efforts depend on a spirit of mutual
interest and mutual respect. No Government or
company, no school or non-governmental organization
will be confident working in a country where its people
are endangered. For partnerships to be effective,
our citizens must be secure and our efforts must be
welcomed. A politics based only on anger — one based
on dividing the world between us and them — not
only sets back international cooperation, it ultimately
undermines those who tolerate it. All of us have an
interest in standing up to those forces.
Let us remember that Muslims have suffered the
most at the hands of extremism. On the same day that
our civilians were killed in Benghazi, a Turkish police
officer was murdered in Istanbul only days before his
wedding; more than 10 Yemenis were killed in a car
bomb in Sana’a; several Afghan children were mourned
by their parents just days after they were killed by
a suicide bomber in Kabul. The impulse towards
intolerance and violence may initially be focused on the
West, but over time it cannot be contained. The same
impulses towards extremism are used to justify war
between Sunni and Shia, between tribes and clans. It
leads not to strength and prosperity but to chaos. In less
than two years, we have seen largely peaceful protests
bring more change to Muslim-majority countries than
a decade of violence. And extremists understand this.
Because they have nothing to offer to improve the lives
of people, violence is their only way to stay relevant.
They do not build; they only destroy.
It is time to leave the call to violence and the politics
of division behind. On so many issues, we face a choice
between the promise of the future or the prisons of the
past. And we cannot afford to get it wrong. We must
seize this moment. And America stands ready to work
with all who are willing to embrace a better future.
The future must not belong to those who target Coptic Christians in Egypt; it must be claimed by those in
Tahrir Square who chanted, “Muslims, Christians, we
are one.” The future must not belong to those who bully
women; it must be shaped by girls who go to school,
and those who stand for a world where our daughters
can live their dreams just like our sons.
The future must not belong to those corrupt few
who steal a country’s resources; it must be won by the
students and entrepreneurs, the workers and business
owners who seek a broader prosperity for all people.
Those are the women and men that America stands
with; theirs is the vision we will support.
The future must not belong to those who slander
the Prophet of Islam. But to be credible, those who
condemn that slander must also condemn the hate we
see in the images of Jesus Christ that are desecrated,
or churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is
denied.
Let us condemn incitement against Sufi Muslims
and Shia pilgrims. It is time to heed the words of
Gandhi: “Intolerance is itself a form of violence and
an obstacle to the growth of a true democratic spirit”.
Together we must work towards a world where we are
strengthened by our differences, not defined by them.
That is what America embodies; that is the vision that
we will support.
Among Israelis and Palestinians, the future must
not belong to those who turn their backs on the prospect
of peace. Let us leave behind those who thrive on
conflict, those who reject the right of Israel to exist.
The road is hard, but the destination is clear: a secure,
Jewish State of Israel and an independent, prosperous
Palestine. Understanding that such a peace must come
through a just agreement between the parties, America
will walk alongside all who are prepared to make that
journey.
In Syria, the future must not belong to a dictator
who massacres his people. If there is a cause that cries
out for protest in the world today, peaceful protest, it
is a regime that tortures children and shoots rockets
at apartment buildings. We must remain engaged to
ensure that what began with citizens demanding their
rights does not end in a cycle of sectarian violence.
Together, we must stand with those Syrians who
believe in a different vision: a Syria that is united and
inclusive, where children do not need to fear their own
Government and all Syrians have a say in how they are governed, Sunnis and Alawites, Kurds and Christians.
That is what America stands for. That is the outcome
that we will work for, with sanctions and consequences
for those who persecute, and assistance and support
for those who work for this common good, because we
believe that the Syrians who embrace this vision will
have the strength and the legitimacy to lead.
In Iran, we see where the path of a violent and
unaccountable ideology leads. The Iranian people
have a remarkable and ancient history, and many
Iranians wish to enjoy peace and prosperity alongside
their neighbours. But just as it restricts the rights of
its own people, the Iranian Government continues to
prop up a dictator in Damascus and supports terrorist
groups abroad. Time and again, it has failed to take the
opportunity to demonstrate that its nuclear programme
is peaceful and to meet its obligations to the United
Nations.
So let me be clear. America wants to resolve this
issue through diplomacy, and we believe that there
is still time and space to do so. But that time is not
unlimited. We respect the right of nations to access
peaceful nuclear power, but one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to see that we harness that power for
peace. Make no mistake: a nuclear-armed Iran is not a
challenge that can be contained. It would threaten the
elimination of Israel, the security of Gulf nations and
the stability of the global economy. It risks triggering
a nuclear-arms race in the region and the unravelling
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is why a coalition of countries is holding
the Iranian Government accountable, and that is why
the United States will do what we must to prevent Iran
from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
We know from painful experience that the path
to security and prosperity does not lie outside the
boundaries of international law and respect for human
rights. That is why this institution was established, from
the rubble of conflict. That is why liberty triumphed
over tyranny in the cold war, and that is the lesson of
the last two decades as well.
History shows that peace and progress come to
those who make the right choices. Nations in every part
of the world have travelled this difficult path. Europe,
the bloodiest battlefield of the twentieth century, is
united, free and at peace. From Brazil to South Africa,
from Turkey to South Korea, from India to Indonesia,
people of different races, religions and traditions have lifted millions out of poverty, while respecting the
rights of their citizens and meeting their responsibilities
as nations.
It is because of the progress that I have witnessed
in my own lifetime, the progress that I have witnessed
after nearly four years as President, that I remain ever
hopeful about the world that we live in. The war in
Iraq is over. American troops have come home. We
have begun a transition in Afghanistan, and America
and our allies will end our war on schedule in 2014.
Al-Qaida has been weakened, and Osama bin Laden
is no more. Nations have come together to lock down
nuclear materials, and America and Russia are reducing
our arsenals. We have seen hard choices made, from
Naypyidaw to Cairo to Abidjan, to put more power in
the hands of citizens.
At a time of economic challenge, the world
has come together to broaden prosperity. Through
the Group of 20, we have partnered with emerging
countries to keep the world on the path of recovery.
America has pursued a development agenda that fuels
growth and breaks dependency, and has worked with
African leaders to help them feed their nations. New
partnerships have been forged to combat corruption and
promote government that is open and transparent, and
new commitments have been made through the Equal
Futures Partnership to ensure that women and girls can
fully participate in politics and pursue opportunity.
Later today, I will discuss our efforts to combat the
scourge of human trafficking.
All those things give me hope. But what gives
me the most hope is not the actions taken by us, not
the actions of leaders; it is the people that I have
seen — the American troops who have risked their lives
and sacrificed their limbs for strangers half a world
away, the students in Jakarta or Seoul who are eager
to use their knowledge to benefit mankind, the faces in
a square in Prague or a parliament in Ghana who see
democracy giving voice to their aspirations, the young
people in the favelas of Rio and the schools of Mumbai
whose eyes shine with promise. Those men, women,
and children of every race and every faith remind me
that for every angry mob that gets shown on television,
there are billions around the world who share similar
hopes and dreams. They tell us that there is a common
heartbeat to humanity.
So much attention in our world turns to what
divides us. That is what we see on the news. That is what consumes our political debates. But when you strip
it all away, people everywhere long for the freedom to
determine their destiny; the dignity that comes with
work; the comfort that comes with faith; and the justice
that exists when Governments serve their people and
not the other way around.
The United States of America will always stand up
for these aspirations, for our own people and for people
all across the world. That was our founding purpose.
That is what our history shows. That is what Chris
Stevens worked for throughout his life.
I promise you this: long after the killers are brought
to justice, Chris Stevens’s legacy will live on in the lives
that he touched, in the tens of thousands who marched
against violence through the streets of Benghazi; in the
Libyans who changed their Facebook photo to one of
Chris; in the signs that read simply, “Chris Stevens was
a friend to all Libyans”. They should give us hope. They
should remind us that so long as we work for it justice
will be done, that history is on our side and that a rising
tide of liberty will never be reversed.

﻿I thank you, sir, for the opportunity
to address the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
general debate. Let me start by congratulating Mr. Vuk
Jeremić and the Republic of Serbia on his election to
preside over the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly. We also acknowledge the contribution of
the President of the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser.
South Africa fundamentally believes in the
principles and purposes contained in the Charter of
the United Nations, and correctly so, given our nation’s
history. This year, we are proudly celebrating 100 years
of our people’s self less struggle for freedom, led by the
African National Congress movement. We recall with
great appreciation the immense contribution of the United Nations to the creation of a free and democratic
South Africa.
In 1966, the General Assembly labelled apartheid
a crime against humanity in resolution 2202 A (XXI),
which ultimately led to the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, later known as the Apartheid Convention.
The United Nations defined the crime of apartheid
as “inhuman acts committed for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining domination by one racial
group of persons over any other racial group of persons
and systematically oppressing them” (resolution 3068
(XXVIII), annex, article II). The Apartheid Convention
was adopted by the General Assembly on 30 November
1973 and set the tone for vociferous action against
apartheid around the world.
Let me repeat the words our leader and international
icon, President Nelson Mandela, uttered in his very
first address to the General Assembly, in 1994, the first
by a democratically elected leader and Head of State of
our country. He said,
“The millions of our people say ‘Thank you’
and ‘Thank you again, because the respect for your
own dignity as human beings inspired you to act
to ensure the restoration of our dignity as well.’”
(A/49/PV.14, p.7)
The theme of this session is most appropriate as it
takes us back to the basics — to the founding principles
of the United Nations. The founders intended the
United Nations to be the foremost multilateral forum
entrusted with bringing hope, peace and order to the
world. Indeed, the United Nations enjoys universal
membership and is at the centre of global governance
and multilateralism. The theme reminds us that peace is
a choice. We can either choose peace as Member States
or choose the path of conflict.
The founders of the United Nations made that choice
67 years ago. They decided that the United Nations must
lead the world to peace. It is important for the United
Nations and its organs, especially the Security Council,
to execute the Organization’s mandate of working for
peace without fear or favour. We must not steer away
from the founding objectives of the Organization.
The United Nations faces immense pressure when
the world sees the unprecedented loss of lives, as it now
does in Africa and the Middle East. It is of concern
when it appears as if the United Nations were unable to act and assist, and when it comes across as paralysed in
certain instances, due to the actions of some Member
States. We have seen a divided Security Council unable
to muster the collective courage to say “no more” to
warring parties in the interest of peace. That brings
to the fore the need to continue and deepen the reform
of the United Nations and its organs to make it agile
and nimble in addressing the contemporary challenges
facing humanity.
The debate on the reform of the United Nations
and its organs, in particular the Security Council, has
been going on for the past 18 years. However, there
has been no significant movement forward. I would
like to focus in particular on the Security Council.
Given its mandate, the Council has to be legitimate,
democratic and transparent. Its current composition has
a propensity for deadlock and paralysis even in the face
of crisis. It remains unrepresentative and undemocratic
in both its composition and decision-making.
We would like to see a more meaningful
representation of Africa in the Security Council. About
70 per cent of the Council’s agenda is taken up by issues
from the African continent. The Security Council has
to be expanded in both categories, with at least two
seats for Africa in the permanent category and five in
the non-permanent category. In addition to seats for the
continent in the composition of the Council, the United
Nations should also fully recognize and appreciate the
role of regional organizations working with the United
Nations in conflict management and resolution.
In that regard, we urge closer collaboration with the
African Union (AU) peace and security mechanisms,
especially given the progress being made by the AU
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding in some parts
of the continent since its formation 10 years ago.
Therefore, cognizance should be taken of Chapter VIII
of the Charter, in particular when dealing with African
issues.That is why South Africa piloted resolution 2033
(2012) during our rotating presidency of the Security
Council in January.
Currently, the AU continues to address one of the
longest outstanding conflicts on the continent through
one of its mechanisms, the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan. Together, as the
international community, we recently celebrated
the creation of the State of South Sudan. We wish
to congratulate the Somalis and their leadership on
choosing the path of peace, democracy and prosperity.

The international community and the United Nations
must continue to give the people of Somalia all the
necessary support.
Africa is indeed making progress and, with United
Nations support, that could go further. To promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, we also wish to
emphasize that the Security Council should carry out
its Charter mandate within the confines of international
law.
Any Member State or international body that
implements Council resolutions should be accountable
to the Council, so as to ensure that we avoid the
abuse of internationally agreed principles such as the
responsibility to protect and the protection of civilians.
Those principles must not be used, amongst other
things, to justify the notion of regime change. They
exist to prevent mass atrocities, war crimes, genocide
and ethnic cleansing.We should continue the debate
on them in order to develop norms and standards for
accountability when actions are taken.
It is also of critical importance for the United
Nations to closely guard its impartiality, independence
and objectivity and not allow itself to be dragged into a
conflict to take sides with any party under the guise of
protecting civilians.
The situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestine-Israeli question, continues to be of concern
to us. The United Nations should play a central and
decisive role in efforts to resolve the long-standing
conflict in that region. Any act of aggression or
violations of international law should be condemned
unequivocally by the United Nations at all times. As
the United Nations, we cannot be seen to be strong in
condemning some acts while being soft on others. As
South Africa, we remain committed to the two-State
solution based on the 1967 borders, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting side by side in peace.
Let me also emphasize that South Africa fully
supports the application by Palestine for full membership
of the United Nations. It is unacceptable that, even
today, Palestine remains outside the membership of the
United Nations. We trust that that matter will soon be
positively concluded.
In further promotion of the peaceful resolution of
disputes, we believe that the sovereign right of States
to nuclear energy for peaceful and civilian use should
be respected in accordance with international law.

We have taken note that the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency has been able to
draw the conclusion that all declared nuclear material
in Iran is used for peaceful activities. Clarification
of the nature of undeclared materials will enable the
international community to have full confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. South Africa therefore encourages Iran to
continue its cooperation with the Agency.
We should also remember that so long as some
States are allowed to operate outside internationally
agreed norms, such as those of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, it will be
difficult to expect others to operate within them. South
Africa supports the long-standing call for a nuclear-free
zone in the Middle East. In that regard, the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue is very important.
Let me use this opportunity to reiterate our support
for the ongoing struggle for self-determination by the
people of Western Sahara. We urge the international
community to support their quest for freedom, human
rights and dignity.
We also reiterate our call for the lifting of the
economic and financial embargo against the people of
Cuba in order to help the Cuban people to gain their
economic freedom.
Poverty, underdevelopment, lack of opportunities
and competition for scarce resources contribute to
some of the conflicts in the developing world, including
Africa. Therefore, the promotion of sustainable
development and the fight against poverty cannot be
divorced from the quest for peace.
In 2015, the United Nations will be 70 years old
and will also reach the target year for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). World
leaders committed themselves to eradicating extreme
poverty, facilitating universal primary education,
attaining gender equality, improving maternal and
child health, reducing the burden of disease primarily
by combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis,
protecting the environment, and mobilizing global
partnerships for development by 2015. The Heads of
State also committed themselves to promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women as effective
ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease and to
stimulate truly sustainable development. We urge the
United Nations to continue promoting the achievement of the MDGs and other instruments whose tenets
advance the human rights of women.
We are concerned that sub-Saharan Africa is
unlikely to meet the targets for the MDGs. Awareness
of that possibility should not make us give up; in the
next three years, we must accelerate the implementation
of the MDGs. We appeal to all who have made financial
commitments to Africa for the achievement of the
MDGs not to renege on those commitments. We would
like to express our appreciation to those development
partners that continue to stick to their 0.7 per cent
official development assistance commitment despite
their financial difficulties at the domestic level.
We support the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel of Eminent Persons to focus on the acceleration
of the implementation of the MDGs, and would urge
that much of its focus be on assisting Africa in meeting
all its targets. However, we wish to caution against
prejudging the review outcome and prematurely setting
in motion processes that would undermine the ideals of
the MDGs.
The protection and promotion of human rights
and fundamental freedoms should be at the centre of
our collective desire to resolve international disputes
by peaceful means. Racism and racial discrimination
continue to be an affront to the very basic founding
principles of the United Nations and must be fought
relentlessly. We should shun any idea in any part of the
world that seems to suggest that there is a superior race
or human being on the basis of skin colour. The danger
of such ideas is still fresh in our collective memory.
We have learned from the evils of colonialism, two
World Wars and the system of apartheid. We should all
renew our commitment to continue to build on the solid
foundation laid by the Durban Declaration and the Plan
of Action that we adopted more than a decade ago at
the end of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
In Durban last December, South Africa had
the honour of hosting the seventeenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol. Member States must ensure that agreements
are implemented. In that regard, the Durban Platform
offers an opportunity for progress that we must utilize
to move forward.

Today’s timely debate is a reminder that, ultimately,
peace is a choice. Peace is achievable. The wise and brave
choices we have the power to make can deliver lasting
peace to every corner of the world. We are called upon
at this sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
choose peace by reforming and strengthening the United
Nations so that it can play its rightful role and deliver
peace, security, sustainable development and respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout
the world. As the foremost multilateral forum bringing
together all nations of the world, the United Nations is
best placed to play this role. It requires our support as
Member States at all times, both for our sake and for
that of future generations.﻿I wish
to congratulate Mr. Jeremić on his election as President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
I am confident that with his ability and experience he
will successfully fulfil that lofty mission. I also wish to thank Mr. Al-Nasser for his positive contribution as
President at the last session.
The world is undergoing major and profound
changes. The trends towards multipolarity, economic
globalization and the application of information
technology are gaining momentum. Countries have
never been as interconnected and interdependent as they
are today. Emerging markets and developing countries
have never had such strong influence, and cross-
civilizational dialogue and exchanges are flourishing
as never before. To promote peace, development
and cooperation has become the shared aspiration of
people across the world and the common pursuit of the
international community.
On the other hand, the world is still far from being
peaceful. The underlying impact of the international
financial crisis and the European debt crisis remains
strong. Destabilizing factors and uncertainties affecting
global growth have increased. Regional turbulence
persists, hotspot issues keep emerging and traditional
and non-traditional security issues have become
intertwined. The international security environment is
highly complex.
Facing both unprecedented opportunities and
challenges, we must not allow the outdated Cold War
mentality and zero-sum game theory to stand in our
way. We should act like passengers who stick together
in a boat when crossing a torrential river and seek
win-win progress through cooperation. That is the only
option for countries around the world. To ensure one’s
own security, a country should respect and accommodate
the security of other nations. To achieve one’s own
development, a country should actively promote
common development. In pursuing one’s own interests,
a country should take into account the interests of
other nations. Only by promoting common security and
development for all its members can the international
community effectively address complex and multiple
security threats and global challenges, resolve
increasingly serious difficulties facing development and
ensure durable peace and sustainable development in
the world. With that in mind, China believes that it is
important to do the following.
We should promote equality and democracy in
international relations. Mutual respect and equality
are basic norms governing international relations. All
countries, large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor,
are equal members of the international community. Respect for each other’s sovereignty, core interests
and choice of social system and development path is a
fundamental principle guiding State-to-State relations.
We should resolutely promote greater democracy in
international relations. A country should deal with its
internal affairs itself. Issues involving the interests of
various countries should be handled by those countries
through consultation. We should remain true to
multilateralism and uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the central role
of the United Nations in international affairs.
China strives to strengthen political mutual trust
and to address problems and differences with other
countries through dialogue and exchanges. China does
not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries or
impose its will on others. China does not allow outside
forces to interfere in its internal affairs.
We should seek win-win progress through
cooperation on development. As economic globalization
deepens, all countries have a high stake in each other’s
success. We should therefore enhance cooperation
and develop common interests to achieve win-win
progress with benefits for all. We should tap the
potential for cooperation in all countries, increase and
develop cooperation, improve cooperation mechanisms
and work together to make economic globalization
balanced, inclusive and beneficial to all.
We should accelerate the development of
developing countries and narrow the North-South gap.
We should enhance global development cooperation to
ensure that the benefits of development reach everyone.
Since the start of the international financial crisis,
while maintaining its own robust growth, China has
significantly increased contributions to international
financial institutions, extended a helping hand to other
developing countries and bought more bonds from
certain developed countries. That has helped to stabilize
the international economic and financial situation and
to maintain the economic and social development of the
relevant countries.
We should ensure fairness and effectiveness in
conducting global governance. Facing increasing
global challenges, the international community should
strengthen coordination and cooperation, establish a
fair, equitable, flexible and effective system of global
governance, properly address the various global issues
and promote the common well-being of humanity.
China supports the United Nations in enhancing its authority, efficiency and ability to address new threats
and challenges through the required proper reform.
It is important to advance the building of a global
system of economic governance with a focus on
reforming the international financial system, rapidly
implement the quota and governance reform plans of
the International Monetary Fund and other financial
institutions, and increase the representation and voice of
emerging markets and developing countries. We should
fully implement the outcome and consensus of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex), further develop international
cooperation on sustainable development and discuss the
establishment of a post-2015 international development
agenda based on actively implementing the Millennium
Development Goals.
We should launch a process of open, transparent
and democratic intergovernmental consultation,
with development and poverty reduction as the core
objectives. We should also fully leverage the role of
civil society and the private sector in that task. Together
with all other parties, China is ready to actively
participate in reforming the international system and in
global governance and to jointly face the various global
challenges.
We should pursue common progress by embracing
the diversity of civilizations. According to ancient
Chinese philosophy, the world will be a great place
when all things thrive without harming each another
and when various efforts are pursued in parallel
without their clashing. We should encourage exchanges
and mutual learning among different civilizations and
social systems, draw on each other’s strength through
competition and comparison and make progress by
seeking common ground, while maintaining our
differences. We should respect the diversity of the world
and the right of all countries to independently choose
their development path. China encourages dialogue
and exchanges among civilizations. We should replace
confrontation with dialogue and bridge differences
with inclusiveness in order to make the world more
harmonious and to ensure common progress for
humanity.
We should seek common security amid growing
interdependence. No country is immune to the complex
and multiple security threats and challenges in the
world. We should foster a new thinking on security that
is characterized by mutual trust and benefit, equality and coordination. We should adopt a holistic approach
to address both the symptoms and the root causes of
the various security challenges and should build a
peaceful and stable international and regional security
environment.
The United Nations should fully play its role in
maintaining international peace and security and
in establishing a fair and effective mechanism for
common security. We must resolve disputes through
dialogue and negotiation and oppose the wilful use or
threat of force. We must oppose all forms of terrorism,
separatism and extremism.
West Asia and North Africa are undergoing
profound changes. China respects and supports efforts
by countries in those regions to independently deal
with their internal affairs. We respect the aspirations
and calls of people in those areas for change and
development. The unique features of those regions in
terms of religion, civilization, history and ethnicity
must be respected. We hope that the relevant parties will
settle differences through inclusive and constructive
political dialogue and that they will resolve problems
peacefully.
Safeguarding peace and stability in those areas,
upholding the fundamental and long-term interests of
Arab countries and ensuring the growth of friendly
China-Arab relations will remain a central goal of
China’s policy towards such regions. We will continue
to tirelessly strive, together with countries in those
areas, to promote peace and development in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
China is deeply concerned about the stalled
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks and the economic
and humanitarian difficulties facing the Palestinian
people. The turbulence in the region should not divert
international attention from the Palestinian issue. China
supports the Palestinian people in establishing, on the
basis of the 1967 border, an independent Palestinian State
that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. China supports Palestine’s membership of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
China urges both Palestine and Israel to take concrete
measures to remove obstacles and to work for the early
resumption and substantive progress of the peace talks.
China is deeply concerned about the ongoing
tension and worsening humanitarian situation in
Syria. We call on all relevant parties in Syria to put an immediate end to the fighting and violence, to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
Mr. Kofi Annan’s six-point plan and the communiqué
of the foreign ministers’ meeting of the Action Group
for Syria (A/66/865, annex), and to launch an inclusive
political dialogue and a Syrian-led political transition as
soon as possible. China is open to any political plan that
is acceptable to all parties in Syria. The relevant parties
of the international community should play a positive
and constructive role in that regard, credibly support
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
in conducting impartial mediation, and strive to set
in motion and move forward the process of political
transition in Syria.
The Iranian nuclear issue has reached a new, critical
stage. The relevant parties should remain committed to
a diplomatic solution and begin a new round of dialogue
as soon as possible. In the spirit of respecting each
other’s concerns, we should act with flexibility and
pragmatism to expand common ground and overcome
differences, seek early progress in dialogue and
negotiation and, over time, achieve a comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate solution to the issue. China
has always supported efforts to uphold the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and will continue to
work with the parties concerned and play a constructive
role in seeking a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through dialogue and negotiation.
The Asia-Pacific region has maintained general
stability and rapid growth for many years, thereby
making important contributions to global stability
and prosperity. Given the growing threat of shrinkage
in the global economy and increasing volatility in the
international situation, maintaining peace, stability
and sound growth in the Asia-Pacific region is crucial
to ensuring the well-being of its people and meets the
broader interests of the international community.
We should fully respect the reality of a
diverse and interdependent Asia-Pacific region,
and continue to follow the approach of regional
cooperation — building consensus, making
incremental progress and accommodating each other’s
comfort levels — that has proved effective over the
years. We should promote regional development with
greater determination, advance regional cooperation
with increased resources, and handle differences with
longer-term interests in mind so as to uphold the peace,
stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. As an important participant in building the
international system, China is committed to sharing
development opportunities with other countries and
to working with them to overcome various challenges
and realize security and development for all. China
will stay the course of peaceful development. We seek
a peaceful international environment in which China
can promote its own development. By so doing, China
will contribute to global peace and development. China
is firm in upholding its core interests. At the same
time, it respects the legitimate right of other countries
to protect their interests. We seek to expand common
interests with other parties for the sake of the common
good.
China has contributed a total of some 21,000
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and taken an active part in international cooperation
on counter-terrorism, anti-piracy and non-proliferation
efforts. In our efforts to resolve major international
and regional hotspot issues, we have urged the parties
concerned to seek peaceful solutions through negotiation
and thereby played an important and constructive role
in easing tensions and achieving the political resolution
of those issues. China has made remarkable progress
in pursuing peaceful development and will continue to
follow that path in the years to come.
China will enhance friendly relations and
cooperation with all other countries on the basis of
the five principles of peaceful coexistence and strive
to promote a new type of relationship among major
countries based on mutual respect and win-win
cooperation. Following a policy of building good
relationships and partnerships with neighbouring
countries, China has actively expanded exchanges with
its neighbours.
China has contributed to over 50 per cent of
Asia’s growth for many consecutive years. We have
endeavoured to build mechanisms of mutual trust and
political cooperation with other Asian countries and
appropriately to address differences and frictions among
relevant countries. On the basis of firmly upholding
China’s sovereignty, security and territorial integrity,
we have worked with our neighbours to maintain sound
relations and overall stability in the region. China treats
other developing countries as good friends and good
partners; we therefore support each other and seek
common development on the basis of equality.
By the end of 2011, the Chinese Government had
built over 2,200 projects that are important to the local economies and people’s lives in the countries
concerned. We have cancelled the debts owed to China
by 50 heavily indebted poor and least-developed
countries. We have trained over 60,000 personnel in
various sectors for 173 developing countries and 13
regional and international organizations. All of that has
contributed to the economic and social development of
other developing countries.
China has taken an active part in reforming the
international system and global governance, and
assumed its due share of international responsibilities
and obligations as its capabilities permit. We are
working to build a fair, equitable and non-discriminatory
global trading system and a more equal and balanced
new global partnership for development. We support
a greater role for the Group of Twenty as the premier
forum for international economic cooperation, as well
as the efforts of emerging markets represented by the
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South
Africa — aimed at exploring a new model of global
cooperation.
The global economy is at a critical stage, and
achieving full recovery and sustained growth will be a
long and difficult task. Last year, despite a challenging
economic environment both at home and abroad, China
registered a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
of 9.3 per cent, and made good progress in adjusting its
economic structure and improving people’s lives. Since
the beginning of the year, in order to address some
new problems in economic performance, the Chinese
Government has stepped up anticipatory fine-tuning of
the economy and introduced a series of targeted policy
measures. That has boosted market confidence and
ensured steady growth.
China’s GDP grew by 7.8 per cent in the first half of
the year, and the country has enjoyed sound economic
and social development. China is still in an important
period of strategic opportunities for development.
Industrialization, urbanization, the application of
information technology and agricultural modernization
will continue to unlock our great potential for
development. We have the confidence, means and
ability to maintain steady and robust growth and
achieve long-term, sound and sustainable development.
During its twelfth five-year plan for the period
2011-2015, China’s domestic market will become one of
the largest in the world. Its total imports are expected
to exceed $10 trillion, and direct outbound investment is expected to exceed $500 billion. That will create
enormous business and job opportunities for the world
and provide good opportunities for other countries’
development.
The Diaoyu Islands have been an integral part
of China’s territory since ancient times. China has
indisputable historical and legal evidence in that
regard. Japan seized the islands in 1895 at the end of the
Sino-Japanese War and forced the Chinese Government
of the time to sign an unequal treaty to cede the islands
and other Chinese territories to Japan. After the Second
World War, the Diaoyu Islands and other Chinese
territories occupied by Japan were returned to China
in accordance with the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam
Agreement and other international documents.
By taking such unilateral actions as the so-called
island purchase, the Japanese Government has grossly
violated China’s sovereignty. This is an outright denial
of the outcomes of the victorious anti-fascist World
War and poses a grave challenge to the post-war
international order and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. The moves made by
Japan are totally illegal and invalid. They can in no way
change the historical fact that Japan stole the Diaoyu
Islands from China and that China has territorial
sovereignty over them. The Chinese Government is
firm in upholding China’s territorial sovereignty. China
strongly urges Japan to immediately stop all activities
violating China’s territorial sovereignty, take concrete
action to correct its mistakes and return to the path of
resolving the dispute through negotiation.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold
its eighteenth National Congress. We are confident
that the important meeting will lead China’s reform,
opening-up and modernization drive to a new stage.
The facts have shown and will continue to prove that
China’s development is peaceful, open, cooperative and
win-win in nature. We will work with the international
community to follow the trend of history and the call
of the times and build a harmonious world of enduring
peace and shared prosperity.﻿Freedom,
dignity, self-determination and the hope of a better
life were the driving forces behind the movement for
change in the Arab world.
As Germans, we know from our own bitter
experience that freedom is not a gift. It has to be won
and constantly defended. Freedom is more than just
freedom of thought. It is freedom to express one’s own
opinion and to voice public criticism. For that reason
alone, freedom is not always comfortable. The first
article of the Basic Law, Germany’s Constitution,
states that human dignity shall be inviolable. That
applies to every single individual, regardless of their
origin, culture, creed or sex. As Germans, we have
experienced what it is to lack freedom in the course of
our own history. We will always stand by those who,
wherever they are in the world, call for freedom of
opinion, religion, the press and artistic freedom.

Freedom has a daughter; it is tolerance. And
freedom has a son; it is respect, respect for other people,
respect for what is important to others, respect for what
is sacred to others. Freedom therefore does not mean
freedom from responsibility. Freedom always means
freedom to shoulder responsibility.
We understand the many devout people who feel
wounded by the recent shameful anti-Islam video.
However, legitimate criticism and sincere indignation
cannot be used to justify acts of violence or destruction.
Some would have us believe that the burning of embassy
buildings are proof of a clash of civilizations. We must
not allow ourselves to be deluded by such arguments.
The vast majority of people oppose violence. The
people who have taken to the streets, as well as their
political representatives gathered here in New York
this week, have expressed that forcefully. It is not a
clash of civilizations. It is a clash within societies and
civilizations. It is also a struggle for the soul of the
movement for change in the Arab world.
It is a struggle between open and closed minds,
between moderates and radicals, between understanding
and hate. It is a clash between those seeking peace and
those prepared to resort to violence. The extremists
want to prevent the emergence of freedom by inciting
violence. They must not be allowed to succeed.
Germany has taken a stand in that struggle. We will
continue to expand our support for people in the Arab
world. We are not going to turn our backs on them, but
we will be open to them. Our values and our interests
compel us to take the side of those around the world who
are fighting peacefully for freedom, dignity and self-
determination. Education and work, investment and
growth — our offer of a transformational partnership
still stands.
I will never forget the Syrian father who held out
his emaciated son to me during my visit to the Zaatari
refugee camp in Jordan. Such suffering renders us
speechless, but it also impels us to act. To this very
day, the Security Council has failed to live up to its
responsibility for the people in Syria. I express that
criticism with great sadness. The deadlock in the
Security Council must not continue. Every day, the
violence perpetrated by the Bashar Al-Assad regime
is escalating. The risk of a conf lagration engulfing the
entire region is growing. Together with our partners and
the United Nations, we are helping the many refugees
in Syria itself and in neighbouring countries.

All Syrians who want their country to have a
democratic and pluralistic future based on the rule
of law must work together. We support the efforts of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States, to
find a political approach. Despite the escalating violence
and despite the deadlock in the Security Council, we
must not stop working on a political solution.
During the past 20 months, the Arab League
has demonstrated ever more clearly its adherence
to the values enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We welcome that and we want to build on
it. At Germany’s initiative, during the last week in
September, the Security Council welcomed intensifying
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States (see S/PRST/2012/20). That is
an acknowledgement of the Arab League’s constructive
and positive role.
We also pay tribute to the efforts to gain freedom in
other parts of the world. As a result of the remarkable
opening-up process under way in Myanmar, the country
is emerging from isolation and gradually leaving
repression behind.
We criticize and strongly condemn the ongoing
repression in our own neighbourhood, in Belarus.
In many other Asian and African countries, which
have struck out in a new direction, we are supporting
political transformation by providing assistance for
economic and social development. That is in the
common interest of the international community. For
there is one thing that becomes ever more apparent, and
that is that without development, there can be no security
and without security there can be no development. That
applies to our engagement in Afghanistan, which we
will continue after the withdrawal of combat troops in
2014. It also applies to the efforts to bring stability to
Somalia and Yemen, to the Great Lakes region and to
the countries of the Sahel.
We are very concerned by the still-unresolved
dispute about Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran has still
not produced evidence of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. It has also failed to
date to provide the transparency that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has long demanded. So far, the
talks during the last few months have not made enough
progress towards reaching a solution. The European
Union’s three plus three group has put forward
proposals for a substantive negotiation process. We still
await a serious response from Iran. We want a political
and diplomatic solution. Time is short. Israel’s security
is at stake. Indeed, stability in the entire region is at
stake. However, that is also about averting the risk of
a nuclear arms race with unforeseeable consequences
for international security. I call on Iran to stop playing
for time. The situation is serious indeed, and time is
running out. We want a political solution, and we are
putting all our efforts into achieving that goal.
Those challenges must not lead us to lose sight of
the necessity of a negotiated peace settlement between
Israel and the Palestinians. There is a danger that the
goal of a two-State solution, the only solution that can
reconcile the legitimate interests of the two sides, will
slip away. The two sides must build new trust. At the
same time, they must refrain from doing anything that
might jeopardize a two-State solution.
Germany’s foreign policy is a policy for peace.
Germany’s foreign policy is anchored in Europe. Many
have been wondering whether Europe can successfully
manage its sovereign debt crisis and whether it will
continue to play a leading role in the world. The answer
is an emphatic yes. Europe has a great responsibility in
the world. And Germany is aware of its responsibility
for Europe. The way out of the debt crisis is difficult. It
requires spending discipline, solidarity and growth. We
will continue down that road. Europe is growing closer
together. Europe is consolidating. Europe will emerge
from the crisis stronger than ever before. Europe will
remain a force to be reckoned with as the world’s largest
donor of development assistance, as an inspiration for
peaceful regional cooperation, as a pioneer in climate
action and disarmament, as a champion of rules-based
globalization and as a driving force for United Nations
reform.
My country’s peaceful unification more than 20
years ago also signified the reunification of Europe.
Since then, the world has changed dramatically. Today,
we find ourselves on the threshold of a multipolar
world. The world with its interdependencies needs a
cooperative order. It needs strong and representative
institutions. We will weaken the Security Council if
we fail to adapt it to today’s world. Together with our
partners in the G-4 group, India, Brazil and Japan,
Germany is prepared to assume greater responsibility.
It cannot be that Latin America and Africa have
no permanent seats on the Security Council or that
dynamic Asia has only one. That does not reflect the realities of today’s world, and it definitely does not
reflect the realities of tomorrow.
The challenges are too great for us to simply
accept the status quo. The world is not only growing
together; the pace of change is increasing. We are
living in an age of breathtaking change. That change
brings with it risks and new dangers, as well as new
uncertainties. Above all, however, that change brings
with it great opportunities, especially for young people.
In this changing world we need a clear compass, and
our compass is freedom. The yearning for freedom is
rooted in people’s hearts all over the world. They are
our partners in building a better future.﻿This is the
first time that I speak from this rostrum at the United Nations. It is a very moving moment for me because
I understand what the United Nations represents, for
our world, and what it has represented historically. I am
also aware of a sense of responsibility, because France
is a permanent member of the Security Council and
therefore has duties. I am also here at this rostrum to
talk about values that do not belong to any particular
people, are not owned by any particular continent
and are not the privilege of any particular part of the
population.
I am here to talk about universal values, which
France has always proclaimed, and about the rights
of every human being, wherever they live: liberty,
security and resistance to oppression. Those values
and those rights are all too frequently held in contempt
in our world, especially as we face three main threats,
which we must tackle head-on. The first is the threat
of fanaticism, which fuels violence. We have seen
that yet again in recent days. The second is the global
economy, which has been affected by a crisis and which
perpetuates intolerable inequalities. The third threat is
the disturbance in the climate system, which threatens
the very survival of our planet.
The mission of the United Nations is to tackle these
challenges and to find strong and just responses to them
together. These responses must be just because without
justice, force is blind, and they must be strong because
without strength, justice is powerless.
I am also here to express France’s confidence in
the United Nations. In recent years, we have been able
together, to finally put an end to deadly conflicts, and
we have been able to prevent confrontations. However,
just as we are sending out 100,000 Blue Helmets who
act on our behalf — and I would like to pay tribute to
them — because of divisions, the blocking of our own
institutions and inertia, the United Nations has not been
able to put an end to war, atrocities and attacks on the
rights of peoples.
I would therefore, on behalf of France, draw one
conclusion that I would like to share with the Assembly.
If we want to make our world safer, it is up to us to fully
shoulder our responsibilities. How can we do so?
First of all, we can do so by reforming our own
Organization, the United Nations. The Security Council
must better reflect the realities of the world today. This
is why I would once again recall that France supports
the request for an enlargement of the Council made
by Germany, Japan, India and Brazil. But we are also in favour of an increased African presence, including
among the permanent members. Having a seat on the
Security Council is not a privilege justified by history,
and it is not a matter of satisfying some ambition related
to economic power. No, having a seat on the Security
Council means making the commitment to take action
to promote peace in the world. Indeed, we must act and
act together, but act quickly, because it is urgent.
The most urgent situation is in Syria. The Assembly
has several times denounced the massacres carried out
by the Syrian regime, called for those responsible to be
prosecuted and expressed the desire for a democratic
transition. But the ordeal of the population continues to
this day. There have been almost 30,000 deaths in the
last 18 months. How many more deaths will we wait for
before we take action? How can we allow the paralysis
of the United Nations to continue?
I know one thing for certain: the Syrian regime
will never again take its place among the alliance of
nations. It has no future among us. This is why I have
taken the decision, on behalf of France, to recognize the
provisional Government representing the new Syria as
soon as it is formed. That Government will itself have
to give guarantees that every community in Syria will
be respected and will be able to live in security in their
own country. Without further delay, I would ask that
the United Nations immediately give the Syrian people
all of the assistance and support they are requesting
and, in particular, that the liberated areas be protected
and humanitarian aid be assured for refugees. As for
the leaders in Damascus, they must know that the
international community will not stand by if they take
the unhappy decision to use chemical weapons.
Another situation that is urgent is the fight against
the most serious of threats to stability in the world,
namely, the proliferation of nuclear weapons. For several
years now, Iran has been ignoring the demands of the
international community. It shuns monitoring by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It does not keep
its word or uphold Security Council resolutions. I had
hoped that negotiations could take place in earnest and
that steps could be outlined, but, again, no negotiations
have taken place. France will not accept such actions,
which threaten not only security in the region but peace
throughout the world.
I therefore state once again that we are prepared to
adopt new sanctions, not to punish the great people of Iran, but to tell their leaders that enough is enough and
that negotiations must be resumed before it is too late.
The third urgent issue is at last to find a solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The status quo is not a
response; it is an impasse. France will make every effort
to re-establish the basis for negotiations leading to the
coexistence of the two States in question; everyone
knows that this is the only solution that could lead to a
just and lasting peace in the region.
The last of the urgent issues that I will mention,
although there are many others, might be the most
important one for us to focus on this week: the Sahel.
The situation created by the occupation of territory
in northern Mali by terrorist groups is intolerable,
inadmissible and unacceptable. It is unacceptable not
only for Mali, which is affected by that terrorist threat,
but also for all countries of the region and beyond the
region — all of those that one day might be affected by
terrorism.
The African Union, which I commend, and the
Economic Community of West African States have said
that they are prepared to take courageous decisions.
The authorities of Mali have spoken; there is no time to
lose. France will support any initiative that will enable
the Africans themselves to resolve that issue within the
framework of international law, with a clear mandate
from the Security Council. Mali must recover its
territorial integrity, and terrorism must be eliminated
from that area of the Sahel.
The role of the United Nations is to respond to
urgent situations. But there is another objective that
should unite us here, and that is development. The
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held in Rio, in which I participated, was
a disappointing stage for some and an encouraging one
for others. I believe that today we have an agenda that
should encompass economic growth, poverty reduction,
social progress and environmental protection. That is
what we need to do over the long term.
The 2015 deadline for a climate agreement is fast
approaching. I wish to state here that France is ready to
host the United Nations conference on climate change
to be held at that time, because I want us to succeed
together in meeting that challenge.
In parallel, I would recall that one of the
disappointments of Rio was our failure to agree on
the creation of a major United Nations organization for the environment. That remains France’s objective.
Such an agency would be based in Africa, because
that continent, which has been neglected for too long,
is facing climate-related challenges. It would also be
highly symbolic to entrust Africa with such a global
agency for the environment.
With respect to development, I believe that we
should face reality. We will not achieve the Millennium
Development Goals without new resources. Everyone
knows the budgetary limitations of our respective
States. That is why today, from this rostrum here at the
United Nations, I am making an appeal for innovative
financing, which would give us the means to enable our
organizations to fight effectively against diseases such
as HIV/AIDS and malaria.
I would like to commend the success of the
International Drug Purchase Facility, which was
financed by a tax on airline tickets. That path
has been opened, and today we must take another
step in that direction. I propose a tax on financial
transactions — which several European Union countries
have already agreed to — aimed at slowing down the
movement of capital or at least financing development
and helping to fight health-related scourges. France
has adopted such a tax. We have also made another
commitment: to dedicate at least 10 per cent of the
benefits of that tax to development and to fight health-
related threats and pandemics.
That is the message that I wanted to send to the
Assembly today: let us ensure that a global tax on
financial transactions can be levied and that the benefits
it yields can be spent on development and fighting
pandemics. That would be an excellent example of what
I call the globalization of solidarity, and one of the best
ideas that today’s world could implement.
But the mission of the United Nations is not only
to fight financial instability or ensure that development
remains at the centre of our concerns: it is to work to
counter all forms of instability. I am thinking here about
drug trafficking, a scourge that affects producing, transit
and consuming countries. To combat drug traffickers,
who are frequently allied with terrorist networks, the
United Nations must elaborate and implement a global
strategy to fight against drugs.
Arms trafficking also poses a major threat. France
is firmly committed to the conclusion of a universal
arms trade treaty. What the United Nations must defend
and promote is a worldview that is based on respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. The Arab Spring
showed that those values are universal and apply to all
continents and countries.
I want to welcome the events that took place in
Tunisia, in Libya, in Egypt. It is true that transitions
are not always easy. There are risks, and setbacks can
occur. Some may attempt, through violence, to reverse
the progress made and the achievements gained. France
will call on the new political authorities emanating
from democratic elections in those countries to wage an
unrelenting combat against complacency, extremism,
fanaticism, hatred, intolerance and violence, whatever
the provocation may be, because there can never be any
justification for violence.
France wants to set an example. It is not telling
anyone what to do; that is simply its history and its
message. We want to be an example in the promotion of
fundamental freedoms. That is our combat, and we are
honoured to wage it. That is why France will continue
to fight to abolish the death penalty, to ensure women’s
right to equality and dignity, and to work towards the
universal decriminalization of homosexuality, which
cannot be viewed as a crime but must be recognized as
an orientation.
We will continue to fight for the protection of
civilians. Moreover, I recall that the Assembly affirmed
the principle that all States have the responsibility to
ensure the security of their civilians. If a State fails
in that obligation, it is up to us, the United Nations,
to use the means at its disposal to meet it in its place.
Let us not neglect that promise, as it can serve us. I
am thinking, in particular, of what is happening in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, where civilians are the
main victims of clashes and where foreign interference
must cease as soon as possible.

Those are the goals that France will support and
defend at the United Nations. France has confidence in
the United Nations. We know that no State, however
powerful, can deal with emergencies, undertake the
fight for development or overcome all crises. No State
can do that, but, on the contrary, if we act together, we
will live up to our responsibilities. France wants the
United Nations to be the centre and the framework for
global governance, but do the States that make up the
Organization want that to be our purpose and goal?

I say in all seriousness that when there is paralysis,
inertia and inaction, injustice and intolerance find their
place. What I would like members to understand is that
we must act in order to shoulder our responsibilities
and to deal with urgent situations, such as Syria,
nuclear proliferation and the Sahel. We must also work
for another world that is based on development and
innovative financing and for the fight against health
crises. We must act, always and together. Let us live up
to the mission entrusted to us and to the expectations of
peoples. That is France’s message.﻿I am proud that
this year Britain welcomed the world to the Olympic
and Paralympic games and put on a great display,
showing that while we may have only the twenty-
second-largest population in the world, we can roll out
one of its warmest welcomes.
I am honoured, too, that in the coming year I have
been asked to co-chair the high-level panel designed to
help us build on one of the greatest achievements of the United Nations, the Millennium Development Goals.
Britain takes that work very seriously. I am convinced
that we need to focus more than ever on the building
blocks that take countries and people from poverty to
prosperity. By those building blocks I mean the absence
of conflict and corruption and the presence of property
rights and the rule of law. We should never forget that
for many in the world the closest relative of poverty is
injustice. Development has never been just about aid
or money, but I am proud that Britain is a country that
keeps its promises to the poorest in our world.
A year ago I stood here and argued that the Arab
Spring represented an unprecedented opportunity for
advancing peace, prosperity and security. One year
on, some believe that the Arab Spring is in danger of
becoming an Arab winter. They point to the riots on
the streets, to Syria’s descent into a bloody civil war, to
frustration at the lack of economic progress and to the
emergence of newly elected Islamist-led Governments
across the region.
But I believe those people are in danger of drawing
the wrong conclusion. Today is not the time to turn back,
but to keep the faith and to redouble our support for open
societies and for people’s demands for a job and a voice.
Yes, the path is challenging. But democracy is not, and
never has been, simply about holding an election. It is
not one person, one vote, once. Democracy is about
establishing the building blocks of true democracy:
the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law,
with the majority prepared to defend the rights of the
minority; the freedom of the media; a proper place for
the army in society; and the development of effective
State institutions, political parties and a wider civil
society.
I am not so naive as to believe that democracy
alone has some magical healing power. I am a liberal
Conservative, not a neo-conservative. I respect each
country’s different histories and traditions. I welcome
the steps taken in countries where reform is happening
with the consent of the people. I know that every
country takes its own path, and that progress will
sometimes be slow. Some countries have achieved
stability and success based on tradition and consent.
Others have endured decades in which the institutions
of civil society were deliberately destroyed, political
parties banned, free media abolished and the rule of
law twisted for the benefit of the few. We cannot expect
the damage of decades to be put right in a matter of
months. But the drive for opportunity, justice and the rule of law and the hunger for a job and a voice are not
responsible for the problems in the region. In fact, quite
the opposite: the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not part of the problem. We in the United Nations
must step up our efforts to support the people of those
countries as they build their own democratic future.
Let me take the key arguments in turn. First, there
are those who say there has been too little progress,
that the Arab Spring has produced few tangible
improvements in people’s lives. That is not right. Look
at Libya since the fall of Al-Qadhafi. We have seen
elections to create a new Congress, and now plans to
integrate armed groups into the national police and
army. None of that is to ignore the huge and sobering
challenges that remain.
The murder of Ambassador Chris Stevens was a
despicable act of terrorism. But the right response is
to finish the work that Chris Stevens gave his life to.
That is what the vast majority of Libyans want, too, as
we saw so inspiringly in Benghazi last weekend, when
they took to the streets in the thousands, refusing to
allow extremists to hijack their chance for democracy.
The Arab Spring has also brought progress in
Egypt, where the democratically elected President
has asserted civilian control over the military; in
Yemen and Tunisia, where elections have brought new
Governments to power; and in Morocco, where there
is a new Constitution and a Prime Minister appointed
on the basis of a popular vote for the first time. Even
further afield, Somalia has also taken the first vital step
forward by electing a new President. So there has been
progress. None of it would have come about without
people standing up last year and demanding change,
or without the United Nations having the courage to
respond to those crises.
Secondly, there is the argument that the removal of
dictators has somehow started to unleash a new wave of
violence, extremism and instability. Some argue that in
a volatile region, only an authoritarian strong man can
maintain stability and security. Or even, some argue,
that recent events prove that democracy in the Middle
East brings terrorism, not security, and sectarian
conflict, not peace. Again, I believe we should reject
that argument.
I have no illusions about the danger that political
transition can be exploited by violent extremists. I
understand the importance of protecting people and defending national security. Britain is determined
to work with our allies to do that. But democracy
and open societies are not the problem. The fact is
that, for decades, too many were prepared to tolerate
dictators like Al-Qadhafi and Al-Assad on the basis
that they would keep their people safe at home and
promote stability in the region and the wider world. In
fact, neither was true. Not only were theose dictators
repressing their people, ruling by control not by consent,
plundering the national wealth, and denying people
their basic rights and freedoms, they were funding
terrorism overseas as well. Brutal dictatorships made
the region more dangerous not less; more dangerous
because those regimes dealt with frustration at home
by whipping up anger against their neighbours, against
the West, against Israel; and more dangerous, too,
because people denied a job and a voice were given no
alternative but a dead-end choice between dictatorship
and extremism.
What was heartening about the events of Tahrir
Square was that the Egyptian people found their voice
and rejected that false choice. They withheld their
consent from a Government that had lost all legitimacy,
and they chose instead the road to a more open and fair
society. The road is not easy, but it is the right one. I
believe it will make countries safer in the end.
Next, there are those who say that, whatever may
have been achieved elsewhere, in Syria the Arab Spring
has unleashed a vortex of sectarian violence and hatred
with the potential to destroy the whole region. Syria
does present some profound challenges. But those who
look at Syria today and blame the Arab Spring have got
it the wrong way round. We cannot blame the people
for the behaviour of a brutal dictator. The responsibility
lies with the brutal dictator himself.
Al-Assad is today inf laming Syria’s sectarian
tensions, just as his father did as far back as the slaughter
in Hama 30 years ago. And not only in Syria; Al-Assad
has colluded with those in Iran who are set on dragging
the region into wider conflict. The only way out of
Syria’s nightmare is to move forward towards political
transition and not to give up the cause of freedom. The
future for Syria is a future without Al-Assad. It has to
be based on mutual consent, as was clearly agreed in
the International Conference on Syria held in Geneva
in June. If anyone was in any doubt about the horrors
that Al-Assad has inf licted on his people, just look at
the evidence published this week by Save the Children:
schools used as torture centres, children used for target practice. A 16-year-old Syrian called Wael who was
detained in a police station in Daraa said: “I have seen
children slaughtered. No, I do not think I will ever be
OK again...lf there was even 1 per cent of humanity in
the world, this would not happen”.
The blood of those young children is a terrible stain
on the reputation of the United Nations. In particular,
it is a stain on those who have failed to stand up to
these atrocities and those who in some cases aided
and abetted Al-Assad’s regime of terror. lf the United
Nations Charter is to have any value in the twenty-
first century, we must now join together to support
a rapid political transition. At the same time, no one
of conscience can turn a deaf ear to the voices of
suffering. Security Council members have a particular
responsibility to support the United Nations appeal for
Syria. Britain, already the third biggest donor, is today
announcing a further $12 million in humanitarian
support, including new support for UNICEF’s work
to help Syrian children. We look to our international
partners to do more as well.
Of course, the Arab Spring has not removed
overnight the profound economic challenges that
these countries face. Too many countries face falling
investment, rising food prices and bigger trade deficits.
But it is completely wrong to suggest that the Arab
Spring has somehow created those economic problems.
It is a challenging time for the world economy as
a whole. There was never going to be an economic
transformation overnight, not least because far from
being successful open-market-based economies, many
of these countries were beset by vested interests and
corruption, with unaccountable institutions. That has,
one might say, created a double problem. Not just
fragile economies, but worse, people were told they had
experienced free enterprise and open markets when
they had experienced nothing of the sort.
So we must help these countries unwind the legacy
of endemic corruption, military expenditure they
cannot afford, natural resources unfairly exploited; in
short, the mass kleptocracy that they suffered under for
too long.
While I am on the subject of stolen assets, we also
have a responsibility to help these countries get back
the stolen assets that are rightfully theirs, just as we
have returned billions of dollars of assets to Libya. It
is simply not good enough that the Egyptian people
continue to be denied those assets long after Mubarak
has gone.

Today, I am announcing a new British task force to
work with the Egyptian Government to gather evidence,
trace assets, work to change European Union law and
pursue the legal cases that will return the stolen money
to its rightful owners, the Egyptian people.
Finally, perhaps most challenging of all for Western
countries like mine, is the argument that elections
have simply opened the door to Islamist parties whose
values are incompatible with truly open societies. My
response to this is clear. We should respect the outcome
of elections. But we should not compromise on our
definition of what makes an open society. We should
judge Islamists by what they do.
The test is this. Will they entrust the rights of
citizenship to fellow countrymen and countrywomen
who do not share their specific political or religious
views? Do they accept that, unlike the dictators they
replaced, they should never pervert the democratic
process to hold onto power if they lose the consent
of the people they serve? Will they live up to their
commitments to protect the rule of law for all citizens,
to defend the rights of Christians and minorities and
to allow women a full role in society, in the economy
and in politics? The truth is this: we cannot build
strong economies, we cannot build open societies and
we cannot have inclusive political systems if we lock
out women. The eyes of the world today may be on the
brothers, but the future is as much in the hands of their
mothers, their sisters and their daughters.
Holding Islamists to account must also mean that
if they attempt to undermine the stability of other
countries, encourage terrorism instead of peace or
promote conflict instead of partnership, we will oppose
them. That is why Iran will continue to face the full
force of sanctions and scrutiny from the United Nations
until it gives up its ambitions to spread a nuclear shadow
over the world. It is also why we should not waver from
our insistence that Hamas give up violence. Hamas must
not be allowed to dictate the way forward. Palestinians
should have the chance to fulfil the same aspirations for
a job and a voice as others in the region, and we support
their right to have a State and a home. And Israelis
should be able to fulfil their own aspirations to live in
peace and security with their neighbours.
Of course there are challenges in working with
Governments that have different views and cultural
traditions. But there is a fundamental difference
between Islam and extremism. Islam is a great religion
observed peacefully and devoutly by more than 1 billion people. Islamist extremism is a warped political
ideology supported by a minority that seeks to hijack
that great religion, to gain respectability for its violent
objectives. It is vital that we make that distinction.
In Turkey, we see a Government with roots in
Islamic values but with democratic politics, an open
economy and a responsible attitude to supporting
change in Libya, Syria and elsewhere in the region.
I profoundly believe the same path is open to Egypt,
Tunisia and their neighbours. We must help them take
it. Democracy and Islam can flourish alongside one
another. Let us judge Governments not by their religion,
but by how they act and what they do. Let us engage with
the new democratic Governments in Egypt, Tunisia and
Libya so their success can strengthen democracy, not
undermine it.
There is no doubt that we are in the midst of
profound change and that many uncertainties lie
ahead. But the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not the problem. Indeed, nothing in the last year has
changed my fundamental conviction. The Arab Spring
represents a precious opportunity for people to realize
their aspirations for a job, a voice and a stake in their
future. We in the United Nations must do everything
we can to support them.﻿It is indeed a great privilege
for me to be able to address the General Assembly.
Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Vuk Jeremić on
his election to the office of President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I assure him of
our constructive support in his work over the coming
year.
We are assembled in New York at a time when we
face multiple global challenges that transcend national
boundaries. Developing countries are still to recover
from the downturn in the global economy. Their quest
for poverty eradication and sustainable development
remains an uphill task. Food and energy security as well
as health and education for their populations remain
daunting challenges. The West Asia-North Africa
region is seeing unprecedented sociopolitical upheaval.
The question of Palestine remains unresolved. Threats
emanating from terrorism, maritime piracy, drug
trafficking and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction continue to multiply. Those challenges
demand that we work for solutions in a concerted and
coordinated manner. That is the only path to success.
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20), the international community
renewed its commitment to sustainable development
and recognized poverty eradication as the greatest
global challenge. To act on that, it unequivocally
reaffirmed the sanctity of the Rio principles. India
remains committed to addressing climate change
through a comprehensive, equitable and balanced
outcome based on the principles of equity and common
but differentiated responsibilities. In less than two
weeks, in Hyderabad, we will host the eleventh meeting
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. We seek the support of parties to
fashion an outcome that harmonizes strong biodiversity
action with our basic development objectives.
The process to develop a set of sustainable
development goals has begun. The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) must be integrated in the
new framework so that the unmet development priorities
continue to be the main focus. In the interim, with still
three years to go to the MDG target date of 2015, it
is imperative to ensure that all efforts to achieve the
MDGs are made. In the global discourse on the post-
2015 development agenda, the focus ought to be on the
word “development”. It ought to be firmly entrenched
in the understandings and principles of Rio+20 and be
anchored in the intergovernmental process at the United Nations. Priority must be given to the challenges of
poverty, unemployment, food and energy, water, health,
environmental sustainability, unsustainable lifestyles
and, above all, economic growth.
Ensuring gender equality and women’s
empowerment is essential to the pursuit of building
inclusive societies. It is also an imperative for building
strong and resilient economies. We are happy to support
the efforts of the United Nations. We also need to pay
particular attention to upgrading the skills of young
people and to ensuring employment opportunities for
them. Children and youth are our future. We need to
invest in them to reap the demographic dividend to
secure our future.
India remains firmly committed to scaling up
our development partnership with Africa, including
through the framework of the India-Africa Forum
Summit. Similarly, we will continue to build on our
commitments for enhanced cooperation with least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States within the framework
of South-South cooperation.
India is a multireligious, multi-ethnic and
multilingual society. Our civilizational ethos has been
underpinned by peaceful coexistence and tolerance,
values that the founder of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi,
placed at the core of India’s national life. Those
principles are enshrined in our Constitution, which
provides the foundation for our secular, democratic and
inclusive society.
Mutual respect for deeply held religious sentiments
is the bedrock of tolerance and coexistence. Unfortunate
recent events have highlighted the need for enhanced
dialogue among faiths and civilizations. Violence
cannot lead to greater understanding. It is necessary
to uphold norms of peaceful international discourse.
In particular, the safety and security of diplomatic
personnel should be fully respected.
Terrorism remains one of the most potent threats
to international peace and security. The international
community must adopt a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism and must focus on efforts to dismantle the
infrastructure of terrorism, including its invidious
network of epicentres, training facilities and financing.
It is time we demonstrated the necessary political will to
agree on a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism so as to strengthen the normative framework against the increasingly sophisticated and globalized
terrorist challenge.
India continues to be gravely concerned by the
menace of piracy and armed robbery at sea. Apart from
the major economic and commercial consequences of
that scourge, it has serious humanitarian implications
for the large number of seafarers held hostage by
pirates. The need of the hour is once again concerted
international action under United Nations auspices,
with special attention to addressing the welfare of
seafarers and their families.
Peacekeeping and disarmament are among the
unique pursuits of the United Nations, because
they embody the promise and innate potential of the
Organization to make the world a better place. India
has a proud history of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations dating back to the 1950s,
having taken part in as many as 43 peacekeeping
operations. The challenge before the international
community today is to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping is adequately resourced and enabled to
meet the realities of today, including in post-conflict
and peacebuilding contexts. In that regard, we are
hopeful that progress will be made on all outstanding
issues between the Sudan and South Sudan.
India is committed to achieving a nuclear-
weapon-free world. The principles of the Rajiv Gandhi
action plan of 1988 for achieving nuclear disarmament
in a time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory,
phased and verifiable manner remain relevant, even
after more than two decades. A renewed consensus
on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament must
be forged. Meaningful dialogue among all States
possessing nuclear weapons is needed in order to build
trust and confidence and to reduce the salience of
nuclear weapons in international affairs and security
doctrines.
Measures must be taken to reduce nuclear
risks, including the grave risk of terrorists gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, and thus
to strengthen nuclear security. The Conference on
Disarmament — the international community’s sole
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum — deserves
our support in discharging its mandate of negotiating
treaties on issues on the international disarmament
agenda.
The crisis in Syria continues unabated and is a matter
of serious concern for us. Any further militarization of the crisis can have catastrophic consequences for
the region. We urge all parties to commit themselves
to resolving the crisis without any further bloodshed
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process
that can meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. We support the efforts of the United Nations
and urge all sides to cooperate in good faith with the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Support for the Palestinian cause has been a
cornerstone of India’s foreign policy. We were privileged
to receive President Mahmoud Abbas in India earlier this
month. We support Palestine’s aspirations for enhanced
status at the United Nations. It is imperative that there be
an early realization of a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
India desires constructive and friendly relations
with all its neighbours. We have a vision of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous region with enhanced cooperation
and connectivity linking us with Central Asia, the
Gulf and South-East Asia. Within South Asia, we have
sought to enhance bilateral relations individually with
each of our neighbours and through the aegis of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
We have embarked on a resumed dialogue process
with Pakistan and advocate a step-by-step approach to
normalizing our bilateral relations.
An unwarranted reference has been made from
this rostrum to Jammu and Kashmir. Our principled
position on the issue has been consistent and is well
known. The people of Jammu and Kashmir have chosen
their destiny and reaffirmed it repeatedly through
India’s well-established democratic processes. We wish
to make it abundantly clear that Jammu and Kashmir is
an integral part of India.
India supports the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their endeavour to build a peaceful,
stable, democratic and prosperous country. We are
ready to partner with the Afghan people as they rebuild
their country in accordance with their own priorities
and national circumstances. The continuing existence
beyond Afghanistan’s borders of safe havens and
sanctuaries for terrorists is the major impediment to the
restoration of peace and security in Afghanistan. India is committed to creating an enabling environment in
which the Afghan people can live in peace and security
and decide their future for themselves, without outside
interference, coercion or intimidation.
The United Nations and the norms of international
relations that it has fostered remain the most
efficacious means for converting today’s challenges
into opportunities. However, we need to ensure that the
architecture of global governance reflects contemporary
realities. Sticking to structures designed at the end of
the Second World War only constrains multilateralism
from delivering on its promises.
The most important and decisive step towards
remedying that situation pertains to the Security
Council, which must be expanded in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories. A reformed Council
must include countries that are capable of bearing, and
willing to bear, the additional burdens relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well
as willilng to sustain global campaigns against new and
emerging global threats. Let me also stress that we must
address, sooner rather than later, the incongruity of the
lack of permanent membership for Africa.
Equally, India will promote and lend its weight to
enhancing the voice and participation of developing
countries in decision-making in global economic and
financial institutions. The quota reform process of the
International Monetary Fund must be accelerated with
altered quotas that reflect contemporary economic
weight.
Speaking in the Assembly on 14 October 1968,
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said,
“The United Nations is the trustee of the
world’s peace and represents the hopes of mankind.
Its very existence gives a feeling of assurance that
the justice of true causes can be brought fearlessly
before the world. This Assembly and the agencies
of the United Nations should, in all that they do,
sustain those hopes and promote the causes of
peace”.
Those words remain true to this day.
Let me conclude by assuring the President and the
members of the Assembly that India will continue to
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and will strive to strengthen the
United Nations.﻿It is a pleasure to see the
General Assembly presided over by the Ambassador from Israel, and it is good to see all of the representatives
here.
Three thousand years ago, King David reigned
over the Jewish State in our eternal capital, Jerusalem.
I say that to all those who proclaim that the Jewish
State has no roots in our region and that it will soon
disappear. Throughout our history, the Jewish people
have overcome all the tyrants who have sought our
destruction. It is their ideologies that have been
discarded by history. The people of Israel live on. We
say in Hebrew, the Jewish State will live forever.
The Jewish people have lived in the land of Israel
for thousands of years. Even after most of our people
were exiled from it, Jews continued to live in the land
of Israel throughout the ages. The masses of our people
never gave up the dream of returning to our ancient
homeland. Defying the laws of history, we did just that.
We ingathered the exiles, restored our independence
and rebuilt our national life. The Jewish people have
come home. We will never be uprooted again.
Yesterday was Yom Kippur, the holiest day of
the Jewish year. Every year, for over three millennia,
we have come together on this day of ref lection and
atonement. We take stock of our past. We pray for our
future. We remember the sorrows of our persecution;
we remember the great travails of our dispersion; we
mourn the extermination of a third of our people,
6 million, in the Holocaust.
But at the end of Yom Kippur, we celebrate. We
celebrate the rebirth of Israel. We celebrate the heroism
of our young men and women who have defended our
people with the indomitable courage of Joshua, David
and the Maccabees of old. We celebrate the marvel
of the flourishing modern Jewish State. In Israel we
walk the same paths as those trodden by our patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But we blaze new trails in
science, technology, medicine and agriculture. In Israel
the past and the future find common ground.
Unfortunately, that is not the case in many other
countries. For today, a great battle is being waged
between the modern and the medieval. The forces of
modernity seek a bright future in which the rights of
all are protected, in which an ever-expanding digital
library is available in the palm of every child, in which
every life is sacred.
The forces of medievalism seek a world in which
women and minorities are subjugated, in which knowledge is suppressed, in which not life but death
is glorified. Those forces clash around the globe, but
nowhere more starkly than in the Middle East. Israel
stands proudly with the forces of modernity. We protect
the rights of all our citizens, men and women, Jews and
Arabs, Muslims and Christians — all are equal before
the law.
Israel is also making the world a better place. Our
scientists win Nobel Prizes. Our know-how is in every
cell phone and computer that every one of us uses. We
prevent hunger by irrigating arid lands in Africa and
Asia. Recently, I was deeply moved when I visited
Technion, one of our technological institutes in Haifa,
and I saw a man paralysed from the waist down climb
up a f light of stairs, quite easily, with the aid of an
Israeli invention. And Israel’s exceptional creativity is
matched by our people’s remarkable compassion. When
disaster strikes anywhere in the world — in Haiti,
Japan, India, Turkey, Indonesia and elsewhere — Israeli
doctors are among the first on the scene, performing
lifesaving surgeries.
In the past year, I lost both my father and my
father-in-law. In the same hospital wards where they
were treated, Israeli doctors were treating Palestinian
Arabs. In fact, every year, thousands of Arabs from
the Palestinian territories and Arabs from throughout
the Middle East come to Israel to be treated in Israeli
hospitals by Israeli doctors. I know that that is not
going to be spoken by speakers at this podium, but it
is the truth. It is important that the world be aware of
that truth. It is because Israel cherishes life that Israel
cherishes peace and seeks peace. We seek to preserve
our historic ties and our historic peace treaties with
Egypt and Jordan. We seek to forge a durable peace
with the Palestinians.
President Abbas just spoke here. I say to him and
I say to the Assembly: we will not solve our conflict
with libellous speeches at the United Nations. That is
not the way to solve it. We will not solve our conflict
with unilateral declarations of statehood. We have
to sit together, negotiate together and reach a mutual
compromise, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State
recognizes the one and only Jewish State.
Israel wants to see a Middle East of progress and
peace. We want to see the three great religions that
sprang forth from our region — Judaism, Christianity
and Islam — coexist in peace and in mutual respect. Yet the medieval forces of radical Islam, which
the world just saw storming American Embassies
throughout the Middle East, oppose that. They seek
supremacy over all Muslims. They are bent on world
conquest. They want to destroy Israel, Europe, America.
They want to extinguish freedom. They want to end the
modern world.
Militant Islam has many branches, from the rulers
of Iran with their Revolutionary Guards to Al-Qaida
terrorists to the radical cells lurking in every part of the
globe. But despite their differences, they are all rooted
in the same bitter soil of intolerance. That intolerance
is directed first at their fellow Muslims and then at
Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus, secular people,
and anyone who does not submit to their unforgiving
creed. They want to drag humankind back to an age of
unquestioning dogma and unrelenting conflict.
I am sure of one thing. Ultimately, they will fail.
Ultimately, light will penetrate the darkness. We
have seen that happen before. Some 500 years ago,
the printing press helped pry a cloistered Europe
out of a dark age. Eventually, ignorance gave way to
enlightenment. So too, a cloistered Middle East will
eventually yield to the irresistible power of freedom
and technology. When that happens, our region will be
guided not by fanaticism and conspiracy but by reason
and curiosity.
I think the relevant question is not whether this
fanaticism will be defeated. It is how many lives will
be lost before it is defeated. We have seen that happen
before too. Some 70 years ago, the world saw another
fanatic ideology bent on world conquest. It went down
in flames, but not before it took millions of people with
it. Those who opposed that fanaticism waited too long
to act. In the end they triumphed, but at a horrific cost.
My friends, we cannot let that happen again. At
stake is not merely the future of my own country. At
stake is the future of the world. Nothing could imperil
our common future more than the arming of Iran with
nuclear weapons. To understand what the world would
be like with a nuclear-armed Iran, just imagine the
world with a nuclear-armed Al-Qaida. It makes little
difference whether these lethal weapons are in the
hands of the world’s most dangerous terrorist regime or
the world’s most dangerous terrorist organization. They
are both fired by the same hatred; they are both driven
by the same lust for violence. Just look at what the Iranian regime has done up
until now, without nuclear weapons. In 2009, they
brutally put down mass protests for democracy in their
own country. Today, their henchmen are participating
in the slaughter of tens of thousands of Syrian
civilians, including thousands of children — directly
participating in those murders. They abetted the killing
of American soldiers in Iraq and continue to do so
in Afghanistan. Before that, Iranian proxies killed
hundreds of American troops in Beirut and in Saudi
Arabia. They have turned Lebanon and Gaza into terror
strongholds, embedding nearly 100,000 missiles and
rockets in civilian areas. Thousands of such rockets and
missiles have already been fired at Israeli communities
by their terrorist proxies.
In the past year, they have spread their international
terror networks to two dozen countries across five
continents, from India and Thailand to Kenya and
Bulgaria. They have even plotted to blow up a restaurant
a few blocks from the White House in order to kill a
diplomat. And of course, Iran’s rulers repeatedly deny
the Holocaust and call for Israel’s destruction almost
on a daily basis, as they did again this week from the
United Nations.
So I ask, given this record of Iranian aggression
without nuclear weapons, just imagine Iranian
aggression with nuclear weapons. Imagine their long-
range missiles tipped with nuclear warheads, their
terror networks armed with atomic bombs. Who here
would feel safe in the Middle East? Who would be safe
in Europe? Who would be safe in America? Who would
be safe anywhere?
There are those who believe that a nuclear-armed
Iran can be deterred like the Soviet Union. That is a
very dangerous assumption. Militant jihadists behave
very differently from secular Marxists. There were
no Soviet suicide bombers. Yet Iran produces hordes
of them. Deterrence worked with the Soviets, because
every time the Soviets faced a choice between their
ideology and their survival, they chose their survival.
But deterrence may not work with the Iranians once
they get nuclear weapons.
A great scholar of the Middle East, Professor
Bernard Lewis, put it best. He said that for the ayatollahs
of Iran mutually assured destruction is not a deterrent,
it is an inducement. Iran’s apocalyptic leaders believe
that a medieval holy man will reappear in the wake
of a devastating holy war, thereby ensuring that their brand of radical Islam will rule the Earth. That is not
just what they believe; it is what is actually guiding
their policies and their actions. Just listen to Ayatollah
Rafsanjani who said, “the use of even one nuclear bomb
inside Israel will destroy everything, however it would
only harm the Islamic world.” Rafsanjani said: “It is
not irrational to contemplate such an eventuality”. “Not
irrational” is what he said. And that is coming from one
of the so-called moderates of Iran.
Shockingly, some people have begun to peddle the
absurd notion that a nuclear-armed Iran would actually
stabilize the Middle East. That is like saying a nuclear-
armed Al-Qaida would usher in an era of universal
peace.
I have been speaking about the need to prevent Iran
from developing nuclear weapons for over 15 years.
I spoke about it in my first term in office as Prime
Minister, and then I spoke about it when I left office.
I spoke about it when it was fashionable, and I spoke
about it when it was not fashionable.
I speak about it now because the hour is getting
late, very late. I speak about it now because the Iranian
nuclear calendar does not take time out for anyone or
for anything. I speak about it now because when it
comes to the survival of my country, it is not only my
right to speak, it is my duty to speak. And I believe that
it is the duty of every responsible leader who wants to
preserve world peace.
For nearly a decade, the international community
has tried to stop the Iranian nuclear programme with
diplomacy. That has not worked. Iran uses diplomatic
negotiations as a means to buy time to advance its nuclear
programme. For over seven years, the international
community has tried sanctions with Iran. Under the
leadership of President Obama, the international
community has passed some of the strongest sanctions
to date.
I want to thank the Governments represented here
that have joined in that effort. It has had an effect. Oil
exports have been curbed and the Iranian economy
has been hit hard. It has had an effect on the economy,
but we must face the truth. Sanctions have not stopped
Iran’s nuclear programme either.
According to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, during the last year alone, Iran doubled the
number of centrifuges in its underground nuclear
facility in Qom. At this late hour, there is only one way to peacefully prevent Iran from getting atomic bombs.
That is by placing a clear red line on Iran’s nuclear
weapons programme.
Red lines do not lead to war. Red lines prevent war.
Look at NATO’s charter. It made clear that an attack on
one member country would be considered an attack on
all. NATO’s red line helped keep the peace in Europe
for nearly half a century. President Kennedy set a red
line during the Cuban missile crisis. That red line
also prevented war and helped preserve the peace for
decades.
In fact, it is the failure to place red lines that has
often invited aggression. If the Western Powers had
drawn clear red lines during the 1930s, I believe they
would have stopped Nazi aggression, and the Second
World War might have been avoided. In 1990, if
Saddam Hussein had been clearly told that his conquest
of Kuwait would cross a red line, the first Gulf War
might have been avoided.
Clear red lines have also worked with Iran. Earlier
this year, Iran threatened to close the Straits of Hormuz.
The United States drew a clear red line and Iran backed
off. Now, red lines could be drawn in different parts of
Iran’s nuclear weapons programme, but to be credible,
a red line must be drawn first and foremost in one vital
part of their programme: on Iran’s efforts to enrich
uranium.
Now let me explain why. Basically, any bomb
consists of explosive material and a mechanism to
ignite it. The simplest example is gunpowder and a
fuse — that is, you light the fuse and you set off the
gunpowder. In the case of Iran’s plans to build a nuclear
weapon, the gunpowder is enriched uranium. The
fuse is a nuclear detonator. For Iran, amassing enough
enriched uranium is far more difficult than producing
the nuclear fuse. For a country like Iran, it takes many
years to enrich uranium for a bomb. That requires
thousands of centrifuges spinning in tandem in very
big industrial plants. Those Iranian plants are visible
and they are still vulnerable.
In contrast, Iran could produce the nuclear
detonator, the fuse, in a lot less time — maybe under a
year, maybe only a few months. The detonator can be
made in a small workshop the size of a classroom. It
may be very difficult to find and target that workshop,
especially in Iran. That is a country that is bigger than
France, Germany, Italy and Britain combined. The
same is true for the small facility in which they could assemble a warhead or a nuclear device that could be
placed in a container ship. Chances are you will not
find that facility either.
So in fact, the only way that you can credibly
prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, is to
prevent Iran from amassing enough enriched uranium
for a bomb. So how much enriched uranium do you
need for a bomb, and how close is Iran to getting it?
Let me show you. I brought a diagram for you. Here
is the diagram. This is a bomb. This is a fuse.
In the case of Iran’s nuclear plans to build a bomb,
this bomb has to be filled with enough enriched
uranium, and Iran has to go through three stages. In
the first stage they have to enrich enough low-enriched
uranium; in the second stage they have to enrich enough
medium-enriched uranium. And in the third, and
final, stage they have to enrich enough high-enriched
uranium for the first bomb.
Where is Iran? Iran has completed the first stage. It
took them many years, but they completed it, and they
are 70 per cent of the way there. Now they are well
into the second stage. By next spring, at most by next
summer, at current enrichment rates, they will have
finished the medium enrichment and moved on to the
final stage. From there, it is only a few months, possibly
a few weeks, before they get enough enriched uranium
for the first bomb.
What I told the Assembly just now is not based
on secret information. It is not based on military
intelligence. It is based on public reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Anybody can
read them. They are online.
So if these are the facts — and they are — where
should a red line be drawn? A red line should be drawn
right here, before Iran completes the second stage of
nuclear enrichment necessary to make a bomb and
before Iran gets to a point where it is a few months away
or a few weeks away from amassing enough enriched
uranium to make a nuclear weapon.
Each day, that point is getting closer. That is why
I speak today with such a sense of urgency, and that is
why everyone should have a sense of urgency.
There are some who claim that even if Iran
completes the enrichment process, even if it crosses
that red line that I just drew, our intelligence agencies
will know when and where Iran will make the fuse, assemble the bomb and prepare the warhead. No one
appreciates our intelligence agencies more than the
Prime Minister of Israel. All these leading intelligence
agencies are superb, including ours. They have foiled
many attacks, they have saved many lives, but they
are not foolproof. For over two years, our intelligence
agencies did not know that Iran was building a huge
nuclear enrichment plant under a mountain. Do we
want to risk the security of the world on the assumption
that we would find a small workshop in a country half
the size of Europe in time?
The relevant question is not when Iran will get
the bomb. The relevant question is at what stage can
we no longer stop Iran from getting the bomb? The
red line must be drawn on Iran’s nuclear enrichment
programme because these enrichment facilities are the
only nuclear installations that we can definitely see and
credibly target.
I believe that faced with a clear red line, Iran will
back down. This will give more time for sanctions and
diplomacy to convince Iran to dismantle its nuclear
weapons programme altogether.
Two days ago, from this podium, President Obama
reiterated that the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran cannot
be contained (see A/67/PV.6). I very much appreciate
the President’s position, as does everyone in my country.
We share the goal of stopping Iran’s nuclear weapons
programme. This goal unites the people of Israel. It
unites Americans, Democrats and Republicans alike.
and it is shared by important leaders throughout the
world. What I have said today will help ensure that this
common goal is achieved. Israel is in discussions with
the United States over this issue, and I am confident
that we can chart a path forward together.
The clash between modernity and medievalism
need not be a clash between progress and tradition. The
traditions of the Jewish people go back thousands of
years. They are the source of our collective values and
the foundations of our national strength. At the same
time, the Jewish people have always looked towards the
future. Throughout history, we have been at the forefront
of efforts to expand liberty, promote equality and
advance human rights. We champion those principles
not in spite of our traditions but because of them. We
heed the words of the Jewish prophets Isaiah, Amos and
Jeremiah to treat all with dignity and compassion, to
pursue justice and cherish life and to pray and strive for
peace. Those are the timeless values of my people, and they are the Jewish people’s greatest gift to humankind.
Let us commit ourselves today to defending those
values so that we can defend our freedoms and protect
our common civilization.﻿I bring greetings
from the South Pacific. For the past year, New Zealand
has had the privilege of chairing the Pacific Islands
Forum, a regional body that represents some of the
smallest and most vulnerable States on this planet. For
us that has been an important responsibility.
Because we are a small country with modest
resources, we choose to focus much of our attention
on our own region. Over 60 per cent of our official
development assistance is spent in our own
neighbourhood. Serving as Chair of the Pacific Islands
Forum has caused us to reflect on the role of regional
organizations, and also on the extent to which we all
depend on the United Nations for solutions to challenges
that are truly global in character. I say with some
confidence that we have been making good progress
in dealing with those challenges that are capable of
regional solutions.
But I must also say that we need and expect more
from this institution. The Pacific Islands Forum has
16 members, of which 16 are small island States. I was
pleased this week to attend the first meeting between
the Secretary-General and Pacific Islands Forum
leaders, which I hope will mark a new era of enhanced
high-level engagement between this Organization and
our region and a greater understanding of our needs.
The Pacific has had its share of stability and
security challenges in recent times. As a region, we
have done reasonably well in dealing with them. Most recently it has been in Solomon Islands that a regional
initiative has been required. The Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands has involved a truly
regional approach, with the participation of police
and other personnel from every member of the Pacific
Islands Forum. I am pleased to report that the security
element of that initiative has been significantly scaled
down and will soon be fully withdrawn. But there is
also more that this Organization, particularly the
Security Council, can do to acknowledge and support
regional leadership on peace and security matters in the
Pacific and elsewhere.
Concerns about democracy, the rule of law and
human rights are not mere abstract considerations within
the Pacific. Those principles have been challenged in a
number of States, most notably, in recent years, in Fiji.
In that respect, I am pleased to report that progress is
being made towards the holding of elections in 2014,
and that support has been forthcoming to ensure that
such elections are free and fair.
Stability and security issues are not the only
priorities for our regional body. In our year as Forum
Chair, New Zealand chose to focus on a number of
development priorities, two of which I wish to mention
in my remarks today.
For many of the poorer States within our region,
their fisheries resource is the major economic asset they
hold. Yet due to illegal fishing practices, unreported
catch and inadequate management practices, those
countries have received far too small a return on that
resource. Because of the highly migratory character
of the tuna resource, this is truly a matter requiring
regional management. Solid progress is being made
in such areas as improved surveillance, the training
of monitors and improved management practices, both
to protect the last really healthy fishery on the planet
and to ensure that its owners receive a fair share of the
resource they own.
One of the highest priorities within our region
is the need for practical initiatives in the area of
renewable energy. Ours is a region heavily dependent
upon fossil fuels for the generation of electricity. The
cost of expensive imported diesel in most small Pacific
economies is absolutely crippling. The climate change
impact is obvious.
After a decade of climate change conferences and
hundreds of millions of dollars in so-called climate
change initiatives, one might be forgiven for imagining that the Pacific, overendowed as it is with good sunlight,
would by now be positively festooned with solar power
plants. Sadly, I must report that that is not in fact the
case. Indeed, one of the most striking features of our
region has been the complete lack of progress in putting
lofty climate change rhetoric into any form of renewable
energy practice.
In our year in the Chair of the regional body we
have set out to correct that serious shortcoming. A
small but important illustration lies in our work in
the tiny Tokelau Islands. Until now, Tokelau has been
100 per cent dependent on fossil fuels for the generation
of electricity. By the end 2012, Tokelau will be over
90 per cent resourced with renewable solar electricity.
Good progress has also been made in Tonga, where
I recently participated in the opening of a solar power
plant supplying around 20 per cent of the electricity
requirements of the main island, Tongatapu. And we
are working with the Cook Islands Government, too,
to assist in meeting their bold aspiration to 50 per cent
renewable electricity by 2015, mostly through solar
initiatives.
These New Zealand-funded programmes are
an important part of our overall commitment to our
region. Our parting legacy from our year as Chair
of the regional body is a renewable-energy pledging
conference to be held early next year, with the objective
of matching donors, suppliers of concessional and
commercial finance, and others with the renewable
energy plans of our Pacific neighbours. Here I should
acknowledge the European Union’s commitment in
co-leading this initiative, as well as the support of the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the
Governments of Australia, the United States and other
generous supporters.
While there is much that can be achieved by
regional action, we must acknowledge that sometimes
regional solutions are just not enough. That goes right
to the very heart of the reason for the existence of this
Organization. My point is most vividly illustrated
today in relation to Syria. It would be difficult for
me to overstate the level of frustration of the people
I represent with the complete inability of the Security
Council to act in relation to Syria. And it would be
even more difficult to overstate the extent to which the
Security Council is at risk of losing its credibility in the
eyes of reasonable and fair-minded people through its
inability to act. People in my country ask a very simple question:
If 25,000 deaths, countless thousands injured and
many more displaced and homeless are not enough to
get the Security Council to act, then what does it take?
Just what does it take? I welcome the leadership that
the Arab League and Arab States have shown on this
issue, and we have seen similar leadership from them
on other difficult issues in their region. And I welcome
the fact that the General Assembly has been looking
for opportunities to be more engaged. In the absence of
leadership from the Security Council, 1 suggest that the
Assembly must find ways to play a more activist role.
But from all of this, the case for Security Council
reform has become utterly compelling. Indeed,
increasingly, the future credibility of the United
Nations may depend on it. If we are to make progress
in this area we will need to see Members move past the
extravagant attempts to maximize individual positions
and try to find some meaningful, practical reforms that
actually hold the prospect of widespread support.
I represent a small nation of practical, constructive
people. And it is because we seek practical,
constructive reform that our Government supports the
so-called intermediate solution: the creation of a new
category of seat for the group of larger countries that
feel underrepresented in comparison with the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5), but
seats that they would have to win in open elections
so as to make them fully accountable to the broader
membership.
I do not intend in these remarks to discuss any other
specific proposals we would like to see considered, with
one exception. There are now compelling reasons for us
to ask the P-5 to voluntarily accept restrictions on the
use of the veto. To go further and to seek its abolition is
pointless; it simply will not happen. But to ask the P-5
to acknowledge and respect the genuine concerns of the
wider membership by voluntarily accepting a curb on
the exercise of the veto is an entirely reasonable and
achievable objective.
My country was one of those that led the opposition
to the veto when the Organization was being established;
indeed, it was the only Charter issue that was forced to a
vote. The permanent members argued at that stage that
the veto was necessary in order to protect their vital
national interests. Yet today we routinely see the veto
exercised in circumstances that have little to do with
national interests. My request to the five permanent members is simply that they stick with what they said
to us back in 1945. And my challenge to them today
is to consider a process by which they collectively and
voluntarily agree to confine their use of the veto to
those issues that clearly and directly affect their vital
national interests; and also that they voluntarily agree
not to use their veto in situations that involve mass
atrocities.
While on the topic of the Security Council, I
would like to take the opportunity to urge the Council
and the relevant organs of the General Assembly to
respond positively to the requests from the Economic
Community of West African States for support in
dealing with the conflict in Mali and the Sahel. Too
often we have seen the Council fail to respond in
a timely way to requests for help — in Rwanda, in
Guinea, in Darfur and in Somalia. Too often it has been
a case of too little, too late. In all of these cases we have
seen good leadership from within the African Union,
and that leadership deserves a timely and constructive
response from New York.
Many of those here will be aware that New Zealand
is an energetic candidate for election to the Security
Council for the term from 2015-2016. I can assure the
Assembly that it will hear more from us on these topics
over the next two years. We are a small country with
a big voice and an approach that is fair-minded and
constructive.
In the past few days. the Assembly has heard from
both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas.
We are now on notice that the issue of Palestinian status
in the United Nations will come before the Assembly
during this session. We look forward to seeing the text
of a draft resolution and to engaging in the consultations
that have been signaled to us. I said earlier that New
Zealanders are practical and constructive. They are also
fair-minded people; they expect to see their Government
bring all of those attributes to the consideration of such
a resolution, and that we will surely do. Having said
that, let me also be clear that we see such a resolution
as a very poor substitute for the direct discussions that
should occur between two leaders who live half an hour
down the road from each other.
In his address to the Assembly earlier in the week
(see A/67/PV.12), Prime Minister Netanyahu set out
clearly the grave implications for the Middle East, and
for the global community more generally, of a nuclear
breakout in the region. Like other Member States, New Zealand believes Iran must be told to step back from
a course that risks further dangerous escalation of the
situation. We hope the international community will
stand firm in sending that sort of message. In return,
however, I suggest that it is fair for the international
community to make a request of Prime Minister
Netanyahu. And that is to put the settlements on hold, at
the very least while negotiations proceed, and to engage
in the direct talks with his Palestinian counterpart that
represent the only basis for a durable solution to this
issue, and an essential step in removing the seeds of
wider conflict within the region.
I would like to remind the Assembly that these are
very difficult times for Governments around the world.
Budget economies have affected foreign ministries,
my own included. It is only fair that we should in
turn ask this large institution to find economies and
improve working methods in order to deliver better
value for our taxpayers. Smaller countries, like New
Zealand, depend more than most on good multilateral
institutions. We need a United Nations that is modern,
efficient and able to meet changing needs. We all need
a Security Council that is more responsive to the needs
of the wider membership and more effective in dealing
with the significant challenges that we all confront
today.﻿For over a year and a half, the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa has been the nerve centre
of global politics. The deep changes that have swept
over the region intertwine with the key problems of
modern international relations and require everyone to
take a comprehensive approach and to reject simplistic
and ideology-driven patterns and double standards.
Russia has consistently supported peoples in their
aspiration to determine their destiny and to pave the
way to more effective models of public governance.
We believe it is particularly important to carry out
those transformations in a non-violent way and without
outside interference. We strongly believe that all
members of the international community should be
interested in making the Middle East-North Africa
region peaceful, stable, democratic and free from
domestic and inter-State conflicts. So far, however,
there has been no progress in reaching unanimity in
the efforts of outside players to create conditions for
achieving that goal.
Of particular concern is the deepening internal
conflict in Syria. We have consistently called for
consolidated efforts by the international community
to compel the Government and its opponents to
immediately cease the violence, come to the negotiating
table and work out a compromise on the content and
pace of reforms that would satisfy all Syrians and
ensure the safety and rights of all ethnic and religious
groups. That was the substance of the consensus
recorded in the final communiqué of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), agreed upon in Geneva
as a follow-up to the Kofi Annan plan.
We call upon all members of the Action Group
to fully abide by the commitments we all took on in
Geneva. That is the fastest way to stop the loss of human
life in Syria. We proposed a Security Council resolution
endorsing the Geneva communiqué as the basis for
negotiations at the beginning of the transitional period, but that proposal was blocked. Those who oppose the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué bear an
onerous responsibility. They insist on a ceasefire by
the Government alone and encourage the opposition
to intensify hostilities, in fact pushing Syria even
deeper into the abyss of bloody internecine strife. The
militarization of the conflict continues, with calls for
open intervention.
Extremist organizations including Al-Qaida
have become more active in Syria. They perpetrate
terrorist attacks against innocent civilians and civil
infrastructure. The number of war crimes is growing, on
the part of both Government forces and the opposition,
as recorded in the recent report of the Human Rights
Council’s commission of inquiry (A/HRC/21/50).
Russia resolutely condemns any violence, wherever
it comes from, and is convinced that there is still an
opportunity to undertake collective action. Practical
steps to overcome the crisis need to begin with a
comprehensive ceasefire, the release of prisoners and
hostages and the provision of additional humanitarian
aid. That would create the conditions to start an
inter-Syrian dialogue. We hope that Lakhdar Brahimi,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, will be able to bring his vast
experience to bear on moving towards an agreement on
such arrangements, with the support of the international
community. Russia will provide its full support to
promote the success of his mission.
The changes taking place in the Middle East
should not marginalize the Palestinian problem. The
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting Arab-
Israeli settlement, which should lead, among other
results, to the establishment of an independent, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting in peace
and security with Israel, would be a major contribution
to the normalization of the overall regional situation.
The Arab Peace Initiative fully retains its relevance,
and we support the efforts of the League of Arab States
to move it forward.
I also wish to stress the importance of implementing
the decision on convening in 2012 a conference on
establishing in the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery (see
NPT/CONF/2010/50 (Vol.I)). It is clearly necessary to
ensure the participation in the conference of all States in
the region, and they should agree on key arrangements among themselves. In that matter, the League of Arab
States should play an important role.
On the whole, we support closer ties between the
United Nations and regional entities. I would note
that in our part of the world today a memorandum on
cooperation was signed between the secretariat of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I am
convinced that it will increase the efficiency of common
efforts to ensure stability and security.
All our actions should be founded solidly on the
United Nations Charter, which makes no provision
for the right to change regimes. It is unacceptable to
impose a political system on a country and its people.
Our position was clearly stated by President Vladimir
Putin speaking at the Kremlin on 26 September. The
entire sequence of events in the Arab world and other
regions proves the futility of any such policy, which can
lead to dangerous interethnic and interreligious clashes
in international relations.
We believe it is an obligation of all States to protect
from provocations and blasphemy the religious feelings
of people of any religious affiliation. At the same
time, of course, there can be no justification for acts
of terror, regardless of where they are committed, be
they in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Yemen or anywhere else.
Attacks against diplomats or United Nations personnel
are absolutely unacceptable.
In general, we are convinced that today, when the
world is going through a transition period characterized
by instability in the spheres of the economy, politics and
inter-civilizational relations, it is particularly important
for United Nations Member States to be able to rely
on accepted rules of conduct and to agree on a joint
response to the threats to global stability. We should
not allow irresponsible actions dictated by expedient
interests to shatter the system of international law. The
world order is threatened by arbitrary interpretation
of such essential principles as the non-use or threat of
force, the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their domestic affairs.
Those are the key principles of the United Nations
Charter, which confers the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security on
the Security Council. In advancing the reform of the
United Nations, it is essential to preserve the capacity of
the Security Council to perform those functions. Their erosion would deprive the international community of
an essential mechanism for developing joint approaches
to the settlement of crisis situations.
It is appropriate to mention the compulsory
instruments at the disposal of the United Nations. Under
the United Nations Charter the imposition of sanctions
falls exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Security
Council. Decisions must be made on a collegial basis,
with the understanding that sanctions should not lead
to isolation of the State targeted for sanctions, but
rather encourage it to engage in a dialogue to remove
questions that the Member States may have. It is
essential that sanctions should be well-measured and
that they not cause any suffering to the population. In
the past the Security Council has discussed the issue of
the humanitarian limits of sanctions, but somehow the
discussions have faded away. We believe it is important
to resume them.
Another issue that needs to be discussed in the
Security Council is the consequences of unilateral
sanctions imposed by a State or a group of States
sidestepping the United Nations to advance their
political goals. We have no doubt that such sanctions,
especially when they are applied extraterritorially,
weaken the unity of the international community
and undermine the effectiveness of its efforts. For
many years, the commercial, economic and financial
restrictions imposed by the United States on Cuba
have remained an illustration of the negative impact
of unilateral sanctions. Russia, together with the
overwhelming majority of members of the international
community, calls for the swift lifting of the blockade,
which is a relic of the Cold War.
Special attention should be given to the practical
enforcement of Security Council decisions regarding
sanctions against non-State actors and illegal cross-
border formations. In general, the events of recent
years have clearly shown that unilateral action which
violates international law and circumvents or distorts
the decisions of the Security Council does no good.
Of course, the legal norms of international affairs
will be further adjusted as necessary. But these
transformations should be treated with the greatest
sense of responsibility and full consciousness of the
serious risks involved. Consensus should be the sole
route to their adoption. Violations of international
law should not be portrayed as some sort of creative
development.

All of this is related to the debate regarding the
concept of the so-called responsibility to protect. Further
discussion of this concept should be held on the basis
of the approach agreed on at the 2005 World Summit,
which reaffirmed the need to observe the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations when responding to
conflicts within States. The protection of civilians is an
issue far too serious to be exploited to achieve political
goals. The ambiguity of the so-called responsibility-
to-protect concept can be better understood in light of
initiatives formulated by Brazil and several other States
to move towards consensus.
Let us not forget that the founders of the United
Nations, in their wisdom, agreed upon and endorsed
a Charter that enshrined principles for the regulation
of a multipolar world order. Now that the abnormal
bipolar period of the Cold War is over, and now that
it has become clear to all that there is no place for
monopolarity in the modern world and international
affairs can only be polycentric, we have a unique
chance to fully implement the original potential of that
Charter.
This is a difficult challenge. International relations
are clearly experiencing a lack of credibility. We regard
this as the main obstacle to practical progress towards
the establishment of universal foundations for equal
and indivisible security, whether in the Euro-Atlantic
area, Asia-Pacific region or other parts of the world.
Such a state of affairs clearly contradicts the concept
of collective security embodied in the Charter and the
deep interdependence of the modern world, where most
challenges and threats are common to us all and have a
cross-border dimension.
Strengthening confidence and collective principles
in international affairs, with the emphasis on
negotiating the pursuit of compromise solutions, would
help substantially reduce the level of instability and
move forward in the settlement of crisis situations, not
only in the Middle East, but also with respect to Iran,
Afghanistan, the Korean peninsula and other situations
throughout the world.
The final goal of the efforts to settle a conflict is
to ensure the right to life and other fundamental human
rights, be they political, economic or social. The events
of recent years confirm that, without lasting peace and
sustainable development, it is impossible to ensure
human rights. In turn, the protection of human rights
should contribute to security and development, rather than serve as a pretext for illegal interference in the
domestic affairs of States.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states
that everyone is entitled to an international order in
which their rights can be fully realized. Those who use
military force and sanctions, bypassing the Charter,
engage in illicit supplies of arms, or provide cover for
terrorists grossly violate this right.
Russia stands for the implementation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and respect for
the traditional values on which human civilization is
based and where all world religions converge. This is
a moral foundation of modern society. It is the cement
that bonds together nations and peoples. In recent
years, these values have been put to the test by displays
of immorality, extremism and racial intolerance. Of
similar concern are the even more assertive actions
of those who, citing freedom of speech, condone the
glorification of the Nazis and their accomplices and
desecrate the memory of the victims of the Second
World War and the victors of fascism. Such actions are
incompatible with the obligations of States under the
Charter of the United Nations.
Let me recall that the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights directly prohibits the
propaganda of war and incitement of national and
religious discord. This means that freedom of speech
and assembly cannot be used to justify the promotion
of Nazi or other radical or extremist views, in violation
of the basic principles and norms of international law.
Yesterday, the Human Rights Council endorsed a
resolution proposed by Russia on the interrelation of
human rights and traditional values. It is regrettable
that a number of Western States voted against this
document, which is especially relevant today.
Progress towards genuine partnership in
international relations is possible only on the basis
of equality and mutual respect. The course of events
in the world leaves no alternative for anyone but to
join efforts in order to build a stable, equitable and
democratic international system. It would be possible
to resist this objective trend and try to preserve the old
order for some time, but such resistance would cost yet
more lives, suffering and destruction. Let us display
our vision and, instead of looking back at the history of
previous centuries, take the side of the events unfolding
before us today, and answer the call for strong collective
statesmanship.﻿I would like to begin today by
telling the Assembly about an American named Chris
Stevens. Chris was born in a town called Grass Valley,
California, the son of a lawyer and a musician. As a
young man, Chris joined the Peace Corps and taught English in Morocco, and he came to love and respect
the people of North Africa and the Middle East. He
would carry that commitment throughout his life.
As a diplomat, he worked from Egypt to Syria, from
Saudi Arabia to Libya. He was known for walking the
streets of the cities where he worked, tasting the local
food, meeting as many people as he could, speaking
Arabic, listening with a broad smile. Chris went to
Benghazi, arriving on a cargo ship, in the early days
of the Libyan revolution. As America’s representative,
he helped the Libyan people as they coped with violent
conflict, cared for the wounded and crafted a vision
for the future in which the rights of all Libyans would
be respected. After the revolution, he supported the
birth of a new democracy as Libyans held elections and
built new institutions and began to move forward after
decades of dictatorship.
Chris Stevens loved his work. He took pride in the
country he served, and he saw dignity in the people that
he met.
Two weeks ago, he travelled to Benghazi to review
plans to establish a new cultural center and modernize
a hospital. That is when America’s compound came
under attack. Along with three of his colleagues, Chris
was killed in the city that he had helped to save. He was
52 years old.
I tell this story because Chris Stevens embodied
the best of America. Like his fellow Foreign Service
officers, he built bridges across oceans and cultures and
was deeply invested in the international cooperation
that the United Nations represents. He acted with
humility, but he also stood up for a set of principles, a
belief that individuals should be free to determine their
own destiny and live with liberty, dignity, justice and
opportunity.
The attacks on the American civilians in Benghazi
were attacks on America. We are grateful for the
assistance we received from the Libyan Government
and from the Libyan people. There should be no doubt
that we will be relentless in tracking down the killers
and bringing them to justice. I also appreciate that,
in recent days, the leaders of other countries in the
region — including Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen — have
taken steps to secure our diplomatic facilities and called
for calm. So have religious authorities around the globe.
But it should be understood that the attacks of the
last two weeks are not simply an assault on America.

They are also an assault on the very ideals upon which
the United Nations was founded — the notion that people
can resolve their differences peacefully; that diplomacy
can take the place of war, and that, in an interdependent
world, all of us have a stake in working towards greater
opportunity and security for our citizens.
If we are serious about upholding those ideals, it
will not be enough to put more guards in front of an
Embassy or to put out statements of regret and wait for
the outrage to pass. If we are serious about those ideals,
we must speak honestly about the deeper causes of the
crisis, because we face a choice between the forces that
would drive us apart and the hopes we hold in common.
Today, we must affirm that our future will be
determined by people like Chris Stevens, and not by
his killers. Today, we must declare that such violence
and intolerance has no place among our United Nations.
It has been less than two years since a vendor in
Tunisia set himself on fire to protest the oppressive
corruption in his country and sparked what became
known as the Arab Spring. Since then, the world has
been captivated by the transformation that has taken
place, and the United States has supported the forces
of change.
We were inspired by the Tunisian protests that
toppled a dictator, because we recognized our own
beliefs in the aspirations of the men and women who
took to the streets.
We supported change in Egypt, because our
support for democracy ultimately put us on the side of
the people.
We welcomed a transition of leadership in Yemen,
because the interests of the people were no longer being
served by a corrupt status quo.
We intervened in Libya alongside a broad coalition
and with the mandate of the United Nations Security
Council, because we had the ability to stop the
slaughter of innocents and because we believed that the
aspirations of the people were more powerful than a
tyrant.
And as we meet here, we again declare that the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad must come to an end, so
that the suffering of the Syrian people can stop and a
new dawn can begin.
We have taken those positions because we believe
that freedom and self-determination are not unique to one culture. Those values are not simply American
values or Western values — they are universal values.
And even as there will be huge challenges that come
with a transition to democracy, I am convinced that,
ultimately, Government of the people, by the people and
for the people is more likely to bring about the stability,
prosperity and individual opportunity that serve as the
basis for peace in our world.
So, let us remember that this is a season of progress.
For the first time in decades, Tunisians, Egyptians and
Libyans voted for new leaders in elections that were
credible, competitive and fair. That democratic spirit
has not been restricted to the Arab world. Over the past
year, we have seen peaceful transitions of power in
Malawi and Senegal and a new President in Somalia.
In Burma, a President has freed political prisoners and
opened a closed society, a courageous dissident has
been elected to Parliament, and people look forward to
further reform. Around the globe, people are making
their voices heard, insisting on their innate dignity and
the right to determine their future.
And yet the turmoil of recent weeks reminds us that
the path to democracy does not end with the casting
of a ballot. Nelson Mandela once said, “To be free is
not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way
that respects and enhances the freedom of others”. True
democracy demands that citizens cannot be thrown in
jail because of what they believe and that businesses
can be opened without paying a bribe. It depends on the
freedom of citizens to speak their minds and assemble
without fear and on the rule of law and due process,
which guarantee the rights of all people.
In other words, true democracy — real freedom — is
hard work. Those in power have to resist the temptation
to crack down on dissidents. In hard economic times,
countries may be tempted to rally the people around
perceived enemies at home and abroad, rather than
focusing on the painstaking work of reform.
Moreover, there will always be those who reject
human progress — dictators who cling to power, corrupt
interests that depend upon the status quo, and extremists
who fan the flames of hate and division. From Northern
Ireland to South Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
from the Balkans to the Pacific Rim, we have witnessed
convulsions that can accompany transitions to a new
political order. At times, the conflicts arise along the
fault lines of race or tribe, and often they arise from the difficulties of reconciling tradition and faith with
the diversity and interdependence of the modern world.
In every country, there are those who find different
religious beliefs threatening; in every culture, those
who love freedom for themselves must ask themselves
how much they are willing to tolerate freedom for
others. That is what we saw play out in the last two
weeks, as a crude and disgusting video sparked outrage
throughout the Muslim world. Now, I have made it
clear that the United States Government had nothing
to do with that video, and I believe its message must
be rejected by all who respect our common humanity.
It is an insult not only to Muslims, but to America as
well, for as the city outside these walls makes clear, we
are a country that has welcomed people of every race
and every faith. We are home to Muslims, who worship
across our country. We not only respect the freedom
of religion, we have laws that protect individuals from
being harmed because of how they look or what they
believe. We understand why people take offence at that
video, because millions of our citizens are among those
people.
I know there are some who ask why we do not just
ban such a video. And the answer is enshrined in our
laws; our Constitution protects the right to practice free
speech. Here in the United States, countless publications
provoke offence. Like me, the majority of Americans
are Christian, and yet we do not ban blasphemy against
our most sacred beliefs. As President of our country
and Commander-in-Chief of our military, I accept that
people are going to call me awful things every day, and
I will always defend their right to do so.
Americans have fought and died around the globe
to protect the right of all people to express their views,
even views that we profoundly disagree with. We do not
do so because we support hateful speech, but because
our founders understood that without such protections,
the capacity of individuals to express their own views
and practise their own faith may be threatened. We do
so because in a diverse society, efforts to restrict speech
can quickly become a tool to silence critics and oppress
minorities. We do so because, given the power of faith in
our lives and the passion that religious differences can
inflame, the strongest weapon against hateful speech
is not repression; it is more speech — the voices of
tolerance that rally against bigotry and blasphemy, and
lift up the values of understanding and mutual respect.

I know that not all countries in this body share
that particular understanding of the protection of free
speech. We recognize that. But in 2012, at a time
when anyone with a cell phone can spread offensive
views around the world with the click of a button, the
notion that we can control the f low of information is
obsolete. The question then is how do we respond? And
on this we must agree: there is no speech that justifies
mindless violence. There are no words that excuse the
killing of innocents. There is no video that justifies
an attack on an embassy. There is no slander that
provides an excuse for people to burn a restaurant in
Lebanon, or destroy a school in Tunis, or cause death
and destruction in Pakistan. In our modern world with
modern technologies, for us to respond in that way to
hateful speech empowers any individual who engages
in such speech to create chaos around the world. We
empower the worst of us if that is how we respond.
More broadly, the events of the past two weeks also
speak to the need for all of us to honestly address the
tensions between the West and the Arab world, which
is moving towards democracy. Now, let me be clear:
just as we cannot solve every problem in the world, the
United States has not and will not seek to dictate the
outcome of democratic transitions abroad. We do not
expect other nations to agree with us on every issue,
nor do we assume that the violence of the past weeks or
the hateful speech of some individuals represents the
views of the overwhelming majority of Muslims, any
more than the views of the people who produced that
video represent those of Americans.
However, I do believe that it is the obligation of all
leaders in all countries to speak out forcefully against
violence and extremism. It is time to marginalize those
who, even when not directly resorting to violence, use
hatred of America, or the West, or Israel, as the central
organizing principle of politics. For that only gives
cover, and sometimes provides an excuse, for those who
do resort to violence.
That brand of politics, one that pits East against
West, and South against North, Muslims against
Christians and Hindus and Jews, cannot deliver on the
promise of freedom. To young people, it offers only
false hope. Burning an American f lag does nothing to
provide a child with an education. Smashing apart a
restaurant does not fill an empty stomach. Attacking
an embassy will not create a single job. That brand of
politics only makes it harder to achieve what we must
do together, namely, to educate our children and create the opportunities that they deserve; protect human
rights and extend democracy’s promise.
It should be understood that America will never
retreat from the world. We will bring to justice those
who harm our citizens and our friends, and we will
stand with our allies. We are willing to partner with
countries around the world to deepen ties of trade
and investment, science and technology, energy and
development — all efforts that can spark economic
growth for all our peoples and stabilize democratic
change.
But such efforts depend on a spirit of mutual
interest and mutual respect. No Government or
company, no school or non-governmental organization
will be confident working in a country where its people
are endangered. For partnerships to be effective,
our citizens must be secure and our efforts must be
welcomed. A politics based only on anger — one based
on dividing the world between us and them — not
only sets back international cooperation, it ultimately
undermines those who tolerate it. All of us have an
interest in standing up to those forces.
Let us remember that Muslims have suffered the
most at the hands of extremism. On the same day that
our civilians were killed in Benghazi, a Turkish police
officer was murdered in Istanbul only days before his
wedding; more than 10 Yemenis were killed in a car
bomb in Sana’a; several Afghan children were mourned
by their parents just days after they were killed by
a suicide bomber in Kabul. The impulse towards
intolerance and violence may initially be focused on the
West, but over time it cannot be contained. The same
impulses towards extremism are used to justify war
between Sunni and Shia, between tribes and clans. It
leads not to strength and prosperity but to chaos. In less
than two years, we have seen largely peaceful protests
bring more change to Muslim-majority countries than
a decade of violence. And extremists understand this.
Because they have nothing to offer to improve the lives
of people, violence is their only way to stay relevant.
They do not build; they only destroy.
It is time to leave the call to violence and the politics
of division behind. On so many issues, we face a choice
between the promise of the future or the prisons of the
past. And we cannot afford to get it wrong. We must
seize this moment. And America stands ready to work
with all who are willing to embrace a better future.
The future must not belong to those who target Coptic Christians in Egypt; it must be claimed by those in
Tahrir Square who chanted, “Muslims, Christians, we
are one.” The future must not belong to those who bully
women; it must be shaped by girls who go to school,
and those who stand for a world where our daughters
can live their dreams just like our sons.
The future must not belong to those corrupt few
who steal a country’s resources; it must be won by the
students and entrepreneurs, the workers and business
owners who seek a broader prosperity for all people.
Those are the women and men that America stands
with; theirs is the vision we will support.
The future must not belong to those who slander
the Prophet of Islam. But to be credible, those who
condemn that slander must also condemn the hate we
see in the images of Jesus Christ that are desecrated,
or churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is
denied.
Let us condemn incitement against Sufi Muslims
and Shia pilgrims. It is time to heed the words of
Gandhi: “Intolerance is itself a form of violence and
an obstacle to the growth of a true democratic spirit”.
Together we must work towards a world where we are
strengthened by our differences, not defined by them.
That is what America embodies; that is the vision that
we will support.
Among Israelis and Palestinians, the future must
not belong to those who turn their backs on the prospect
of peace. Let us leave behind those who thrive on
conflict, those who reject the right of Israel to exist.
The road is hard, but the destination is clear: a secure,
Jewish State of Israel and an independent, prosperous
Palestine. Understanding that such a peace must come
through a just agreement between the parties, America
will walk alongside all who are prepared to make that
journey.
In Syria, the future must not belong to a dictator
who massacres his people. If there is a cause that cries
out for protest in the world today, peaceful protest, it
is a regime that tortures children and shoots rockets
at apartment buildings. We must remain engaged to
ensure that what began with citizens demanding their
rights does not end in a cycle of sectarian violence.
Together, we must stand with those Syrians who
believe in a different vision: a Syria that is united and
inclusive, where children do not need to fear their own
Government and all Syrians have a say in how they are governed, Sunnis and Alawites, Kurds and Christians.
That is what America stands for. That is the outcome
that we will work for, with sanctions and consequences
for those who persecute, and assistance and support
for those who work for this common good, because we
believe that the Syrians who embrace this vision will
have the strength and the legitimacy to lead.
In Iran, we see where the path of a violent and
unaccountable ideology leads. The Iranian people
have a remarkable and ancient history, and many
Iranians wish to enjoy peace and prosperity alongside
their neighbours. But just as it restricts the rights of
its own people, the Iranian Government continues to
prop up a dictator in Damascus and supports terrorist
groups abroad. Time and again, it has failed to take the
opportunity to demonstrate that its nuclear programme
is peaceful and to meet its obligations to the United
Nations.
So let me be clear. America wants to resolve this
issue through diplomacy, and we believe that there
is still time and space to do so. But that time is not
unlimited. We respect the right of nations to access
peaceful nuclear power, but one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to see that we harness that power for
peace. Make no mistake: a nuclear-armed Iran is not a
challenge that can be contained. It would threaten the
elimination of Israel, the security of Gulf nations and
the stability of the global economy. It risks triggering
a nuclear-arms race in the region and the unravelling
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is why a coalition of countries is holding
the Iranian Government accountable, and that is why
the United States will do what we must to prevent Iran
from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
We know from painful experience that the path
to security and prosperity does not lie outside the
boundaries of international law and respect for human
rights. That is why this institution was established, from
the rubble of conflict. That is why liberty triumphed
over tyranny in the cold war, and that is the lesson of
the last two decades as well.
History shows that peace and progress come to
those who make the right choices. Nations in every part
of the world have travelled this difficult path. Europe,
the bloodiest battlefield of the twentieth century, is
united, free and at peace. From Brazil to South Africa,
from Turkey to South Korea, from India to Indonesia,
people of different races, religions and traditions have lifted millions out of poverty, while respecting the
rights of their citizens and meeting their responsibilities
as nations.
It is because of the progress that I have witnessed
in my own lifetime, the progress that I have witnessed
after nearly four years as President, that I remain ever
hopeful about the world that we live in. The war in
Iraq is over. American troops have come home. We
have begun a transition in Afghanistan, and America
and our allies will end our war on schedule in 2014.
Al-Qaida has been weakened, and Osama bin Laden
is no more. Nations have come together to lock down
nuclear materials, and America and Russia are reducing
our arsenals. We have seen hard choices made, from
Naypyidaw to Cairo to Abidjan, to put more power in
the hands of citizens.
At a time of economic challenge, the world
has come together to broaden prosperity. Through
the Group of 20, we have partnered with emerging
countries to keep the world on the path of recovery.
America has pursued a development agenda that fuels
growth and breaks dependency, and has worked with
African leaders to help them feed their nations. New
partnerships have been forged to combat corruption and
promote government that is open and transparent, and
new commitments have been made through the Equal
Futures Partnership to ensure that women and girls can
fully participate in politics and pursue opportunity.
Later today, I will discuss our efforts to combat the
scourge of human trafficking.
All those things give me hope. But what gives
me the most hope is not the actions taken by us, not
the actions of leaders; it is the people that I have
seen — the American troops who have risked their lives
and sacrificed their limbs for strangers half a world
away, the students in Jakarta or Seoul who are eager
to use their knowledge to benefit mankind, the faces in
a square in Prague or a parliament in Ghana who see
democracy giving voice to their aspirations, the young
people in the favelas of Rio and the schools of Mumbai
whose eyes shine with promise. Those men, women,
and children of every race and every faith remind me
that for every angry mob that gets shown on television,
there are billions around the world who share similar
hopes and dreams. They tell us that there is a common
heartbeat to humanity.
So much attention in our world turns to what
divides us. That is what we see on the news. That is what consumes our political debates. But when you strip
it all away, people everywhere long for the freedom to
determine their destiny; the dignity that comes with
work; the comfort that comes with faith; and the justice
that exists when Governments serve their people and
not the other way around.
The United States of America will always stand up
for these aspirations, for our own people and for people
all across the world. That was our founding purpose.
That is what our history shows. That is what Chris
Stevens worked for throughout his life.
I promise you this: long after the killers are brought
to justice, Chris Stevens’s legacy will live on in the lives
that he touched, in the tens of thousands who marched
against violence through the streets of Benghazi; in the
Libyans who changed their Facebook photo to one of
Chris; in the signs that read simply, “Chris Stevens was
a friend to all Libyans”. They should give us hope. They
should remind us that so long as we work for it justice
will be done, that history is on our side and that a rising
tide of liberty will never be reversed.

﻿I thank you, sir, for the opportunity
to address the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
general debate. Let me start by congratulating Mr. Vuk
Jeremić and the Republic of Serbia on his election to
preside over the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly. We also acknowledge the contribution of
the President of the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser.
South Africa fundamentally believes in the
principles and purposes contained in the Charter of
the United Nations, and correctly so, given our nation’s
history. This year, we are proudly celebrating 100 years
of our people’s self less struggle for freedom, led by the
African National Congress movement. We recall with
great appreciation the immense contribution of the United Nations to the creation of a free and democratic
South Africa.
In 1966, the General Assembly labelled apartheid
a crime against humanity in resolution 2202 A (XXI),
which ultimately led to the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, later known as the Apartheid Convention.
The United Nations defined the crime of apartheid
as “inhuman acts committed for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining domination by one racial
group of persons over any other racial group of persons
and systematically oppressing them” (resolution 3068
(XXVIII), annex, article II). The Apartheid Convention
was adopted by the General Assembly on 30 November
1973 and set the tone for vociferous action against
apartheid around the world.
Let me repeat the words our leader and international
icon, President Nelson Mandela, uttered in his very
first address to the General Assembly, in 1994, the first
by a democratically elected leader and Head of State of
our country. He said,
“The millions of our people say ‘Thank you’
and ‘Thank you again, because the respect for your
own dignity as human beings inspired you to act
to ensure the restoration of our dignity as well.’”
(A/49/PV.14, p.7)
The theme of this session is most appropriate as it
takes us back to the basics — to the founding principles
of the United Nations. The founders intended the
United Nations to be the foremost multilateral forum
entrusted with bringing hope, peace and order to the
world. Indeed, the United Nations enjoys universal
membership and is at the centre of global governance
and multilateralism. The theme reminds us that peace is
a choice. We can either choose peace as Member States
or choose the path of conflict.
The founders of the United Nations made that choice
67 years ago. They decided that the United Nations must
lead the world to peace. It is important for the United
Nations and its organs, especially the Security Council,
to execute the Organization’s mandate of working for
peace without fear or favour. We must not steer away
from the founding objectives of the Organization.
The United Nations faces immense pressure when
the world sees the unprecedented loss of lives, as it now
does in Africa and the Middle East. It is of concern
when it appears as if the United Nations were unable to act and assist, and when it comes across as paralysed in
certain instances, due to the actions of some Member
States. We have seen a divided Security Council unable
to muster the collective courage to say “no more” to
warring parties in the interest of peace. That brings
to the fore the need to continue and deepen the reform
of the United Nations and its organs to make it agile
and nimble in addressing the contemporary challenges
facing humanity.
The debate on the reform of the United Nations
and its organs, in particular the Security Council, has
been going on for the past 18 years. However, there
has been no significant movement forward. I would
like to focus in particular on the Security Council.
Given its mandate, the Council has to be legitimate,
democratic and transparent. Its current composition has
a propensity for deadlock and paralysis even in the face
of crisis. It remains unrepresentative and undemocratic
in both its composition and decision-making.
We would like to see a more meaningful
representation of Africa in the Security Council. About
70 per cent of the Council’s agenda is taken up by issues
from the African continent. The Security Council has
to be expanded in both categories, with at least two
seats for Africa in the permanent category and five in
the non-permanent category. In addition to seats for the
continent in the composition of the Council, the United
Nations should also fully recognize and appreciate the
role of regional organizations working with the United
Nations in conflict management and resolution.
In that regard, we urge closer collaboration with the
African Union (AU) peace and security mechanisms,
especially given the progress being made by the AU
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding in some parts
of the continent since its formation 10 years ago.
Therefore, cognizance should be taken of Chapter VIII
of the Charter, in particular when dealing with African
issues.That is why South Africa piloted resolution 2033
(2012) during our rotating presidency of the Security
Council in January.
Currently, the AU continues to address one of the
longest outstanding conflicts on the continent through
one of its mechanisms, the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan. Together, as the
international community, we recently celebrated
the creation of the State of South Sudan. We wish
to congratulate the Somalis and their leadership on
choosing the path of peace, democracy and prosperity.

The international community and the United Nations
must continue to give the people of Somalia all the
necessary support.
Africa is indeed making progress and, with United
Nations support, that could go further. To promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, we also wish to
emphasize that the Security Council should carry out
its Charter mandate within the confines of international
law.
Any Member State or international body that
implements Council resolutions should be accountable
to the Council, so as to ensure that we avoid the
abuse of internationally agreed principles such as the
responsibility to protect and the protection of civilians.
Those principles must not be used, amongst other
things, to justify the notion of regime change. They
exist to prevent mass atrocities, war crimes, genocide
and ethnic cleansing.We should continue the debate
on them in order to develop norms and standards for
accountability when actions are taken.
It is also of critical importance for the United
Nations to closely guard its impartiality, independence
and objectivity and not allow itself to be dragged into a
conflict to take sides with any party under the guise of
protecting civilians.
The situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestine-Israeli question, continues to be of concern
to us. The United Nations should play a central and
decisive role in efforts to resolve the long-standing
conflict in that region. Any act of aggression or
violations of international law should be condemned
unequivocally by the United Nations at all times. As
the United Nations, we cannot be seen to be strong in
condemning some acts while being soft on others. As
South Africa, we remain committed to the two-State
solution based on the 1967 borders, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting side by side in peace.
Let me also emphasize that South Africa fully
supports the application by Palestine for full membership
of the United Nations. It is unacceptable that, even
today, Palestine remains outside the membership of the
United Nations. We trust that that matter will soon be
positively concluded.
In further promotion of the peaceful resolution of
disputes, we believe that the sovereign right of States
to nuclear energy for peaceful and civilian use should
be respected in accordance with international law.

We have taken note that the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency has been able to
draw the conclusion that all declared nuclear material
in Iran is used for peaceful activities. Clarification
of the nature of undeclared materials will enable the
international community to have full confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. South Africa therefore encourages Iran to
continue its cooperation with the Agency.
We should also remember that so long as some
States are allowed to operate outside internationally
agreed norms, such as those of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, it will be
difficult to expect others to operate within them. South
Africa supports the long-standing call for a nuclear-free
zone in the Middle East. In that regard, the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue is very important.
Let me use this opportunity to reiterate our support
for the ongoing struggle for self-determination by the
people of Western Sahara. We urge the international
community to support their quest for freedom, human
rights and dignity.
We also reiterate our call for the lifting of the
economic and financial embargo against the people of
Cuba in order to help the Cuban people to gain their
economic freedom.
Poverty, underdevelopment, lack of opportunities
and competition for scarce resources contribute to
some of the conflicts in the developing world, including
Africa. Therefore, the promotion of sustainable
development and the fight against poverty cannot be
divorced from the quest for peace.
In 2015, the United Nations will be 70 years old
and will also reach the target year for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). World
leaders committed themselves to eradicating extreme
poverty, facilitating universal primary education,
attaining gender equality, improving maternal and
child health, reducing the burden of disease primarily
by combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis,
protecting the environment, and mobilizing global
partnerships for development by 2015. The Heads of
State also committed themselves to promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women as effective
ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease and to
stimulate truly sustainable development. We urge the
United Nations to continue promoting the achievement of the MDGs and other instruments whose tenets
advance the human rights of women.
We are concerned that sub-Saharan Africa is
unlikely to meet the targets for the MDGs. Awareness
of that possibility should not make us give up; in the
next three years, we must accelerate the implementation
of the MDGs. We appeal to all who have made financial
commitments to Africa for the achievement of the
MDGs not to renege on those commitments. We would
like to express our appreciation to those development
partners that continue to stick to their 0.7 per cent
official development assistance commitment despite
their financial difficulties at the domestic level.
We support the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel of Eminent Persons to focus on the acceleration
of the implementation of the MDGs, and would urge
that much of its focus be on assisting Africa in meeting
all its targets. However, we wish to caution against
prejudging the review outcome and prematurely setting
in motion processes that would undermine the ideals of
the MDGs.
The protection and promotion of human rights
and fundamental freedoms should be at the centre of
our collective desire to resolve international disputes
by peaceful means. Racism and racial discrimination
continue to be an affront to the very basic founding
principles of the United Nations and must be fought
relentlessly. We should shun any idea in any part of the
world that seems to suggest that there is a superior race
or human being on the basis of skin colour. The danger
of such ideas is still fresh in our collective memory.
We have learned from the evils of colonialism, two
World Wars and the system of apartheid. We should all
renew our commitment to continue to build on the solid
foundation laid by the Durban Declaration and the Plan
of Action that we adopted more than a decade ago at
the end of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
In Durban last December, South Africa had
the honour of hosting the seventeenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol. Member States must ensure that agreements
are implemented. In that regard, the Durban Platform
offers an opportunity for progress that we must utilize
to move forward.

Today’s timely debate is a reminder that, ultimately,
peace is a choice. Peace is achievable. The wise and brave
choices we have the power to make can deliver lasting
peace to every corner of the world. We are called upon
at this sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
choose peace by reforming and strengthening the United
Nations so that it can play its rightful role and deliver
peace, security, sustainable development and respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout
the world. As the foremost multilateral forum bringing
together all nations of the world, the United Nations is
best placed to play this role. It requires our support as
Member States at all times, both for our sake and for
that of future generations.﻿I wish
to congratulate Mr. Jeremić on his election as President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
I am confident that with his ability and experience he
will successfully fulfil that lofty mission. I also wish to thank Mr. Al-Nasser for his positive contribution as
President at the last session.
The world is undergoing major and profound
changes. The trends towards multipolarity, economic
globalization and the application of information
technology are gaining momentum. Countries have
never been as interconnected and interdependent as they
are today. Emerging markets and developing countries
have never had such strong influence, and cross-
civilizational dialogue and exchanges are flourishing
as never before. To promote peace, development
and cooperation has become the shared aspiration of
people across the world and the common pursuit of the
international community.
On the other hand, the world is still far from being
peaceful. The underlying impact of the international
financial crisis and the European debt crisis remains
strong. Destabilizing factors and uncertainties affecting
global growth have increased. Regional turbulence
persists, hotspot issues keep emerging and traditional
and non-traditional security issues have become
intertwined. The international security environment is
highly complex.
Facing both unprecedented opportunities and
challenges, we must not allow the outdated Cold War
mentality and zero-sum game theory to stand in our
way. We should act like passengers who stick together
in a boat when crossing a torrential river and seek
win-win progress through cooperation. That is the only
option for countries around the world. To ensure one’s
own security, a country should respect and accommodate
the security of other nations. To achieve one’s own
development, a country should actively promote
common development. In pursuing one’s own interests,
a country should take into account the interests of
other nations. Only by promoting common security and
development for all its members can the international
community effectively address complex and multiple
security threats and global challenges, resolve
increasingly serious difficulties facing development and
ensure durable peace and sustainable development in
the world. With that in mind, China believes that it is
important to do the following.
We should promote equality and democracy in
international relations. Mutual respect and equality
are basic norms governing international relations. All
countries, large or small, strong or weak, rich or poor,
are equal members of the international community. Respect for each other’s sovereignty, core interests
and choice of social system and development path is a
fundamental principle guiding State-to-State relations.
We should resolutely promote greater democracy in
international relations. A country should deal with its
internal affairs itself. Issues involving the interests of
various countries should be handled by those countries
through consultation. We should remain true to
multilateralism and uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the central role
of the United Nations in international affairs.
China strives to strengthen political mutual trust
and to address problems and differences with other
countries through dialogue and exchanges. China does
not interfere in the internal affairs of other countries or
impose its will on others. China does not allow outside
forces to interfere in its internal affairs.
We should seek win-win progress through
cooperation on development. As economic globalization
deepens, all countries have a high stake in each other’s
success. We should therefore enhance cooperation
and develop common interests to achieve win-win
progress with benefits for all. We should tap the
potential for cooperation in all countries, increase and
develop cooperation, improve cooperation mechanisms
and work together to make economic globalization
balanced, inclusive and beneficial to all.
We should accelerate the development of
developing countries and narrow the North-South gap.
We should enhance global development cooperation to
ensure that the benefits of development reach everyone.
Since the start of the international financial crisis,
while maintaining its own robust growth, China has
significantly increased contributions to international
financial institutions, extended a helping hand to other
developing countries and bought more bonds from
certain developed countries. That has helped to stabilize
the international economic and financial situation and
to maintain the economic and social development of the
relevant countries.
We should ensure fairness and effectiveness in
conducting global governance. Facing increasing
global challenges, the international community should
strengthen coordination and cooperation, establish a
fair, equitable, flexible and effective system of global
governance, properly address the various global issues
and promote the common well-being of humanity.
China supports the United Nations in enhancing its authority, efficiency and ability to address new threats
and challenges through the required proper reform.
It is important to advance the building of a global
system of economic governance with a focus on
reforming the international financial system, rapidly
implement the quota and governance reform plans of
the International Monetary Fund and other financial
institutions, and increase the representation and voice of
emerging markets and developing countries. We should
fully implement the outcome and consensus of the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(resolution 66/288, annex), further develop international
cooperation on sustainable development and discuss the
establishment of a post-2015 international development
agenda based on actively implementing the Millennium
Development Goals.
We should launch a process of open, transparent
and democratic intergovernmental consultation,
with development and poverty reduction as the core
objectives. We should also fully leverage the role of
civil society and the private sector in that task. Together
with all other parties, China is ready to actively
participate in reforming the international system and in
global governance and to jointly face the various global
challenges.
We should pursue common progress by embracing
the diversity of civilizations. According to ancient
Chinese philosophy, the world will be a great place
when all things thrive without harming each another
and when various efforts are pursued in parallel
without their clashing. We should encourage exchanges
and mutual learning among different civilizations and
social systems, draw on each other’s strength through
competition and comparison and make progress by
seeking common ground, while maintaining our
differences. We should respect the diversity of the world
and the right of all countries to independently choose
their development path. China encourages dialogue
and exchanges among civilizations. We should replace
confrontation with dialogue and bridge differences
with inclusiveness in order to make the world more
harmonious and to ensure common progress for
humanity.
We should seek common security amid growing
interdependence. No country is immune to the complex
and multiple security threats and challenges in the
world. We should foster a new thinking on security that
is characterized by mutual trust and benefit, equality and coordination. We should adopt a holistic approach
to address both the symptoms and the root causes of
the various security challenges and should build a
peaceful and stable international and regional security
environment.
The United Nations should fully play its role in
maintaining international peace and security and
in establishing a fair and effective mechanism for
common security. We must resolve disputes through
dialogue and negotiation and oppose the wilful use or
threat of force. We must oppose all forms of terrorism,
separatism and extremism.
West Asia and North Africa are undergoing
profound changes. China respects and supports efforts
by countries in those regions to independently deal
with their internal affairs. We respect the aspirations
and calls of people in those areas for change and
development. The unique features of those regions in
terms of religion, civilization, history and ethnicity
must be respected. We hope that the relevant parties will
settle differences through inclusive and constructive
political dialogue and that they will resolve problems
peacefully.
Safeguarding peace and stability in those areas,
upholding the fundamental and long-term interests of
Arab countries and ensuring the growth of friendly
China-Arab relations will remain a central goal of
China’s policy towards such regions. We will continue
to tirelessly strive, together with countries in those
areas, to promote peace and development in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
China is deeply concerned about the stalled
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks and the economic
and humanitarian difficulties facing the Palestinian
people. The turbulence in the region should not divert
international attention from the Palestinian issue. China
supports the Palestinian people in establishing, on the
basis of the 1967 border, an independent Palestinian State
that enjoys full sovereignty, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. China supports Palestine’s membership of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
China urges both Palestine and Israel to take concrete
measures to remove obstacles and to work for the early
resumption and substantive progress of the peace talks.
China is deeply concerned about the ongoing
tension and worsening humanitarian situation in
Syria. We call on all relevant parties in Syria to put an immediate end to the fighting and violence, to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
Mr. Kofi Annan’s six-point plan and the communiqué
of the foreign ministers’ meeting of the Action Group
for Syria (A/66/865, annex), and to launch an inclusive
political dialogue and a Syrian-led political transition as
soon as possible. China is open to any political plan that
is acceptable to all parties in Syria. The relevant parties
of the international community should play a positive
and constructive role in that regard, credibly support
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
in conducting impartial mediation, and strive to set
in motion and move forward the process of political
transition in Syria.
The Iranian nuclear issue has reached a new, critical
stage. The relevant parties should remain committed to
a diplomatic solution and begin a new round of dialogue
as soon as possible. In the spirit of respecting each
other’s concerns, we should act with flexibility and
pragmatism to expand common ground and overcome
differences, seek early progress in dialogue and
negotiation and, over time, achieve a comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate solution to the issue. China
has always supported efforts to uphold the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and will continue to
work with the parties concerned and play a constructive
role in seeking a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through dialogue and negotiation.
The Asia-Pacific region has maintained general
stability and rapid growth for many years, thereby
making important contributions to global stability
and prosperity. Given the growing threat of shrinkage
in the global economy and increasing volatility in the
international situation, maintaining peace, stability
and sound growth in the Asia-Pacific region is crucial
to ensuring the well-being of its people and meets the
broader interests of the international community.
We should fully respect the reality of a
diverse and interdependent Asia-Pacific region,
and continue to follow the approach of regional
cooperation — building consensus, making
incremental progress and accommodating each other’s
comfort levels — that has proved effective over the
years. We should promote regional development with
greater determination, advance regional cooperation
with increased resources, and handle differences with
longer-term interests in mind so as to uphold the peace,
stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. As an important participant in building the
international system, China is committed to sharing
development opportunities with other countries and
to working with them to overcome various challenges
and realize security and development for all. China
will stay the course of peaceful development. We seek
a peaceful international environment in which China
can promote its own development. By so doing, China
will contribute to global peace and development. China
is firm in upholding its core interests. At the same
time, it respects the legitimate right of other countries
to protect their interests. We seek to expand common
interests with other parties for the sake of the common
good.
China has contributed a total of some 21,000
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and taken an active part in international cooperation
on counter-terrorism, anti-piracy and non-proliferation
efforts. In our efforts to resolve major international
and regional hotspot issues, we have urged the parties
concerned to seek peaceful solutions through negotiation
and thereby played an important and constructive role
in easing tensions and achieving the political resolution
of those issues. China has made remarkable progress
in pursuing peaceful development and will continue to
follow that path in the years to come.
China will enhance friendly relations and
cooperation with all other countries on the basis of
the five principles of peaceful coexistence and strive
to promote a new type of relationship among major
countries based on mutual respect and win-win
cooperation. Following a policy of building good
relationships and partnerships with neighbouring
countries, China has actively expanded exchanges with
its neighbours.
China has contributed to over 50 per cent of
Asia’s growth for many consecutive years. We have
endeavoured to build mechanisms of mutual trust and
political cooperation with other Asian countries and
appropriately to address differences and frictions among
relevant countries. On the basis of firmly upholding
China’s sovereignty, security and territorial integrity,
we have worked with our neighbours to maintain sound
relations and overall stability in the region. China treats
other developing countries as good friends and good
partners; we therefore support each other and seek
common development on the basis of equality.
By the end of 2011, the Chinese Government had
built over 2,200 projects that are important to the local economies and people’s lives in the countries
concerned. We have cancelled the debts owed to China
by 50 heavily indebted poor and least-developed
countries. We have trained over 60,000 personnel in
various sectors for 173 developing countries and 13
regional and international organizations. All of that has
contributed to the economic and social development of
other developing countries.
China has taken an active part in reforming the
international system and global governance, and
assumed its due share of international responsibilities
and obligations as its capabilities permit. We are
working to build a fair, equitable and non-discriminatory
global trading system and a more equal and balanced
new global partnership for development. We support
a greater role for the Group of Twenty as the premier
forum for international economic cooperation, as well
as the efforts of emerging markets represented by the
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South
Africa — aimed at exploring a new model of global
cooperation.
The global economy is at a critical stage, and
achieving full recovery and sustained growth will be a
long and difficult task. Last year, despite a challenging
economic environment both at home and abroad, China
registered a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
of 9.3 per cent, and made good progress in adjusting its
economic structure and improving people’s lives. Since
the beginning of the year, in order to address some
new problems in economic performance, the Chinese
Government has stepped up anticipatory fine-tuning of
the economy and introduced a series of targeted policy
measures. That has boosted market confidence and
ensured steady growth.
China’s GDP grew by 7.8 per cent in the first half of
the year, and the country has enjoyed sound economic
and social development. China is still in an important
period of strategic opportunities for development.
Industrialization, urbanization, the application of
information technology and agricultural modernization
will continue to unlock our great potential for
development. We have the confidence, means and
ability to maintain steady and robust growth and
achieve long-term, sound and sustainable development.
During its twelfth five-year plan for the period
2011-2015, China’s domestic market will become one of
the largest in the world. Its total imports are expected
to exceed $10 trillion, and direct outbound investment is expected to exceed $500 billion. That will create
enormous business and job opportunities for the world
and provide good opportunities for other countries’
development.
The Diaoyu Islands have been an integral part
of China’s territory since ancient times. China has
indisputable historical and legal evidence in that
regard. Japan seized the islands in 1895 at the end of the
Sino-Japanese War and forced the Chinese Government
of the time to sign an unequal treaty to cede the islands
and other Chinese territories to Japan. After the Second
World War, the Diaoyu Islands and other Chinese
territories occupied by Japan were returned to China
in accordance with the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam
Agreement and other international documents.
By taking such unilateral actions as the so-called
island purchase, the Japanese Government has grossly
violated China’s sovereignty. This is an outright denial
of the outcomes of the victorious anti-fascist World
War and poses a grave challenge to the post-war
international order and the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. The moves made by
Japan are totally illegal and invalid. They can in no way
change the historical fact that Japan stole the Diaoyu
Islands from China and that China has territorial
sovereignty over them. The Chinese Government is
firm in upholding China’s territorial sovereignty. China
strongly urges Japan to immediately stop all activities
violating China’s territorial sovereignty, take concrete
action to correct its mistakes and return to the path of
resolving the dispute through negotiation.
The Communist Party of China will soon hold
its eighteenth National Congress. We are confident
that the important meeting will lead China’s reform,
opening-up and modernization drive to a new stage.
The facts have shown and will continue to prove that
China’s development is peaceful, open, cooperative and
win-win in nature. We will work with the international
community to follow the trend of history and the call
of the times and build a harmonious world of enduring
peace and shared prosperity.﻿Freedom,
dignity, self-determination and the hope of a better
life were the driving forces behind the movement for
change in the Arab world.
As Germans, we know from our own bitter
experience that freedom is not a gift. It has to be won
and constantly defended. Freedom is more than just
freedom of thought. It is freedom to express one’s own
opinion and to voice public criticism. For that reason
alone, freedom is not always comfortable. The first
article of the Basic Law, Germany’s Constitution,
states that human dignity shall be inviolable. That
applies to every single individual, regardless of their
origin, culture, creed or sex. As Germans, we have
experienced what it is to lack freedom in the course of
our own history. We will always stand by those who,
wherever they are in the world, call for freedom of
opinion, religion, the press and artistic freedom.

Freedom has a daughter; it is tolerance. And
freedom has a son; it is respect, respect for other people,
respect for what is important to others, respect for what
is sacred to others. Freedom therefore does not mean
freedom from responsibility. Freedom always means
freedom to shoulder responsibility.
We understand the many devout people who feel
wounded by the recent shameful anti-Islam video.
However, legitimate criticism and sincere indignation
cannot be used to justify acts of violence or destruction.
Some would have us believe that the burning of embassy
buildings are proof of a clash of civilizations. We must
not allow ourselves to be deluded by such arguments.
The vast majority of people oppose violence. The
people who have taken to the streets, as well as their
political representatives gathered here in New York
this week, have expressed that forcefully. It is not a
clash of civilizations. It is a clash within societies and
civilizations. It is also a struggle for the soul of the
movement for change in the Arab world.
It is a struggle between open and closed minds,
between moderates and radicals, between understanding
and hate. It is a clash between those seeking peace and
those prepared to resort to violence. The extremists
want to prevent the emergence of freedom by inciting
violence. They must not be allowed to succeed.
Germany has taken a stand in that struggle. We will
continue to expand our support for people in the Arab
world. We are not going to turn our backs on them, but
we will be open to them. Our values and our interests
compel us to take the side of those around the world who
are fighting peacefully for freedom, dignity and self-
determination. Education and work, investment and
growth — our offer of a transformational partnership
still stands.
I will never forget the Syrian father who held out
his emaciated son to me during my visit to the Zaatari
refugee camp in Jordan. Such suffering renders us
speechless, but it also impels us to act. To this very
day, the Security Council has failed to live up to its
responsibility for the people in Syria. I express that
criticism with great sadness. The deadlock in the
Security Council must not continue. Every day, the
violence perpetrated by the Bashar Al-Assad regime
is escalating. The risk of a conf lagration engulfing the
entire region is growing. Together with our partners and
the United Nations, we are helping the many refugees
in Syria itself and in neighbouring countries.

All Syrians who want their country to have a
democratic and pluralistic future based on the rule
of law must work together. We support the efforts of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States, to
find a political approach. Despite the escalating violence
and despite the deadlock in the Security Council, we
must not stop working on a political solution.
During the past 20 months, the Arab League
has demonstrated ever more clearly its adherence
to the values enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We welcome that and we want to build on
it. At Germany’s initiative, during the last week in
September, the Security Council welcomed intensifying
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States (see S/PRST/2012/20). That is
an acknowledgement of the Arab League’s constructive
and positive role.
We also pay tribute to the efforts to gain freedom in
other parts of the world. As a result of the remarkable
opening-up process under way in Myanmar, the country
is emerging from isolation and gradually leaving
repression behind.
We criticize and strongly condemn the ongoing
repression in our own neighbourhood, in Belarus.
In many other Asian and African countries, which
have struck out in a new direction, we are supporting
political transformation by providing assistance for
economic and social development. That is in the
common interest of the international community. For
there is one thing that becomes ever more apparent, and
that is that without development, there can be no security
and without security there can be no development. That
applies to our engagement in Afghanistan, which we
will continue after the withdrawal of combat troops in
2014. It also applies to the efforts to bring stability to
Somalia and Yemen, to the Great Lakes region and to
the countries of the Sahel.
We are very concerned by the still-unresolved
dispute about Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran has still
not produced evidence of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme. It has also failed to
date to provide the transparency that the International
Atomic Energy Agency has long demanded. So far, the
talks during the last few months have not made enough
progress towards reaching a solution. The European
Union’s three plus three group has put forward
proposals for a substantive negotiation process. We still
await a serious response from Iran. We want a political
and diplomatic solution. Time is short. Israel’s security
is at stake. Indeed, stability in the entire region is at
stake. However, that is also about averting the risk of
a nuclear arms race with unforeseeable consequences
for international security. I call on Iran to stop playing
for time. The situation is serious indeed, and time is
running out. We want a political solution, and we are
putting all our efforts into achieving that goal.
Those challenges must not lead us to lose sight of
the necessity of a negotiated peace settlement between
Israel and the Palestinians. There is a danger that the
goal of a two-State solution, the only solution that can
reconcile the legitimate interests of the two sides, will
slip away. The two sides must build new trust. At the
same time, they must refrain from doing anything that
might jeopardize a two-State solution.
Germany’s foreign policy is a policy for peace.
Germany’s foreign policy is anchored in Europe. Many
have been wondering whether Europe can successfully
manage its sovereign debt crisis and whether it will
continue to play a leading role in the world. The answer
is an emphatic yes. Europe has a great responsibility in
the world. And Germany is aware of its responsibility
for Europe. The way out of the debt crisis is difficult. It
requires spending discipline, solidarity and growth. We
will continue down that road. Europe is growing closer
together. Europe is consolidating. Europe will emerge
from the crisis stronger than ever before. Europe will
remain a force to be reckoned with as the world’s largest
donor of development assistance, as an inspiration for
peaceful regional cooperation, as a pioneer in climate
action and disarmament, as a champion of rules-based
globalization and as a driving force for United Nations
reform.
My country’s peaceful unification more than 20
years ago also signified the reunification of Europe.
Since then, the world has changed dramatically. Today,
we find ourselves on the threshold of a multipolar
world. The world with its interdependencies needs a
cooperative order. It needs strong and representative
institutions. We will weaken the Security Council if
we fail to adapt it to today’s world. Together with our
partners in the G-4 group, India, Brazil and Japan,
Germany is prepared to assume greater responsibility.
It cannot be that Latin America and Africa have
no permanent seats on the Security Council or that
dynamic Asia has only one. That does not reflect the realities of today’s world, and it definitely does not
reflect the realities of tomorrow.
The challenges are too great for us to simply
accept the status quo. The world is not only growing
together; the pace of change is increasing. We are
living in an age of breathtaking change. That change
brings with it risks and new dangers, as well as new
uncertainties. Above all, however, that change brings
with it great opportunities, especially for young people.
In this changing world we need a clear compass, and
our compass is freedom. The yearning for freedom is
rooted in people’s hearts all over the world. They are
our partners in building a better future.﻿This is the
first time that I speak from this rostrum at the United Nations. It is a very moving moment for me because
I understand what the United Nations represents, for
our world, and what it has represented historically. I am
also aware of a sense of responsibility, because France
is a permanent member of the Security Council and
therefore has duties. I am also here at this rostrum to
talk about values that do not belong to any particular
people, are not owned by any particular continent
and are not the privilege of any particular part of the
population.
I am here to talk about universal values, which
France has always proclaimed, and about the rights
of every human being, wherever they live: liberty,
security and resistance to oppression. Those values
and those rights are all too frequently held in contempt
in our world, especially as we face three main threats,
which we must tackle head-on. The first is the threat
of fanaticism, which fuels violence. We have seen
that yet again in recent days. The second is the global
economy, which has been affected by a crisis and which
perpetuates intolerable inequalities. The third threat is
the disturbance in the climate system, which threatens
the very survival of our planet.
The mission of the United Nations is to tackle these
challenges and to find strong and just responses to them
together. These responses must be just because without
justice, force is blind, and they must be strong because
without strength, justice is powerless.
I am also here to express France’s confidence in
the United Nations. In recent years, we have been able
together, to finally put an end to deadly conflicts, and
we have been able to prevent confrontations. However,
just as we are sending out 100,000 Blue Helmets who
act on our behalf — and I would like to pay tribute to
them — because of divisions, the blocking of our own
institutions and inertia, the United Nations has not been
able to put an end to war, atrocities and attacks on the
rights of peoples.
I would therefore, on behalf of France, draw one
conclusion that I would like to share with the Assembly.
If we want to make our world safer, it is up to us to fully
shoulder our responsibilities. How can we do so?
First of all, we can do so by reforming our own
Organization, the United Nations. The Security Council
must better reflect the realities of the world today. This
is why I would once again recall that France supports
the request for an enlargement of the Council made
by Germany, Japan, India and Brazil. But we are also in favour of an increased African presence, including
among the permanent members. Having a seat on the
Security Council is not a privilege justified by history,
and it is not a matter of satisfying some ambition related
to economic power. No, having a seat on the Security
Council means making the commitment to take action
to promote peace in the world. Indeed, we must act and
act together, but act quickly, because it is urgent.
The most urgent situation is in Syria. The Assembly
has several times denounced the massacres carried out
by the Syrian regime, called for those responsible to be
prosecuted and expressed the desire for a democratic
transition. But the ordeal of the population continues to
this day. There have been almost 30,000 deaths in the
last 18 months. How many more deaths will we wait for
before we take action? How can we allow the paralysis
of the United Nations to continue?
I know one thing for certain: the Syrian regime
will never again take its place among the alliance of
nations. It has no future among us. This is why I have
taken the decision, on behalf of France, to recognize the
provisional Government representing the new Syria as
soon as it is formed. That Government will itself have
to give guarantees that every community in Syria will
be respected and will be able to live in security in their
own country. Without further delay, I would ask that
the United Nations immediately give the Syrian people
all of the assistance and support they are requesting
and, in particular, that the liberated areas be protected
and humanitarian aid be assured for refugees. As for
the leaders in Damascus, they must know that the
international community will not stand by if they take
the unhappy decision to use chemical weapons.
Another situation that is urgent is the fight against
the most serious of threats to stability in the world,
namely, the proliferation of nuclear weapons. For several
years now, Iran has been ignoring the demands of the
international community. It shuns monitoring by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It does not keep
its word or uphold Security Council resolutions. I had
hoped that negotiations could take place in earnest and
that steps could be outlined, but, again, no negotiations
have taken place. France will not accept such actions,
which threaten not only security in the region but peace
throughout the world.
I therefore state once again that we are prepared to
adopt new sanctions, not to punish the great people of Iran, but to tell their leaders that enough is enough and
that negotiations must be resumed before it is too late.
The third urgent issue is at last to find a solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The status quo is not a
response; it is an impasse. France will make every effort
to re-establish the basis for negotiations leading to the
coexistence of the two States in question; everyone
knows that this is the only solution that could lead to a
just and lasting peace in the region.
The last of the urgent issues that I will mention,
although there are many others, might be the most
important one for us to focus on this week: the Sahel.
The situation created by the occupation of territory
in northern Mali by terrorist groups is intolerable,
inadmissible and unacceptable. It is unacceptable not
only for Mali, which is affected by that terrorist threat,
but also for all countries of the region and beyond the
region — all of those that one day might be affected by
terrorism.
The African Union, which I commend, and the
Economic Community of West African States have said
that they are prepared to take courageous decisions.
The authorities of Mali have spoken; there is no time to
lose. France will support any initiative that will enable
the Africans themselves to resolve that issue within the
framework of international law, with a clear mandate
from the Security Council. Mali must recover its
territorial integrity, and terrorism must be eliminated
from that area of the Sahel.
The role of the United Nations is to respond to
urgent situations. But there is another objective that
should unite us here, and that is development. The
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held in Rio, in which I participated, was
a disappointing stage for some and an encouraging one
for others. I believe that today we have an agenda that
should encompass economic growth, poverty reduction,
social progress and environmental protection. That is
what we need to do over the long term.
The 2015 deadline for a climate agreement is fast
approaching. I wish to state here that France is ready to
host the United Nations conference on climate change
to be held at that time, because I want us to succeed
together in meeting that challenge.
In parallel, I would recall that one of the
disappointments of Rio was our failure to agree on
the creation of a major United Nations organization for the environment. That remains France’s objective.
Such an agency would be based in Africa, because
that continent, which has been neglected for too long,
is facing climate-related challenges. It would also be
highly symbolic to entrust Africa with such a global
agency for the environment.
With respect to development, I believe that we
should face reality. We will not achieve the Millennium
Development Goals without new resources. Everyone
knows the budgetary limitations of our respective
States. That is why today, from this rostrum here at the
United Nations, I am making an appeal for innovative
financing, which would give us the means to enable our
organizations to fight effectively against diseases such
as HIV/AIDS and malaria.
I would like to commend the success of the
International Drug Purchase Facility, which was
financed by a tax on airline tickets. That path
has been opened, and today we must take another
step in that direction. I propose a tax on financial
transactions — which several European Union countries
have already agreed to — aimed at slowing down the
movement of capital or at least financing development
and helping to fight health-related scourges. France
has adopted such a tax. We have also made another
commitment: to dedicate at least 10 per cent of the
benefits of that tax to development and to fight health-
related threats and pandemics.
That is the message that I wanted to send to the
Assembly today: let us ensure that a global tax on
financial transactions can be levied and that the benefits
it yields can be spent on development and fighting
pandemics. That would be an excellent example of what
I call the globalization of solidarity, and one of the best
ideas that today’s world could implement.
But the mission of the United Nations is not only
to fight financial instability or ensure that development
remains at the centre of our concerns: it is to work to
counter all forms of instability. I am thinking here about
drug trafficking, a scourge that affects producing, transit
and consuming countries. To combat drug traffickers,
who are frequently allied with terrorist networks, the
United Nations must elaborate and implement a global
strategy to fight against drugs.
Arms trafficking also poses a major threat. France
is firmly committed to the conclusion of a universal
arms trade treaty. What the United Nations must defend
and promote is a worldview that is based on respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. The Arab Spring
showed that those values are universal and apply to all
continents and countries.
I want to welcome the events that took place in
Tunisia, in Libya, in Egypt. It is true that transitions
are not always easy. There are risks, and setbacks can
occur. Some may attempt, through violence, to reverse
the progress made and the achievements gained. France
will call on the new political authorities emanating
from democratic elections in those countries to wage an
unrelenting combat against complacency, extremism,
fanaticism, hatred, intolerance and violence, whatever
the provocation may be, because there can never be any
justification for violence.
France wants to set an example. It is not telling
anyone what to do; that is simply its history and its
message. We want to be an example in the promotion of
fundamental freedoms. That is our combat, and we are
honoured to wage it. That is why France will continue
to fight to abolish the death penalty, to ensure women’s
right to equality and dignity, and to work towards the
universal decriminalization of homosexuality, which
cannot be viewed as a crime but must be recognized as
an orientation.
We will continue to fight for the protection of
civilians. Moreover, I recall that the Assembly affirmed
the principle that all States have the responsibility to
ensure the security of their civilians. If a State fails
in that obligation, it is up to us, the United Nations,
to use the means at its disposal to meet it in its place.
Let us not neglect that promise, as it can serve us. I
am thinking, in particular, of what is happening in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, where civilians are the
main victims of clashes and where foreign interference
must cease as soon as possible.

Those are the goals that France will support and
defend at the United Nations. France has confidence in
the United Nations. We know that no State, however
powerful, can deal with emergencies, undertake the
fight for development or overcome all crises. No State
can do that, but, on the contrary, if we act together, we
will live up to our responsibilities. France wants the
United Nations to be the centre and the framework for
global governance, but do the States that make up the
Organization want that to be our purpose and goal?

I say in all seriousness that when there is paralysis,
inertia and inaction, injustice and intolerance find their
place. What I would like members to understand is that
we must act in order to shoulder our responsibilities
and to deal with urgent situations, such as Syria,
nuclear proliferation and the Sahel. We must also work
for another world that is based on development and
innovative financing and for the fight against health
crises. We must act, always and together. Let us live up
to the mission entrusted to us and to the expectations of
peoples. That is France’s message.﻿I am proud that
this year Britain welcomed the world to the Olympic
and Paralympic games and put on a great display,
showing that while we may have only the twenty-
second-largest population in the world, we can roll out
one of its warmest welcomes.
I am honoured, too, that in the coming year I have
been asked to co-chair the high-level panel designed to
help us build on one of the greatest achievements of the United Nations, the Millennium Development Goals.
Britain takes that work very seriously. I am convinced
that we need to focus more than ever on the building
blocks that take countries and people from poverty to
prosperity. By those building blocks I mean the absence
of conflict and corruption and the presence of property
rights and the rule of law. We should never forget that
for many in the world the closest relative of poverty is
injustice. Development has never been just about aid
or money, but I am proud that Britain is a country that
keeps its promises to the poorest in our world.
A year ago I stood here and argued that the Arab
Spring represented an unprecedented opportunity for
advancing peace, prosperity and security. One year
on, some believe that the Arab Spring is in danger of
becoming an Arab winter. They point to the riots on
the streets, to Syria’s descent into a bloody civil war, to
frustration at the lack of economic progress and to the
emergence of newly elected Islamist-led Governments
across the region.
But I believe those people are in danger of drawing
the wrong conclusion. Today is not the time to turn back,
but to keep the faith and to redouble our support for open
societies and for people’s demands for a job and a voice.
Yes, the path is challenging. But democracy is not, and
never has been, simply about holding an election. It is
not one person, one vote, once. Democracy is about
establishing the building blocks of true democracy:
the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law,
with the majority prepared to defend the rights of the
minority; the freedom of the media; a proper place for
the army in society; and the development of effective
State institutions, political parties and a wider civil
society.
I am not so naive as to believe that democracy
alone has some magical healing power. I am a liberal
Conservative, not a neo-conservative. I respect each
country’s different histories and traditions. I welcome
the steps taken in countries where reform is happening
with the consent of the people. I know that every
country takes its own path, and that progress will
sometimes be slow. Some countries have achieved
stability and success based on tradition and consent.
Others have endured decades in which the institutions
of civil society were deliberately destroyed, political
parties banned, free media abolished and the rule of
law twisted for the benefit of the few. We cannot expect
the damage of decades to be put right in a matter of
months. But the drive for opportunity, justice and the rule of law and the hunger for a job and a voice are not
responsible for the problems in the region. In fact, quite
the opposite: the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not part of the problem. We in the United Nations
must step up our efforts to support the people of those
countries as they build their own democratic future.
Let me take the key arguments in turn. First, there
are those who say there has been too little progress,
that the Arab Spring has produced few tangible
improvements in people’s lives. That is not right. Look
at Libya since the fall of Al-Qadhafi. We have seen
elections to create a new Congress, and now plans to
integrate armed groups into the national police and
army. None of that is to ignore the huge and sobering
challenges that remain.
The murder of Ambassador Chris Stevens was a
despicable act of terrorism. But the right response is
to finish the work that Chris Stevens gave his life to.
That is what the vast majority of Libyans want, too, as
we saw so inspiringly in Benghazi last weekend, when
they took to the streets in the thousands, refusing to
allow extremists to hijack their chance for democracy.
The Arab Spring has also brought progress in
Egypt, where the democratically elected President
has asserted civilian control over the military; in
Yemen and Tunisia, where elections have brought new
Governments to power; and in Morocco, where there
is a new Constitution and a Prime Minister appointed
on the basis of a popular vote for the first time. Even
further afield, Somalia has also taken the first vital step
forward by electing a new President. So there has been
progress. None of it would have come about without
people standing up last year and demanding change,
or without the United Nations having the courage to
respond to those crises.
Secondly, there is the argument that the removal of
dictators has somehow started to unleash a new wave of
violence, extremism and instability. Some argue that in
a volatile region, only an authoritarian strong man can
maintain stability and security. Or even, some argue,
that recent events prove that democracy in the Middle
East brings terrorism, not security, and sectarian
conflict, not peace. Again, I believe we should reject
that argument.
I have no illusions about the danger that political
transition can be exploited by violent extremists. I
understand the importance of protecting people and defending national security. Britain is determined
to work with our allies to do that. But democracy
and open societies are not the problem. The fact is
that, for decades, too many were prepared to tolerate
dictators like Al-Qadhafi and Al-Assad on the basis
that they would keep their people safe at home and
promote stability in the region and the wider world. In
fact, neither was true. Not only were theose dictators
repressing their people, ruling by control not by consent,
plundering the national wealth, and denying people
their basic rights and freedoms, they were funding
terrorism overseas as well. Brutal dictatorships made
the region more dangerous not less; more dangerous
because those regimes dealt with frustration at home
by whipping up anger against their neighbours, against
the West, against Israel; and more dangerous, too,
because people denied a job and a voice were given no
alternative but a dead-end choice between dictatorship
and extremism.
What was heartening about the events of Tahrir
Square was that the Egyptian people found their voice
and rejected that false choice. They withheld their
consent from a Government that had lost all legitimacy,
and they chose instead the road to a more open and fair
society. The road is not easy, but it is the right one. I
believe it will make countries safer in the end.
Next, there are those who say that, whatever may
have been achieved elsewhere, in Syria the Arab Spring
has unleashed a vortex of sectarian violence and hatred
with the potential to destroy the whole region. Syria
does present some profound challenges. But those who
look at Syria today and blame the Arab Spring have got
it the wrong way round. We cannot blame the people
for the behaviour of a brutal dictator. The responsibility
lies with the brutal dictator himself.
Al-Assad is today inf laming Syria’s sectarian
tensions, just as his father did as far back as the slaughter
in Hama 30 years ago. And not only in Syria; Al-Assad
has colluded with those in Iran who are set on dragging
the region into wider conflict. The only way out of
Syria’s nightmare is to move forward towards political
transition and not to give up the cause of freedom. The
future for Syria is a future without Al-Assad. It has to
be based on mutual consent, as was clearly agreed in
the International Conference on Syria held in Geneva
in June. If anyone was in any doubt about the horrors
that Al-Assad has inf licted on his people, just look at
the evidence published this week by Save the Children:
schools used as torture centres, children used for target practice. A 16-year-old Syrian called Wael who was
detained in a police station in Daraa said: “I have seen
children slaughtered. No, I do not think I will ever be
OK again...lf there was even 1 per cent of humanity in
the world, this would not happen”.
The blood of those young children is a terrible stain
on the reputation of the United Nations. In particular,
it is a stain on those who have failed to stand up to
these atrocities and those who in some cases aided
and abetted Al-Assad’s regime of terror. lf the United
Nations Charter is to have any value in the twenty-
first century, we must now join together to support
a rapid political transition. At the same time, no one
of conscience can turn a deaf ear to the voices of
suffering. Security Council members have a particular
responsibility to support the United Nations appeal for
Syria. Britain, already the third biggest donor, is today
announcing a further $12 million in humanitarian
support, including new support for UNICEF’s work
to help Syrian children. We look to our international
partners to do more as well.
Of course, the Arab Spring has not removed
overnight the profound economic challenges that
these countries face. Too many countries face falling
investment, rising food prices and bigger trade deficits.
But it is completely wrong to suggest that the Arab
Spring has somehow created those economic problems.
It is a challenging time for the world economy as
a whole. There was never going to be an economic
transformation overnight, not least because far from
being successful open-market-based economies, many
of these countries were beset by vested interests and
corruption, with unaccountable institutions. That has,
one might say, created a double problem. Not just
fragile economies, but worse, people were told they had
experienced free enterprise and open markets when
they had experienced nothing of the sort.
So we must help these countries unwind the legacy
of endemic corruption, military expenditure they
cannot afford, natural resources unfairly exploited; in
short, the mass kleptocracy that they suffered under for
too long.
While I am on the subject of stolen assets, we also
have a responsibility to help these countries get back
the stolen assets that are rightfully theirs, just as we
have returned billions of dollars of assets to Libya. It
is simply not good enough that the Egyptian people
continue to be denied those assets long after Mubarak
has gone.

Today, I am announcing a new British task force to
work with the Egyptian Government to gather evidence,
trace assets, work to change European Union law and
pursue the legal cases that will return the stolen money
to its rightful owners, the Egyptian people.
Finally, perhaps most challenging of all for Western
countries like mine, is the argument that elections
have simply opened the door to Islamist parties whose
values are incompatible with truly open societies. My
response to this is clear. We should respect the outcome
of elections. But we should not compromise on our
definition of what makes an open society. We should
judge Islamists by what they do.
The test is this. Will they entrust the rights of
citizenship to fellow countrymen and countrywomen
who do not share their specific political or religious
views? Do they accept that, unlike the dictators they
replaced, they should never pervert the democratic
process to hold onto power if they lose the consent
of the people they serve? Will they live up to their
commitments to protect the rule of law for all citizens,
to defend the rights of Christians and minorities and
to allow women a full role in society, in the economy
and in politics? The truth is this: we cannot build
strong economies, we cannot build open societies and
we cannot have inclusive political systems if we lock
out women. The eyes of the world today may be on the
brothers, but the future is as much in the hands of their
mothers, their sisters and their daughters.
Holding Islamists to account must also mean that
if they attempt to undermine the stability of other
countries, encourage terrorism instead of peace or
promote conflict instead of partnership, we will oppose
them. That is why Iran will continue to face the full
force of sanctions and scrutiny from the United Nations
until it gives up its ambitions to spread a nuclear shadow
over the world. It is also why we should not waver from
our insistence that Hamas give up violence. Hamas must
not be allowed to dictate the way forward. Palestinians
should have the chance to fulfil the same aspirations for
a job and a voice as others in the region, and we support
their right to have a State and a home. And Israelis
should be able to fulfil their own aspirations to live in
peace and security with their neighbours.
Of course there are challenges in working with
Governments that have different views and cultural
traditions. But there is a fundamental difference
between Islam and extremism. Islam is a great religion
observed peacefully and devoutly by more than 1 billion people. Islamist extremism is a warped political
ideology supported by a minority that seeks to hijack
that great religion, to gain respectability for its violent
objectives. It is vital that we make that distinction.
In Turkey, we see a Government with roots in
Islamic values but with democratic politics, an open
economy and a responsible attitude to supporting
change in Libya, Syria and elsewhere in the region.
I profoundly believe the same path is open to Egypt,
Tunisia and their neighbours. We must help them take
it. Democracy and Islam can flourish alongside one
another. Let us judge Governments not by their religion,
but by how they act and what they do. Let us engage with
the new democratic Governments in Egypt, Tunisia and
Libya so their success can strengthen democracy, not
undermine it.
There is no doubt that we are in the midst of
profound change and that many uncertainties lie
ahead. But the building blocks of democracy, fair
economies and open societies are part of the solution,
not the problem. Indeed, nothing in the last year has
changed my fundamental conviction. The Arab Spring
represents a precious opportunity for people to realize
their aspirations for a job, a voice and a stake in their
future. We in the United Nations must do everything
we can to support them.﻿It is indeed a great privilege
for me to be able to address the General Assembly.
Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Vuk Jeremić on
his election to the office of President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I assure him of
our constructive support in his work over the coming
year.
We are assembled in New York at a time when we
face multiple global challenges that transcend national
boundaries. Developing countries are still to recover
from the downturn in the global economy. Their quest
for poverty eradication and sustainable development
remains an uphill task. Food and energy security as well
as health and education for their populations remain
daunting challenges. The West Asia-North Africa
region is seeing unprecedented sociopolitical upheaval.
The question of Palestine remains unresolved. Threats
emanating from terrorism, maritime piracy, drug
trafficking and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction continue to multiply. Those challenges
demand that we work for solutions in a concerted and
coordinated manner. That is the only path to success.
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20), the international community
renewed its commitment to sustainable development
and recognized poverty eradication as the greatest
global challenge. To act on that, it unequivocally
reaffirmed the sanctity of the Rio principles. India
remains committed to addressing climate change
through a comprehensive, equitable and balanced
outcome based on the principles of equity and common
but differentiated responsibilities. In less than two
weeks, in Hyderabad, we will host the eleventh meeting
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. We seek the support of parties to
fashion an outcome that harmonizes strong biodiversity
action with our basic development objectives.
The process to develop a set of sustainable
development goals has begun. The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) must be integrated in the
new framework so that the unmet development priorities
continue to be the main focus. In the interim, with still
three years to go to the MDG target date of 2015, it
is imperative to ensure that all efforts to achieve the
MDGs are made. In the global discourse on the post-
2015 development agenda, the focus ought to be on the
word “development”. It ought to be firmly entrenched
in the understandings and principles of Rio+20 and be
anchored in the intergovernmental process at the United Nations. Priority must be given to the challenges of
poverty, unemployment, food and energy, water, health,
environmental sustainability, unsustainable lifestyles
and, above all, economic growth.
Ensuring gender equality and women’s
empowerment is essential to the pursuit of building
inclusive societies. It is also an imperative for building
strong and resilient economies. We are happy to support
the efforts of the United Nations. We also need to pay
particular attention to upgrading the skills of young
people and to ensuring employment opportunities for
them. Children and youth are our future. We need to
invest in them to reap the demographic dividend to
secure our future.
India remains firmly committed to scaling up
our development partnership with Africa, including
through the framework of the India-Africa Forum
Summit. Similarly, we will continue to build on our
commitments for enhanced cooperation with least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States within the framework
of South-South cooperation.
India is a multireligious, multi-ethnic and
multilingual society. Our civilizational ethos has been
underpinned by peaceful coexistence and tolerance,
values that the founder of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi,
placed at the core of India’s national life. Those
principles are enshrined in our Constitution, which
provides the foundation for our secular, democratic and
inclusive society.
Mutual respect for deeply held religious sentiments
is the bedrock of tolerance and coexistence. Unfortunate
recent events have highlighted the need for enhanced
dialogue among faiths and civilizations. Violence
cannot lead to greater understanding. It is necessary
to uphold norms of peaceful international discourse.
In particular, the safety and security of diplomatic
personnel should be fully respected.
Terrorism remains one of the most potent threats
to international peace and security. The international
community must adopt a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism and must focus on efforts to dismantle the
infrastructure of terrorism, including its invidious
network of epicentres, training facilities and financing.
It is time we demonstrated the necessary political will to
agree on a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism so as to strengthen the normative framework against the increasingly sophisticated and globalized
terrorist challenge.
India continues to be gravely concerned by the
menace of piracy and armed robbery at sea. Apart from
the major economic and commercial consequences of
that scourge, it has serious humanitarian implications
for the large number of seafarers held hostage by
pirates. The need of the hour is once again concerted
international action under United Nations auspices,
with special attention to addressing the welfare of
seafarers and their families.
Peacekeeping and disarmament are among the
unique pursuits of the United Nations, because
they embody the promise and innate potential of the
Organization to make the world a better place. India
has a proud history of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations dating back to the 1950s,
having taken part in as many as 43 peacekeeping
operations. The challenge before the international
community today is to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping is adequately resourced and enabled to
meet the realities of today, including in post-conflict
and peacebuilding contexts. In that regard, we are
hopeful that progress will be made on all outstanding
issues between the Sudan and South Sudan.
India is committed to achieving a nuclear-
weapon-free world. The principles of the Rajiv Gandhi
action plan of 1988 for achieving nuclear disarmament
in a time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory,
phased and verifiable manner remain relevant, even
after more than two decades. A renewed consensus
on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament must
be forged. Meaningful dialogue among all States
possessing nuclear weapons is needed in order to build
trust and confidence and to reduce the salience of
nuclear weapons in international affairs and security
doctrines.
Measures must be taken to reduce nuclear
risks, including the grave risk of terrorists gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, and thus
to strengthen nuclear security. The Conference on
Disarmament — the international community’s sole
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum — deserves
our support in discharging its mandate of negotiating
treaties on issues on the international disarmament
agenda.
The crisis in Syria continues unabated and is a matter
of serious concern for us. Any further militarization of the crisis can have catastrophic consequences for
the region. We urge all parties to commit themselves
to resolving the crisis without any further bloodshed
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process
that can meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. We support the efforts of the United Nations
and urge all sides to cooperate in good faith with the
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.
Support for the Palestinian cause has been a
cornerstone of India’s foreign policy. We were privileged
to receive President Mahmoud Abbas in India earlier this
month. We support Palestine’s aspirations for enhanced
status at the United Nations. It is imperative that there be
an early realization of a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
India desires constructive and friendly relations
with all its neighbours. We have a vision of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous region with enhanced cooperation
and connectivity linking us with Central Asia, the
Gulf and South-East Asia. Within South Asia, we have
sought to enhance bilateral relations individually with
each of our neighbours and through the aegis of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
We have embarked on a resumed dialogue process
with Pakistan and advocate a step-by-step approach to
normalizing our bilateral relations.
An unwarranted reference has been made from
this rostrum to Jammu and Kashmir. Our principled
position on the issue has been consistent and is well
known. The people of Jammu and Kashmir have chosen
their destiny and reaffirmed it repeatedly through
India’s well-established democratic processes. We wish
to make it abundantly clear that Jammu and Kashmir is
an integral part of India.
India supports the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their endeavour to build a peaceful,
stable, democratic and prosperous country. We are
ready to partner with the Afghan people as they rebuild
their country in accordance with their own priorities
and national circumstances. The continuing existence
beyond Afghanistan’s borders of safe havens and
sanctuaries for terrorists is the major impediment to the
restoration of peace and security in Afghanistan. India is committed to creating an enabling environment in
which the Afghan people can live in peace and security
and decide their future for themselves, without outside
interference, coercion or intimidation.
The United Nations and the norms of international
relations that it has fostered remain the most
efficacious means for converting today’s challenges
into opportunities. However, we need to ensure that the
architecture of global governance reflects contemporary
realities. Sticking to structures designed at the end of
the Second World War only constrains multilateralism
from delivering on its promises.
The most important and decisive step towards
remedying that situation pertains to the Security
Council, which must be expanded in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories. A reformed Council
must include countries that are capable of bearing, and
willing to bear, the additional burdens relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well
as willilng to sustain global campaigns against new and
emerging global threats. Let me also stress that we must
address, sooner rather than later, the incongruity of the
lack of permanent membership for Africa.
Equally, India will promote and lend its weight to
enhancing the voice and participation of developing
countries in decision-making in global economic and
financial institutions. The quota reform process of the
International Monetary Fund must be accelerated with
altered quotas that reflect contemporary economic
weight.
Speaking in the Assembly on 14 October 1968,
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said,
“The United Nations is the trustee of the
world’s peace and represents the hopes of mankind.
Its very existence gives a feeling of assurance that
the justice of true causes can be brought fearlessly
before the world. This Assembly and the agencies
of the United Nations should, in all that they do,
sustain those hopes and promote the causes of
peace”.
Those words remain true to this day.
Let me conclude by assuring the President and the
members of the Assembly that India will continue to
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and will strive to strengthen the
United Nations.﻿It is a pleasure to see the
General Assembly presided over by the Ambassador from Israel, and it is good to see all of the representatives
here.
Three thousand years ago, King David reigned
over the Jewish State in our eternal capital, Jerusalem.
I say that to all those who proclaim that the Jewish
State has no roots in our region and that it will soon
disappear. Throughout our history, the Jewish people
have overcome all the tyrants who have sought our
destruction. It is their ideologies that have been
discarded by history. The people of Israel live on. We
say in Hebrew, the Jewish State will live forever.
The Jewish people have lived in the land of Israel
for thousands of years. Even after most of our people
were exiled from it, Jews continued to live in the land
of Israel throughout the ages. The masses of our people
never gave up the dream of returning to our ancient
homeland. Defying the laws of history, we did just that.
We ingathered the exiles, restored our independence
and rebuilt our national life. The Jewish people have
come home. We will never be uprooted again.
Yesterday was Yom Kippur, the holiest day of
the Jewish year. Every year, for over three millennia,
we have come together on this day of ref lection and
atonement. We take stock of our past. We pray for our
future. We remember the sorrows of our persecution;
we remember the great travails of our dispersion; we
mourn the extermination of a third of our people,
6 million, in the Holocaust.
But at the end of Yom Kippur, we celebrate. We
celebrate the rebirth of Israel. We celebrate the heroism
of our young men and women who have defended our
people with the indomitable courage of Joshua, David
and the Maccabees of old. We celebrate the marvel
of the flourishing modern Jewish State. In Israel we
walk the same paths as those trodden by our patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But we blaze new trails in
science, technology, medicine and agriculture. In Israel
the past and the future find common ground.
Unfortunately, that is not the case in many other
countries. For today, a great battle is being waged
between the modern and the medieval. The forces of
modernity seek a bright future in which the rights of
all are protected, in which an ever-expanding digital
library is available in the palm of every child, in which
every life is sacred.
The forces of medievalism seek a world in which
women and minorities are subjugated, in which knowledge is suppressed, in which not life but death
is glorified. Those forces clash around the globe, but
nowhere more starkly than in the Middle East. Israel
stands proudly with the forces of modernity. We protect
the rights of all our citizens, men and women, Jews and
Arabs, Muslims and Christians — all are equal before
the law.
Israel is also making the world a better place. Our
scientists win Nobel Prizes. Our know-how is in every
cell phone and computer that every one of us uses. We
prevent hunger by irrigating arid lands in Africa and
Asia. Recently, I was deeply moved when I visited
Technion, one of our technological institutes in Haifa,
and I saw a man paralysed from the waist down climb
up a f light of stairs, quite easily, with the aid of an
Israeli invention. And Israel’s exceptional creativity is
matched by our people’s remarkable compassion. When
disaster strikes anywhere in the world — in Haiti,
Japan, India, Turkey, Indonesia and elsewhere — Israeli
doctors are among the first on the scene, performing
lifesaving surgeries.
In the past year, I lost both my father and my
father-in-law. In the same hospital wards where they
were treated, Israeli doctors were treating Palestinian
Arabs. In fact, every year, thousands of Arabs from
the Palestinian territories and Arabs from throughout
the Middle East come to Israel to be treated in Israeli
hospitals by Israeli doctors. I know that that is not
going to be spoken by speakers at this podium, but it
is the truth. It is important that the world be aware of
that truth. It is because Israel cherishes life that Israel
cherishes peace and seeks peace. We seek to preserve
our historic ties and our historic peace treaties with
Egypt and Jordan. We seek to forge a durable peace
with the Palestinians.
President Abbas just spoke here. I say to him and
I say to the Assembly: we will not solve our conflict
with libellous speeches at the United Nations. That is
not the way to solve it. We will not solve our conflict
with unilateral declarations of statehood. We have
to sit together, negotiate together and reach a mutual
compromise, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State
recognizes the one and only Jewish State.
Israel wants to see a Middle East of progress and
peace. We want to see the three great religions that
sprang forth from our region — Judaism, Christianity
and Islam — coexist in peace and in mutual respect. Yet the medieval forces of radical Islam, which
the world just saw storming American Embassies
throughout the Middle East, oppose that. They seek
supremacy over all Muslims. They are bent on world
conquest. They want to destroy Israel, Europe, America.
They want to extinguish freedom. They want to end the
modern world.
Militant Islam has many branches, from the rulers
of Iran with their Revolutionary Guards to Al-Qaida
terrorists to the radical cells lurking in every part of the
globe. But despite their differences, they are all rooted
in the same bitter soil of intolerance. That intolerance
is directed first at their fellow Muslims and then at
Christians, Jews, Buddhists, Hindus, secular people,
and anyone who does not submit to their unforgiving
creed. They want to drag humankind back to an age of
unquestioning dogma and unrelenting conflict.
I am sure of one thing. Ultimately, they will fail.
Ultimately, light will penetrate the darkness. We
have seen that happen before. Some 500 years ago,
the printing press helped pry a cloistered Europe
out of a dark age. Eventually, ignorance gave way to
enlightenment. So too, a cloistered Middle East will
eventually yield to the irresistible power of freedom
and technology. When that happens, our region will be
guided not by fanaticism and conspiracy but by reason
and curiosity.
I think the relevant question is not whether this
fanaticism will be defeated. It is how many lives will
be lost before it is defeated. We have seen that happen
before too. Some 70 years ago, the world saw another
fanatic ideology bent on world conquest. It went down
in flames, but not before it took millions of people with
it. Those who opposed that fanaticism waited too long
to act. In the end they triumphed, but at a horrific cost.
My friends, we cannot let that happen again. At
stake is not merely the future of my own country. At
stake is the future of the world. Nothing could imperil
our common future more than the arming of Iran with
nuclear weapons. To understand what the world would
be like with a nuclear-armed Iran, just imagine the
world with a nuclear-armed Al-Qaida. It makes little
difference whether these lethal weapons are in the
hands of the world’s most dangerous terrorist regime or
the world’s most dangerous terrorist organization. They
are both fired by the same hatred; they are both driven
by the same lust for violence. Just look at what the Iranian regime has done up
until now, without nuclear weapons. In 2009, they
brutally put down mass protests for democracy in their
own country. Today, their henchmen are participating
in the slaughter of tens of thousands of Syrian
civilians, including thousands of children — directly
participating in those murders. They abetted the killing
of American soldiers in Iraq and continue to do so
in Afghanistan. Before that, Iranian proxies killed
hundreds of American troops in Beirut and in Saudi
Arabia. They have turned Lebanon and Gaza into terror
strongholds, embedding nearly 100,000 missiles and
rockets in civilian areas. Thousands of such rockets and
missiles have already been fired at Israeli communities
by their terrorist proxies.
In the past year, they have spread their international
terror networks to two dozen countries across five
continents, from India and Thailand to Kenya and
Bulgaria. They have even plotted to blow up a restaurant
a few blocks from the White House in order to kill a
diplomat. And of course, Iran’s rulers repeatedly deny
the Holocaust and call for Israel’s destruction almost
on a daily basis, as they did again this week from the
United Nations.
So I ask, given this record of Iranian aggression
without nuclear weapons, just imagine Iranian
aggression with nuclear weapons. Imagine their long-
range missiles tipped with nuclear warheads, their
terror networks armed with atomic bombs. Who here
would feel safe in the Middle East? Who would be safe
in Europe? Who would be safe in America? Who would
be safe anywhere?
There are those who believe that a nuclear-armed
Iran can be deterred like the Soviet Union. That is a
very dangerous assumption. Militant jihadists behave
very differently from secular Marxists. There were
no Soviet suicide bombers. Yet Iran produces hordes
of them. Deterrence worked with the Soviets, because
every time the Soviets faced a choice between their
ideology and their survival, they chose their survival.
But deterrence may not work with the Iranians once
they get nuclear weapons.
A great scholar of the Middle East, Professor
Bernard Lewis, put it best. He said that for the ayatollahs
of Iran mutually assured destruction is not a deterrent,
it is an inducement. Iran’s apocalyptic leaders believe
that a medieval holy man will reappear in the wake
of a devastating holy war, thereby ensuring that their brand of radical Islam will rule the Earth. That is not
just what they believe; it is what is actually guiding
their policies and their actions. Just listen to Ayatollah
Rafsanjani who said, “the use of even one nuclear bomb
inside Israel will destroy everything, however it would
only harm the Islamic world.” Rafsanjani said: “It is
not irrational to contemplate such an eventuality”. “Not
irrational” is what he said. And that is coming from one
of the so-called moderates of Iran.
Shockingly, some people have begun to peddle the
absurd notion that a nuclear-armed Iran would actually
stabilize the Middle East. That is like saying a nuclear-
armed Al-Qaida would usher in an era of universal
peace.
I have been speaking about the need to prevent Iran
from developing nuclear weapons for over 15 years.
I spoke about it in my first term in office as Prime
Minister, and then I spoke about it when I left office.
I spoke about it when it was fashionable, and I spoke
about it when it was not fashionable.
I speak about it now because the hour is getting
late, very late. I speak about it now because the Iranian
nuclear calendar does not take time out for anyone or
for anything. I speak about it now because when it
comes to the survival of my country, it is not only my
right to speak, it is my duty to speak. And I believe that
it is the duty of every responsible leader who wants to
preserve world peace.
For nearly a decade, the international community
has tried to stop the Iranian nuclear programme with
diplomacy. That has not worked. Iran uses diplomatic
negotiations as a means to buy time to advance its nuclear
programme. For over seven years, the international
community has tried sanctions with Iran. Under the
leadership of President Obama, the international
community has passed some of the strongest sanctions
to date.
I want to thank the Governments represented here
that have joined in that effort. It has had an effect. Oil
exports have been curbed and the Iranian economy
has been hit hard. It has had an effect on the economy,
but we must face the truth. Sanctions have not stopped
Iran’s nuclear programme either.
According to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, during the last year alone, Iran doubled the
number of centrifuges in its underground nuclear
facility in Qom. At this late hour, there is only one way to peacefully prevent Iran from getting atomic bombs.
That is by placing a clear red line on Iran’s nuclear
weapons programme.
Red lines do not lead to war. Red lines prevent war.
Look at NATO’s charter. It made clear that an attack on
one member country would be considered an attack on
all. NATO’s red line helped keep the peace in Europe
for nearly half a century. President Kennedy set a red
line during the Cuban missile crisis. That red line
also prevented war and helped preserve the peace for
decades.
In fact, it is the failure to place red lines that has
often invited aggression. If the Western Powers had
drawn clear red lines during the 1930s, I believe they
would have stopped Nazi aggression, and the Second
World War might have been avoided. In 1990, if
Saddam Hussein had been clearly told that his conquest
of Kuwait would cross a red line, the first Gulf War
might have been avoided.
Clear red lines have also worked with Iran. Earlier
this year, Iran threatened to close the Straits of Hormuz.
The United States drew a clear red line and Iran backed
off. Now, red lines could be drawn in different parts of
Iran’s nuclear weapons programme, but to be credible,
a red line must be drawn first and foremost in one vital
part of their programme: on Iran’s efforts to enrich
uranium.
Now let me explain why. Basically, any bomb
consists of explosive material and a mechanism to
ignite it. The simplest example is gunpowder and a
fuse — that is, you light the fuse and you set off the
gunpowder. In the case of Iran’s plans to build a nuclear
weapon, the gunpowder is enriched uranium. The
fuse is a nuclear detonator. For Iran, amassing enough
enriched uranium is far more difficult than producing
the nuclear fuse. For a country like Iran, it takes many
years to enrich uranium for a bomb. That requires
thousands of centrifuges spinning in tandem in very
big industrial plants. Those Iranian plants are visible
and they are still vulnerable.
In contrast, Iran could produce the nuclear
detonator, the fuse, in a lot less time — maybe under a
year, maybe only a few months. The detonator can be
made in a small workshop the size of a classroom. It
may be very difficult to find and target that workshop,
especially in Iran. That is a country that is bigger than
France, Germany, Italy and Britain combined. The
same is true for the small facility in which they could assemble a warhead or a nuclear device that could be
placed in a container ship. Chances are you will not
find that facility either.
So in fact, the only way that you can credibly
prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, is to
prevent Iran from amassing enough enriched uranium
for a bomb. So how much enriched uranium do you
need for a bomb, and how close is Iran to getting it?
Let me show you. I brought a diagram for you. Here
is the diagram. This is a bomb. This is a fuse.
In the case of Iran’s nuclear plans to build a bomb,
this bomb has to be filled with enough enriched
uranium, and Iran has to go through three stages. In
the first stage they have to enrich enough low-enriched
uranium; in the second stage they have to enrich enough
medium-enriched uranium. And in the third, and
final, stage they have to enrich enough high-enriched
uranium for the first bomb.
Where is Iran? Iran has completed the first stage. It
took them many years, but they completed it, and they
are 70 per cent of the way there. Now they are well
into the second stage. By next spring, at most by next
summer, at current enrichment rates, they will have
finished the medium enrichment and moved on to the
final stage. From there, it is only a few months, possibly
a few weeks, before they get enough enriched uranium
for the first bomb.
What I told the Assembly just now is not based
on secret information. It is not based on military
intelligence. It is based on public reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Anybody can
read them. They are online.
So if these are the facts — and they are — where
should a red line be drawn? A red line should be drawn
right here, before Iran completes the second stage of
nuclear enrichment necessary to make a bomb and
before Iran gets to a point where it is a few months away
or a few weeks away from amassing enough enriched
uranium to make a nuclear weapon.
Each day, that point is getting closer. That is why
I speak today with such a sense of urgency, and that is
why everyone should have a sense of urgency.
There are some who claim that even if Iran
completes the enrichment process, even if it crosses
that red line that I just drew, our intelligence agencies
will know when and where Iran will make the fuse, assemble the bomb and prepare the warhead. No one
appreciates our intelligence agencies more than the
Prime Minister of Israel. All these leading intelligence
agencies are superb, including ours. They have foiled
many attacks, they have saved many lives, but they
are not foolproof. For over two years, our intelligence
agencies did not know that Iran was building a huge
nuclear enrichment plant under a mountain. Do we
want to risk the security of the world on the assumption
that we would find a small workshop in a country half
the size of Europe in time?
The relevant question is not when Iran will get
the bomb. The relevant question is at what stage can
we no longer stop Iran from getting the bomb? The
red line must be drawn on Iran’s nuclear enrichment
programme because these enrichment facilities are the
only nuclear installations that we can definitely see and
credibly target.
I believe that faced with a clear red line, Iran will
back down. This will give more time for sanctions and
diplomacy to convince Iran to dismantle its nuclear
weapons programme altogether.
Two days ago, from this podium, President Obama
reiterated that the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran cannot
be contained (see A/67/PV.6). I very much appreciate
the President’s position, as does everyone in my country.
We share the goal of stopping Iran’s nuclear weapons
programme. This goal unites the people of Israel. It
unites Americans, Democrats and Republicans alike.
and it is shared by important leaders throughout the
world. What I have said today will help ensure that this
common goal is achieved. Israel is in discussions with
the United States over this issue, and I am confident
that we can chart a path forward together.
The clash between modernity and medievalism
need not be a clash between progress and tradition. The
traditions of the Jewish people go back thousands of
years. They are the source of our collective values and
the foundations of our national strength. At the same
time, the Jewish people have always looked towards the
future. Throughout history, we have been at the forefront
of efforts to expand liberty, promote equality and
advance human rights. We champion those principles
not in spite of our traditions but because of them. We
heed the words of the Jewish prophets Isaiah, Amos and
Jeremiah to treat all with dignity and compassion, to
pursue justice and cherish life and to pray and strive for
peace. Those are the timeless values of my people, and they are the Jewish people’s greatest gift to humankind.
Let us commit ourselves today to defending those
values so that we can defend our freedoms and protect
our common civilization.﻿I bring greetings
from the South Pacific. For the past year, New Zealand
has had the privilege of chairing the Pacific Islands
Forum, a regional body that represents some of the
smallest and most vulnerable States on this planet. For
us that has been an important responsibility.
Because we are a small country with modest
resources, we choose to focus much of our attention
on our own region. Over 60 per cent of our official
development assistance is spent in our own
neighbourhood. Serving as Chair of the Pacific Islands
Forum has caused us to reflect on the role of regional
organizations, and also on the extent to which we all
depend on the United Nations for solutions to challenges
that are truly global in character. I say with some
confidence that we have been making good progress
in dealing with those challenges that are capable of
regional solutions.
But I must also say that we need and expect more
from this institution. The Pacific Islands Forum has
16 members, of which 16 are small island States. I was
pleased this week to attend the first meeting between
the Secretary-General and Pacific Islands Forum
leaders, which I hope will mark a new era of enhanced
high-level engagement between this Organization and
our region and a greater understanding of our needs.
The Pacific has had its share of stability and
security challenges in recent times. As a region, we
have done reasonably well in dealing with them. Most recently it has been in Solomon Islands that a regional
initiative has been required. The Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands has involved a truly
regional approach, with the participation of police
and other personnel from every member of the Pacific
Islands Forum. I am pleased to report that the security
element of that initiative has been significantly scaled
down and will soon be fully withdrawn. But there is
also more that this Organization, particularly the
Security Council, can do to acknowledge and support
regional leadership on peace and security matters in the
Pacific and elsewhere.
Concerns about democracy, the rule of law and
human rights are not mere abstract considerations within
the Pacific. Those principles have been challenged in a
number of States, most notably, in recent years, in Fiji.
In that respect, I am pleased to report that progress is
being made towards the holding of elections in 2014,
and that support has been forthcoming to ensure that
such elections are free and fair.
Stability and security issues are not the only
priorities for our regional body. In our year as Forum
Chair, New Zealand chose to focus on a number of
development priorities, two of which I wish to mention
in my remarks today.
For many of the poorer States within our region,
their fisheries resource is the major economic asset they
hold. Yet due to illegal fishing practices, unreported
catch and inadequate management practices, those
countries have received far too small a return on that
resource. Because of the highly migratory character
of the tuna resource, this is truly a matter requiring
regional management. Solid progress is being made
in such areas as improved surveillance, the training
of monitors and improved management practices, both
to protect the last really healthy fishery on the planet
and to ensure that its owners receive a fair share of the
resource they own.
One of the highest priorities within our region
is the need for practical initiatives in the area of
renewable energy. Ours is a region heavily dependent
upon fossil fuels for the generation of electricity. The
cost of expensive imported diesel in most small Pacific
economies is absolutely crippling. The climate change
impact is obvious.
After a decade of climate change conferences and
hundreds of millions of dollars in so-called climate
change initiatives, one might be forgiven for imagining that the Pacific, overendowed as it is with good sunlight,
would by now be positively festooned with solar power
plants. Sadly, I must report that that is not in fact the
case. Indeed, one of the most striking features of our
region has been the complete lack of progress in putting
lofty climate change rhetoric into any form of renewable
energy practice.
In our year in the Chair of the regional body we
have set out to correct that serious shortcoming. A
small but important illustration lies in our work in
the tiny Tokelau Islands. Until now, Tokelau has been
100 per cent dependent on fossil fuels for the generation
of electricity. By the end 2012, Tokelau will be over
90 per cent resourced with renewable solar electricity.
Good progress has also been made in Tonga, where
I recently participated in the opening of a solar power
plant supplying around 20 per cent of the electricity
requirements of the main island, Tongatapu. And we
are working with the Cook Islands Government, too,
to assist in meeting their bold aspiration to 50 per cent
renewable electricity by 2015, mostly through solar
initiatives.
These New Zealand-funded programmes are
an important part of our overall commitment to our
region. Our parting legacy from our year as Chair
of the regional body is a renewable-energy pledging
conference to be held early next year, with the objective
of matching donors, suppliers of concessional and
commercial finance, and others with the renewable
energy plans of our Pacific neighbours. Here I should
acknowledge the European Union’s commitment in
co-leading this initiative, as well as the support of the
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the
Governments of Australia, the United States and other
generous supporters.
While there is much that can be achieved by
regional action, we must acknowledge that sometimes
regional solutions are just not enough. That goes right
to the very heart of the reason for the existence of this
Organization. My point is most vividly illustrated
today in relation to Syria. It would be difficult for
me to overstate the level of frustration of the people
I represent with the complete inability of the Security
Council to act in relation to Syria. And it would be
even more difficult to overstate the extent to which the
Security Council is at risk of losing its credibility in the
eyes of reasonable and fair-minded people through its
inability to act. People in my country ask a very simple question:
If 25,000 deaths, countless thousands injured and
many more displaced and homeless are not enough to
get the Security Council to act, then what does it take?
Just what does it take? I welcome the leadership that
the Arab League and Arab States have shown on this
issue, and we have seen similar leadership from them
on other difficult issues in their region. And I welcome
the fact that the General Assembly has been looking
for opportunities to be more engaged. In the absence of
leadership from the Security Council, 1 suggest that the
Assembly must find ways to play a more activist role.
But from all of this, the case for Security Council
reform has become utterly compelling. Indeed,
increasingly, the future credibility of the United
Nations may depend on it. If we are to make progress
in this area we will need to see Members move past the
extravagant attempts to maximize individual positions
and try to find some meaningful, practical reforms that
actually hold the prospect of widespread support.
I represent a small nation of practical, constructive
people. And it is because we seek practical,
constructive reform that our Government supports the
so-called intermediate solution: the creation of a new
category of seat for the group of larger countries that
feel underrepresented in comparison with the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5), but
seats that they would have to win in open elections
so as to make them fully accountable to the broader
membership.
I do not intend in these remarks to discuss any other
specific proposals we would like to see considered, with
one exception. There are now compelling reasons for us
to ask the P-5 to voluntarily accept restrictions on the
use of the veto. To go further and to seek its abolition is
pointless; it simply will not happen. But to ask the P-5
to acknowledge and respect the genuine concerns of the
wider membership by voluntarily accepting a curb on
the exercise of the veto is an entirely reasonable and
achievable objective.
My country was one of those that led the opposition
to the veto when the Organization was being established;
indeed, it was the only Charter issue that was forced to a
vote. The permanent members argued at that stage that
the veto was necessary in order to protect their vital
national interests. Yet today we routinely see the veto
exercised in circumstances that have little to do with
national interests. My request to the five permanent members is simply that they stick with what they said
to us back in 1945. And my challenge to them today
is to consider a process by which they collectively and
voluntarily agree to confine their use of the veto to
those issues that clearly and directly affect their vital
national interests; and also that they voluntarily agree
not to use their veto in situations that involve mass
atrocities.
While on the topic of the Security Council, I
would like to take the opportunity to urge the Council
and the relevant organs of the General Assembly to
respond positively to the requests from the Economic
Community of West African States for support in
dealing with the conflict in Mali and the Sahel. Too
often we have seen the Council fail to respond in
a timely way to requests for help — in Rwanda, in
Guinea, in Darfur and in Somalia. Too often it has been
a case of too little, too late. In all of these cases we have
seen good leadership from within the African Union,
and that leadership deserves a timely and constructive
response from New York.
Many of those here will be aware that New Zealand
is an energetic candidate for election to the Security
Council for the term from 2015-2016. I can assure the
Assembly that it will hear more from us on these topics
over the next two years. We are a small country with
a big voice and an approach that is fair-minded and
constructive.
In the past few days. the Assembly has heard from
both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas.
We are now on notice that the issue of Palestinian status
in the United Nations will come before the Assembly
during this session. We look forward to seeing the text
of a draft resolution and to engaging in the consultations
that have been signaled to us. I said earlier that New
Zealanders are practical and constructive. They are also
fair-minded people; they expect to see their Government
bring all of those attributes to the consideration of such
a resolution, and that we will surely do. Having said
that, let me also be clear that we see such a resolution
as a very poor substitute for the direct discussions that
should occur between two leaders who live half an hour
down the road from each other.
In his address to the Assembly earlier in the week
(see A/67/PV.12), Prime Minister Netanyahu set out
clearly the grave implications for the Middle East, and
for the global community more generally, of a nuclear
breakout in the region. Like other Member States, New Zealand believes Iran must be told to step back from
a course that risks further dangerous escalation of the
situation. We hope the international community will
stand firm in sending that sort of message. In return,
however, I suggest that it is fair for the international
community to make a request of Prime Minister
Netanyahu. And that is to put the settlements on hold, at
the very least while negotiations proceed, and to engage
in the direct talks with his Palestinian counterpart that
represent the only basis for a durable solution to this
issue, and an essential step in removing the seeds of
wider conflict within the region.
I would like to remind the Assembly that these are
very difficult times for Governments around the world.
Budget economies have affected foreign ministries,
my own included. It is only fair that we should in
turn ask this large institution to find economies and
improve working methods in order to deliver better
value for our taxpayers. Smaller countries, like New
Zealand, depend more than most on good multilateral
institutions. We need a United Nations that is modern,
efficient and able to meet changing needs. We all need
a Security Council that is more responsive to the needs
of the wider membership and more effective in dealing
with the significant challenges that we all confront
today.﻿For over a year and a half, the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa has been the nerve centre
of global politics. The deep changes that have swept
over the region intertwine with the key problems of
modern international relations and require everyone to
take a comprehensive approach and to reject simplistic
and ideology-driven patterns and double standards.
Russia has consistently supported peoples in their
aspiration to determine their destiny and to pave the
way to more effective models of public governance.
We believe it is particularly important to carry out
those transformations in a non-violent way and without
outside interference. We strongly believe that all
members of the international community should be
interested in making the Middle East-North Africa
region peaceful, stable, democratic and free from
domestic and inter-State conflicts. So far, however,
there has been no progress in reaching unanimity in
the efforts of outside players to create conditions for
achieving that goal.
Of particular concern is the deepening internal
conflict in Syria. We have consistently called for
consolidated efforts by the international community
to compel the Government and its opponents to
immediately cease the violence, come to the negotiating
table and work out a compromise on the content and
pace of reforms that would satisfy all Syrians and
ensure the safety and rights of all ethnic and religious
groups. That was the substance of the consensus
recorded in the final communiqué of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), agreed upon in Geneva
as a follow-up to the Kofi Annan plan.
We call upon all members of the Action Group
to fully abide by the commitments we all took on in
Geneva. That is the fastest way to stop the loss of human
life in Syria. We proposed a Security Council resolution
endorsing the Geneva communiqué as the basis for
negotiations at the beginning of the transitional period, but that proposal was blocked. Those who oppose the
implementation of the Geneva communiqué bear an
onerous responsibility. They insist on a ceasefire by
the Government alone and encourage the opposition
to intensify hostilities, in fact pushing Syria even
deeper into the abyss of bloody internecine strife. The
militarization of the conflict continues, with calls for
open intervention.
Extremist organizations including Al-Qaida
have become more active in Syria. They perpetrate
terrorist attacks against innocent civilians and civil
infrastructure. The number of war crimes is growing, on
the part of both Government forces and the opposition,
as recorded in the recent report of the Human Rights
Council’s commission of inquiry (A/HRC/21/50).
Russia resolutely condemns any violence, wherever
it comes from, and is convinced that there is still an
opportunity to undertake collective action. Practical
steps to overcome the crisis need to begin with a
comprehensive ceasefire, the release of prisoners and
hostages and the provision of additional humanitarian
aid. That would create the conditions to start an
inter-Syrian dialogue. We hope that Lakhdar Brahimi,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States, will be able to bring his vast
experience to bear on moving towards an agreement on
such arrangements, with the support of the international
community. Russia will provide its full support to
promote the success of his mission.
The changes taking place in the Middle East
should not marginalize the Palestinian problem. The
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting Arab-
Israeli settlement, which should lead, among other
results, to the establishment of an independent, viable
and contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting in peace
and security with Israel, would be a major contribution
to the normalization of the overall regional situation.
The Arab Peace Initiative fully retains its relevance,
and we support the efforts of the League of Arab States
to move it forward.
I also wish to stress the importance of implementing
the decision on convening in 2012 a conference on
establishing in the Middle East a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery (see
NPT/CONF/2010/50 (Vol.I)). It is clearly necessary to
ensure the participation in the conference of all States in
the region, and they should agree on key arrangements among themselves. In that matter, the League of Arab
States should play an important role.
On the whole, we support closer ties between the
United Nations and regional entities. I would note
that in our part of the world today a memorandum on
cooperation was signed between the secretariat of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization and the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I am
convinced that it will increase the efficiency of common
efforts to ensure stability and security.
All our actions should be founded solidly on the
United Nations Charter, which makes no provision
for the right to change regimes. It is unacceptable to
impose a political system on a country and its people.
Our position was clearly stated by President Vladimir
Putin speaking at the Kremlin on 26 September. The
entire sequence of events in the Arab world and other
regions proves the futility of any such policy, which can
lead to dangerous interethnic and interreligious clashes
in international relations.
We believe it is an obligation of all States to protect
from provocations and blasphemy the religious feelings
of people of any religious affiliation. At the same
time, of course, there can be no justification for acts
of terror, regardless of where they are committed, be
they in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Yemen or anywhere else.
Attacks against diplomats or United Nations personnel
are absolutely unacceptable.
In general, we are convinced that today, when the
world is going through a transition period characterized
by instability in the spheres of the economy, politics and
inter-civilizational relations, it is particularly important
for United Nations Member States to be able to rely
on accepted rules of conduct and to agree on a joint
response to the threats to global stability. We should
not allow irresponsible actions dictated by expedient
interests to shatter the system of international law. The
world order is threatened by arbitrary interpretation
of such essential principles as the non-use or threat of
force, the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their domestic affairs.
Those are the key principles of the United Nations
Charter, which confers the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security on
the Security Council. In advancing the reform of the
United Nations, it is essential to preserve the capacity of
the Security Council to perform those functions. Their erosion would deprive the international community of
an essential mechanism for developing joint approaches
to the settlement of crisis situations.
It is appropriate to mention the compulsory
instruments at the disposal of the United Nations. Under
the United Nations Charter the imposition of sanctions
falls exclusively under the jurisdiction of the Security
Council. Decisions must be made on a collegial basis,
with the understanding that sanctions should not lead
to isolation of the State targeted for sanctions, but
rather encourage it to engage in a dialogue to remove
questions that the Member States may have. It is
essential that sanctions should be well-measured and
that they not cause any suffering to the population. In
the past the Security Council has discussed the issue of
the humanitarian limits of sanctions, but somehow the
discussions have faded away. We believe it is important
to resume them.
Another issue that needs to be discussed in the
Security Council is the consequences of unilateral
sanctions imposed by a State or a group of States
sidestepping the United Nations to advance their
political goals. We have no doubt that such sanctions,
especially when they are applied extraterritorially,
weaken the unity of the international community
and undermine the effectiveness of its efforts. For
many years, the commercial, economic and financial
restrictions imposed by the United States on Cuba
have remained an illustration of the negative impact
of unilateral sanctions. Russia, together with the
overwhelming majority of members of the international
community, calls for the swift lifting of the blockade,
which is a relic of the Cold War.
Special attention should be given to the practical
enforcement of Security Council decisions regarding
sanctions against non-State actors and illegal cross-
border formations. In general, the events of recent
years have clearly shown that unilateral action which
violates international law and circumvents or distorts
the decisions of the Security Council does no good.
Of course, the legal norms of international affairs
will be further adjusted as necessary. But these
transformations should be treated with the greatest
sense of responsibility and full consciousness of the
serious risks involved. Consensus should be the sole
route to their adoption. Violations of international
law should not be portrayed as some sort of creative
development.

All of this is related to the debate regarding the
concept of the so-called responsibility to protect. Further
discussion of this concept should be held on the basis
of the approach agreed on at the 2005 World Summit,
which reaffirmed the need to observe the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations when responding to
conflicts within States. The protection of civilians is an
issue far too serious to be exploited to achieve political
goals. The ambiguity of the so-called responsibility-
to-protect concept can be better understood in light of
initiatives formulated by Brazil and several other States
to move towards consensus.
Let us not forget that the founders of the United
Nations, in their wisdom, agreed upon and endorsed
a Charter that enshrined principles for the regulation
of a multipolar world order. Now that the abnormal
bipolar period of the Cold War is over, and now that
it has become clear to all that there is no place for
monopolarity in the modern world and international
affairs can only be polycentric, we have a unique
chance to fully implement the original potential of that
Charter.
This is a difficult challenge. International relations
are clearly experiencing a lack of credibility. We regard
this as the main obstacle to practical progress towards
the establishment of universal foundations for equal
and indivisible security, whether in the Euro-Atlantic
area, Asia-Pacific region or other parts of the world.
Such a state of affairs clearly contradicts the concept
of collective security embodied in the Charter and the
deep interdependence of the modern world, where most
challenges and threats are common to us all and have a
cross-border dimension.
Strengthening confidence and collective principles
in international affairs, with the emphasis on
negotiating the pursuit of compromise solutions, would
help substantially reduce the level of instability and
move forward in the settlement of crisis situations, not
only in the Middle East, but also with respect to Iran,
Afghanistan, the Korean peninsula and other situations
throughout the world.
The final goal of the efforts to settle a conflict is
to ensure the right to life and other fundamental human
rights, be they political, economic or social. The events
of recent years confirm that, without lasting peace and
sustainable development, it is impossible to ensure
human rights. In turn, the protection of human rights
should contribute to security and development, rather than serve as a pretext for illegal interference in the
domestic affairs of States.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights states
that everyone is entitled to an international order in
which their rights can be fully realized. Those who use
military force and sanctions, bypassing the Charter,
engage in illicit supplies of arms, or provide cover for
terrorists grossly violate this right.
Russia stands for the implementation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and respect for
the traditional values on which human civilization is
based and where all world religions converge. This is
a moral foundation of modern society. It is the cement
that bonds together nations and peoples. In recent
years, these values have been put to the test by displays
of immorality, extremism and racial intolerance. Of
similar concern are the even more assertive actions
of those who, citing freedom of speech, condone the
glorification of the Nazis and their accomplices and
desecrate the memory of the victims of the Second
World War and the victors of fascism. Such actions are
incompatible with the obligations of States under the
Charter of the United Nations.
Let me recall that the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights directly prohibits the
propaganda of war and incitement of national and
religious discord. This means that freedom of speech
and assembly cannot be used to justify the promotion
of Nazi or other radical or extremist views, in violation
of the basic principles and norms of international law.
Yesterday, the Human Rights Council endorsed a
resolution proposed by Russia on the interrelation of
human rights and traditional values. It is regrettable
that a number of Western States voted against this
document, which is especially relevant today.
Progress towards genuine partnership in
international relations is possible only on the basis
of equality and mutual respect. The course of events
in the world leaves no alternative for anyone but to
join efforts in order to build a stable, equitable and
democratic international system. It would be possible
to resist this objective trend and try to preserve the old
order for some time, but such resistance would cost yet
more lives, suffering and destruction. Let us display
our vision and, instead of looking back at the history of
previous centuries, take the side of the events unfolding
before us today, and answer the call for strong collective
statesmanship.﻿I would like to begin today by
telling the Assembly about an American named Chris
Stevens. Chris was born in a town called Grass Valley,
California, the son of a lawyer and a musician. As a
young man, Chris joined the Peace Corps and taught English in Morocco, and he came to love and respect
the people of North Africa and the Middle East. He
would carry that commitment throughout his life.
As a diplomat, he worked from Egypt to Syria, from
Saudi Arabia to Libya. He was known for walking the
streets of the cities where he worked, tasting the local
food, meeting as many people as he could, speaking
Arabic, listening with a broad smile. Chris went to
Benghazi, arriving on a cargo ship, in the early days
of the Libyan revolution. As America’s representative,
he helped the Libyan people as they coped with violent
conflict, cared for the wounded and crafted a vision
for the future in which the rights of all Libyans would
be respected. After the revolution, he supported the
birth of a new democracy as Libyans held elections and
built new institutions and began to move forward after
decades of dictatorship.
Chris Stevens loved his work. He took pride in the
country he served, and he saw dignity in the people that
he met.
Two weeks ago, he travelled to Benghazi to review
plans to establish a new cultural center and modernize
a hospital. That is when America’s compound came
under attack. Along with three of his colleagues, Chris
was killed in the city that he had helped to save. He was
52 years old.
I tell this story because Chris Stevens embodied
the best of America. Like his fellow Foreign Service
officers, he built bridges across oceans and cultures and
was deeply invested in the international cooperation
that the United Nations represents. He acted with
humility, but he also stood up for a set of principles, a
belief that individuals should be free to determine their
own destiny and live with liberty, dignity, justice and
opportunity.
The attacks on the American civilians in Benghazi
were attacks on America. We are grateful for the
assistance we received from the Libyan Government
and from the Libyan people. There should be no doubt
that we will be relentless in tracking down the killers
and bringing them to justice. I also appreciate that,
in recent days, the leaders of other countries in the
region — including Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen — have
taken steps to secure our diplomatic facilities and called
for calm. So have religious authorities around the globe.
But it should be understood that the attacks of the
last two weeks are not simply an assault on America.

They are also an assault on the very ideals upon which
the United Nations was founded — the notion that people
can resolve their differences peacefully; that diplomacy
can take the place of war, and that, in an interdependent
world, all of us have a stake in working towards greater
opportunity and security for our citizens.
If we are serious about upholding those ideals, it
will not be enough to put more guards in front of an
Embassy or to put out statements of regret and wait for
the outrage to pass. If we are serious about those ideals,
we must speak honestly about the deeper causes of the
crisis, because we face a choice between the forces that
would drive us apart and the hopes we hold in common.
Today, we must affirm that our future will be
determined by people like Chris Stevens, and not by
his killers. Today, we must declare that such violence
and intolerance has no place among our United Nations.
It has been less than two years since a vendor in
Tunisia set himself on fire to protest the oppressive
corruption in his country and sparked what became
known as the Arab Spring. Since then, the world has
been captivated by the transformation that has taken
place, and the United States has supported the forces
of change.
We were inspired by the Tunisian protests that
toppled a dictator, because we recognized our own
beliefs in the aspirations of the men and women who
took to the streets.
We supported change in Egypt, because our
support for democracy ultimately put us on the side of
the people.
We welcomed a transition of leadership in Yemen,
because the interests of the people were no longer being
served by a corrupt status quo.
We intervened in Libya alongside a broad coalition
and with the mandate of the United Nations Security
Council, because we had the ability to stop the
slaughter of innocents and because we believed that the
aspirations of the people were more powerful than a
tyrant.
And as we meet here, we again declare that the
regime of Bashar Al-Assad must come to an end, so
that the suffering of the Syrian people can stop and a
new dawn can begin.
We have taken those positions because we believe
that freedom and self-determination are not unique to one culture. Those values are not simply American
values or Western values — they are universal values.
And even as there will be huge challenges that come
with a transition to democracy, I am convinced that,
ultimately, Government of the people, by the people and
for the people is more likely to bring about the stability,
prosperity and individual opportunity that serve as the
basis for peace in our world.
So, let us remember that this is a season of progress.
For the first time in decades, Tunisians, Egyptians and
Libyans voted for new leaders in elections that were
credible, competitive and fair. That democratic spirit
has not been restricted to the Arab world. Over the past
year, we have seen peaceful transitions of power in
Malawi and Senegal and a new President in Somalia.
In Burma, a President has freed political prisoners and
opened a closed society, a courageous dissident has
been elected to Parliament, and people look forward to
further reform. Around the globe, people are making
their voices heard, insisting on their innate dignity and
the right to determine their future.
And yet the turmoil of recent weeks reminds us that
the path to democracy does not end with the casting
of a ballot. Nelson Mandela once said, “To be free is
not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way
that respects and enhances the freedom of others”. True
democracy demands that citizens cannot be thrown in
jail because of what they believe and that businesses
can be opened without paying a bribe. It depends on the
freedom of citizens to speak their minds and assemble
without fear and on the rule of law and due process,
which guarantee the rights of all people.
In other words, true democracy — real freedom — is
hard work. Those in power have to resist the temptation
to crack down on dissidents. In hard economic times,
countries may be tempted to rally the people around
perceived enemies at home and abroad, rather than
focusing on the painstaking work of reform.
Moreover, there will always be those who reject
human progress — dictators who cling to power, corrupt
interests that depend upon the status quo, and extremists
who fan the flames of hate and division. From Northern
Ireland to South Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
from the Balkans to the Pacific Rim, we have witnessed
convulsions that can accompany transitions to a new
political order. At times, the conflicts arise along the
fault lines of race or tribe, and often they arise from the difficulties of reconciling tradition and faith with
the diversity and interdependence of the modern world.
In every country, there are those who find different
religious beliefs threatening; in every culture, those
who love freedom for themselves must ask themselves
how much they are willing to tolerate freedom for
others. That is what we saw play out in the last two
weeks, as a crude and disgusting video sparked outrage
throughout the Muslim world. Now, I have made it
clear that the United States Government had nothing
to do with that video, and I believe its message must
be rejected by all who respect our common humanity.
It is an insult not only to Muslims, but to America as
well, for as the city outside these walls makes clear, we
are a country that has welcomed people of every race
and every faith. We are home to Muslims, who worship
across our country. We not only respect the freedom
of religion, we have laws that protect individuals from
being harmed because of how they look or what they
believe. We understand why people take offence at that
video, because millions of our citizens are among those
people.
I know there are some who ask why we do not just
ban such a video. And the answer is enshrined in our
laws; our Constitution protects the right to practice free
speech. Here in the United States, countless publications
provoke offence. Like me, the majority of Americans
are Christian, and yet we do not ban blasphemy against
our most sacred beliefs. As President of our country
and Commander-in-Chief of our military, I accept that
people are going to call me awful things every day, and
I will always defend their right to do so.
Americans have fought and died around the globe
to protect the right of all people to express their views,
even views that we profoundly disagree with. We do not
do so because we support hateful speech, but because
our founders understood that without such protections,
the capacity of individuals to express their own views
and practise their own faith may be threatened. We do
so because in a diverse society, efforts to restrict speech
can quickly become a tool to silence critics and oppress
minorities. We do so because, given the power of faith in
our lives and the passion that religious differences can
inflame, the strongest weapon against hateful speech
is not repression; it is more speech — the voices of
tolerance that rally against bigotry and blasphemy, and
lift up the values of understanding and mutual respect.

I know that not all countries in this body share
that particular understanding of the protection of free
speech. We recognize that. But in 2012, at a time
when anyone with a cell phone can spread offensive
views around the world with the click of a button, the
notion that we can control the f low of information is
obsolete. The question then is how do we respond? And
on this we must agree: there is no speech that justifies
mindless violence. There are no words that excuse the
killing of innocents. There is no video that justifies
an attack on an embassy. There is no slander that
provides an excuse for people to burn a restaurant in
Lebanon, or destroy a school in Tunis, or cause death
and destruction in Pakistan. In our modern world with
modern technologies, for us to respond in that way to
hateful speech empowers any individual who engages
in such speech to create chaos around the world. We
empower the worst of us if that is how we respond.
More broadly, the events of the past two weeks also
speak to the need for all of us to honestly address the
tensions between the West and the Arab world, which
is moving towards democracy. Now, let me be clear:
just as we cannot solve every problem in the world, the
United States has not and will not seek to dictate the
outcome of democratic transitions abroad. We do not
expect other nations to agree with us on every issue,
nor do we assume that the violence of the past weeks or
the hateful speech of some individuals represents the
views of the overwhelming majority of Muslims, any
more than the views of the people who produced that
video represent those of Americans.
However, I do believe that it is the obligation of all
leaders in all countries to speak out forcefully against
violence and extremism. It is time to marginalize those
who, even when not directly resorting to violence, use
hatred of America, or the West, or Israel, as the central
organizing principle of politics. For that only gives
cover, and sometimes provides an excuse, for those who
do resort to violence.
That brand of politics, one that pits East against
West, and South against North, Muslims against
Christians and Hindus and Jews, cannot deliver on the
promise of freedom. To young people, it offers only
false hope. Burning an American f lag does nothing to
provide a child with an education. Smashing apart a
restaurant does not fill an empty stomach. Attacking
an embassy will not create a single job. That brand of
politics only makes it harder to achieve what we must
do together, namely, to educate our children and create the opportunities that they deserve; protect human
rights and extend democracy’s promise.
It should be understood that America will never
retreat from the world. We will bring to justice those
who harm our citizens and our friends, and we will
stand with our allies. We are willing to partner with
countries around the world to deepen ties of trade
and investment, science and technology, energy and
development — all efforts that can spark economic
growth for all our peoples and stabilize democratic
change.
But such efforts depend on a spirit of mutual
interest and mutual respect. No Government or
company, no school or non-governmental organization
will be confident working in a country where its people
are endangered. For partnerships to be effective,
our citizens must be secure and our efforts must be
welcomed. A politics based only on anger — one based
on dividing the world between us and them — not
only sets back international cooperation, it ultimately
undermines those who tolerate it. All of us have an
interest in standing up to those forces.
Let us remember that Muslims have suffered the
most at the hands of extremism. On the same day that
our civilians were killed in Benghazi, a Turkish police
officer was murdered in Istanbul only days before his
wedding; more than 10 Yemenis were killed in a car
bomb in Sana’a; several Afghan children were mourned
by their parents just days after they were killed by
a suicide bomber in Kabul. The impulse towards
intolerance and violence may initially be focused on the
West, but over time it cannot be contained. The same
impulses towards extremism are used to justify war
between Sunni and Shia, between tribes and clans. It
leads not to strength and prosperity but to chaos. In less
than two years, we have seen largely peaceful protests
bring more change to Muslim-majority countries than
a decade of violence. And extremists understand this.
Because they have nothing to offer to improve the lives
of people, violence is their only way to stay relevant.
They do not build; they only destroy.
It is time to leave the call to violence and the politics
of division behind. On so many issues, we face a choice
between the promise of the future or the prisons of the
past. And we cannot afford to get it wrong. We must
seize this moment. And America stands ready to work
with all who are willing to embrace a better future.
The future must not belong to those who target Coptic Christians in Egypt; it must be claimed by those in
Tahrir Square who chanted, “Muslims, Christians, we
are one.” The future must not belong to those who bully
women; it must be shaped by girls who go to school,
and those who stand for a world where our daughters
can live their dreams just like our sons.
The future must not belong to those corrupt few
who steal a country’s resources; it must be won by the
students and entrepreneurs, the workers and business
owners who seek a broader prosperity for all people.
Those are the women and men that America stands
with; theirs is the vision we will support.
The future must not belong to those who slander
the Prophet of Islam. But to be credible, those who
condemn that slander must also condemn the hate we
see in the images of Jesus Christ that are desecrated,
or churches that are destroyed, or the Holocaust that is
denied.
Let us condemn incitement against Sufi Muslims
and Shia pilgrims. It is time to heed the words of
Gandhi: “Intolerance is itself a form of violence and
an obstacle to the growth of a true democratic spirit”.
Together we must work towards a world where we are
strengthened by our differences, not defined by them.
That is what America embodies; that is the vision that
we will support.
Among Israelis and Palestinians, the future must
not belong to those who turn their backs on the prospect
of peace. Let us leave behind those who thrive on
conflict, those who reject the right of Israel to exist.
The road is hard, but the destination is clear: a secure,
Jewish State of Israel and an independent, prosperous
Palestine. Understanding that such a peace must come
through a just agreement between the parties, America
will walk alongside all who are prepared to make that
journey.
In Syria, the future must not belong to a dictator
who massacres his people. If there is a cause that cries
out for protest in the world today, peaceful protest, it
is a regime that tortures children and shoots rockets
at apartment buildings. We must remain engaged to
ensure that what began with citizens demanding their
rights does not end in a cycle of sectarian violence.
Together, we must stand with those Syrians who
believe in a different vision: a Syria that is united and
inclusive, where children do not need to fear their own
Government and all Syrians have a say in how they are governed, Sunnis and Alawites, Kurds and Christians.
That is what America stands for. That is the outcome
that we will work for, with sanctions and consequences
for those who persecute, and assistance and support
for those who work for this common good, because we
believe that the Syrians who embrace this vision will
have the strength and the legitimacy to lead.
In Iran, we see where the path of a violent and
unaccountable ideology leads. The Iranian people
have a remarkable and ancient history, and many
Iranians wish to enjoy peace and prosperity alongside
their neighbours. But just as it restricts the rights of
its own people, the Iranian Government continues to
prop up a dictator in Damascus and supports terrorist
groups abroad. Time and again, it has failed to take the
opportunity to demonstrate that its nuclear programme
is peaceful and to meet its obligations to the United
Nations.
So let me be clear. America wants to resolve this
issue through diplomacy, and we believe that there
is still time and space to do so. But that time is not
unlimited. We respect the right of nations to access
peaceful nuclear power, but one of the purposes of the
United Nations is to see that we harness that power for
peace. Make no mistake: a nuclear-armed Iran is not a
challenge that can be contained. It would threaten the
elimination of Israel, the security of Gulf nations and
the stability of the global economy. It risks triggering
a nuclear-arms race in the region and the unravelling
of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That is why a coalition of countries is holding
the Iranian Government accountable, and that is why
the United States will do what we must to prevent Iran
from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
We know from painful experience that the path
to security and prosperity does not lie outside the
boundaries of international law and respect for human
rights. That is why this institution was established, from
the rubble of conflict. That is why liberty triumphed
over tyranny in the cold war, and that is the lesson of
the last two decades as well.
History shows that peace and progress come to
those who make the right choices. Nations in every part
of the world have travelled this difficult path. Europe,
the bloodiest battlefield of the twentieth century, is
united, free and at peace. From Brazil to South Africa,
from Turkey to South Korea, from India to Indonesia,
people of different races, religions and traditions have lifted millions out of poverty, while respecting the
rights of their citizens and meeting their responsibilities
as nations.
It is because of the progress that I have witnessed
in my own lifetime, the progress that I have witnessed
after nearly four years as President, that I remain ever
hopeful about the world that we live in. The war in
Iraq is over. American troops have come home. We
have begun a transition in Afghanistan, and America
and our allies will end our war on schedule in 2014.
Al-Qaida has been weakened, and Osama bin Laden
is no more. Nations have come together to lock down
nuclear materials, and America and Russia are reducing
our arsenals. We have seen hard choices made, from
Naypyidaw to Cairo to Abidjan, to put more power in
the hands of citizens.
At a time of economic challenge, the world
has come together to broaden prosperity. Through
the Group of 20, we have partnered with emerging
countries to keep the world on the path of recovery.
America has pursued a development agenda that fuels
growth and breaks dependency, and has worked with
African leaders to help them feed their nations. New
partnerships have been forged to combat corruption and
promote government that is open and transparent, and
new commitments have been made through the Equal
Futures Partnership to ensure that women and girls can
fully participate in politics and pursue opportunity.
Later today, I will discuss our efforts to combat the
scourge of human trafficking.
All those things give me hope. But what gives
me the most hope is not the actions taken by us, not
the actions of leaders; it is the people that I have
seen — the American troops who have risked their lives
and sacrificed their limbs for strangers half a world
away, the students in Jakarta or Seoul who are eager
to use their knowledge to benefit mankind, the faces in
a square in Prague or a parliament in Ghana who see
democracy giving voice to their aspirations, the young
people in the favelas of Rio and the schools of Mumbai
whose eyes shine with promise. Those men, women,
and children of every race and every faith remind me
that for every angry mob that gets shown on television,
there are billions around the world who share similar
hopes and dreams. They tell us that there is a common
heartbeat to humanity.
So much attention in our world turns to what
divides us. That is what we see on the news. That is what consumes our political debates. But when you strip
it all away, people everywhere long for the freedom to
determine their destiny; the dignity that comes with
work; the comfort that comes with faith; and the justice
that exists when Governments serve their people and
not the other way around.
The United States of America will always stand up
for these aspirations, for our own people and for people
all across the world. That was our founding purpose.
That is what our history shows. That is what Chris
Stevens worked for throughout his life.
I promise you this: long after the killers are brought
to justice, Chris Stevens’s legacy will live on in the lives
that he touched, in the tens of thousands who marched
against violence through the streets of Benghazi; in the
Libyans who changed their Facebook photo to one of
Chris; in the signs that read simply, “Chris Stevens was
a friend to all Libyans”. They should give us hope. They
should remind us that so long as we work for it justice
will be done, that history is on our side and that a rising
tide of liberty will never be reversed.

﻿I thank you, sir, for the opportunity
to address the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
general debate. Let me start by congratulating Mr. Vuk
Jeremić and the Republic of Serbia on his election to
preside over the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly. We also acknowledge the contribution of
the President of the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser.
South Africa fundamentally believes in the
principles and purposes contained in the Charter of
the United Nations, and correctly so, given our nation’s
history. This year, we are proudly celebrating 100 years
of our people’s self less struggle for freedom, led by the
African National Congress movement. We recall with
great appreciation the immense contribution of the United Nations to the creation of a free and democratic
South Africa.
In 1966, the General Assembly labelled apartheid
a crime against humanity in resolution 2202 A (XXI),
which ultimately led to the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid, later known as the Apartheid Convention.
The United Nations defined the crime of apartheid
as “inhuman acts committed for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining domination by one racial
group of persons over any other racial group of persons
and systematically oppressing them” (resolution 3068
(XXVIII), annex, article II). The Apartheid Convention
was adopted by the General Assembly on 30 November
1973 and set the tone for vociferous action against
apartheid around the world.
Let me repeat the words our leader and international
icon, President Nelson Mandela, uttered in his very
first address to the General Assembly, in 1994, the first
by a democratically elected leader and Head of State of
our country. He said,
“The millions of our people say ‘Thank you’
and ‘Thank you again, because the respect for your
own dignity as human beings inspired you to act
to ensure the restoration of our dignity as well.’”
(A/49/PV.14, p.7)
The theme of this session is most appropriate as it
takes us back to the basics — to the founding principles
of the United Nations. The founders intended the
United Nations to be the foremost multilateral forum
entrusted with bringing hope, peace and order to the
world. Indeed, the United Nations enjoys universal
membership and is at the centre of global governance
and multilateralism. The theme reminds us that peace is
a choice. We can either choose peace as Member States
or choose the path of conflict.
The founders of the United Nations made that choice
67 years ago. They decided that the United Nations must
lead the world to peace. It is important for the United
Nations and its organs, especially the Security Council,
to execute the Organization’s mandate of working for
peace without fear or favour. We must not steer away
from the founding objectives of the Organization.
The United Nations faces immense pressure when
the world sees the unprecedented loss of lives, as it now
does in Africa and the Middle East. It is of concern
when it appears as if the United Nations were unable to act and assist, and when it comes across as paralysed in
certain instances, due to the actions of some Member
States. We have seen a divided Security Council unable
to muster the collective courage to say “no more” to
warring parties in the interest of peace. That brings
to the fore the need to continue and deepen the reform
of the United Nations and its organs to make it agile
and nimble in addressing the contemporary challenges
facing humanity.
The debate on the reform of the United Nations
and its organs, in particular the Security Council, has
been going on for the past 18 years. However, there
has been no significant movement forward. I would
like to focus in particular on the Security Council.
Given its mandate, the Council has to be legitimate,
democratic and transparent. Its current composition has
a propensity for deadlock and paralysis even in the face
of crisis. It remains unrepresentative and undemocratic
in both its composition and decision-making.
We would like to see a more meaningful
representation of Africa in the Security Council. About
70 per cent of the Council’s agenda is taken up by issues
from the African continent. The Security Council has
to be expanded in both categories, with at least two
seats for Africa in the permanent category and five in
the non-permanent category. In addition to seats for the
continent in the composition of the Council, the United
Nations should also fully recognize and appreciate the
role of regional organizations working with the United
Nations in conflict management and resolution.
In that regard, we urge closer collaboration with the
African Union (AU) peace and security mechanisms,
especially given the progress being made by the AU
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding in some parts
of the continent since its formation 10 years ago.
Therefore, cognizance should be taken of Chapter VIII
of the Charter, in particular when dealing with African
issues.That is why South Africa piloted resolution 2033
(2012) during our rotating presidency of the Security
Council in January.
Currently, the AU continues to address one of the
longest outstanding conflicts on the continent through
one of its mechanisms, the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan. Together, as the
international community, we recently celebrated
the creation of the State of South Sudan. We wish
to congratulate the Somalis and their leadership on
choosing the path of peace, democracy and prosperity.

The international community and the United Nations
must continue to give the people of Somalia all the
necessary support.
Africa is indeed making progress and, with United
Nations support, that could go further. To promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, we also wish to
emphasize that the Security Council should carry out
its Charter mandate within the confines of international
law.
Any Member State or international body that
implements Council resolutions should be accountable
to the Council, so as to ensure that we avoid the
abuse of internationally agreed principles such as the
responsibility to protect and the protection of civilians.
Those principles must not be used, amongst other
things, to justify the notion of regime change. They
exist to prevent mass atrocities, war crimes, genocide
and ethnic cleansing.We should continue the debate
on them in order to develop norms and standards for
accountability when actions are taken.
It is also of critical importance for the United
Nations to closely guard its impartiality, independence
and objectivity and not allow itself to be dragged into a
conflict to take sides with any party under the guise of
protecting civilians.
The situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestine-Israeli question, continues to be of concern
to us. The United Nations should play a central and
decisive role in efforts to resolve the long-standing
conflict in that region. Any act of aggression or
violations of international law should be condemned
unequivocally by the United Nations at all times. As
the United Nations, we cannot be seen to be strong in
condemning some acts while being soft on others. As
South Africa, we remain committed to the two-State
solution based on the 1967 borders, with Palestine and
Israel coexisting side by side in peace.
Let me also emphasize that South Africa fully
supports the application by Palestine for full membership
of the United Nations. It is unacceptable that, even
today, Palestine remains outside the membership of the
United Nations. We trust that that matter will soon be
positively concluded.
In further promotion of the peaceful resolution of
disputes, we believe that the sovereign right of States
to nuclear energy for peaceful and civilian use should
be respected in accordance with international law.

We have taken note that the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency has been able to
draw the conclusion that all declared nuclear material
in Iran is used for peaceful activities. Clarification
of the nature of undeclared materials will enable the
international community to have full confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. South Africa therefore encourages Iran to
continue its cooperation with the Agency.
We should also remember that so long as some
States are allowed to operate outside internationally
agreed norms, such as those of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, it will be
difficult to expect others to operate within them. South
Africa supports the long-standing call for a nuclear-free
zone in the Middle East. In that regard, the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue is very important.
Let me use this opportunity to reiterate our support
for the ongoing struggle for self-determination by the
people of Western Sahara. We urge the international
community to support their quest for freedom, human
rights and dignity.
We also reiterate our call for the lifting of the
economic and financial embargo against the people of
Cuba in order to help the Cuban people to gain their
economic freedom.
Poverty, underdevelopment, lack of opportunities
and competition for scarce resources contribute to
some of the conflicts in the developing world, including
Africa. Therefore, the promotion of sustainable
development and the fight against poverty cannot be
divorced from the quest for peace.
In 2015, the United Nations will be 70 years old
and will also reach the target year for the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). World
leaders committed themselves to eradicating extreme
poverty, facilitating universal primary education,
attaining gender equality, improving maternal and
child health, reducing the burden of disease primarily
by combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis,
protecting the environment, and mobilizing global
partnerships for development by 2015. The Heads of
State also committed themselves to promoting gender
equality and the empowerment of women as effective
ways to combat poverty, hunger and disease and to
stimulate truly sustainable development. We urge the
United Nations to continue promoting the achievement of the MDGs and other instruments whose tenets
advance the human rights of women.
We are concerned that sub-Saharan Africa is
unlikely to meet the targets for the MDGs. Awareness
of that possibility should not make us give up; in the
next three years, we must accelerate the implementation
of the MDGs. We appeal to all who have made financial
commitments to Africa for the achievement of the
MDGs not to renege on those commitments. We would
like to express our appreciation to those development
partners that continue to stick to their 0.7 per cent
official development assistance commitment despite
their financial difficulties at the domestic level.
We support the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel of Eminent Persons to focus on the acceleration
of the implementation of the MDGs, and would urge
that much of its focus be on assisting Africa in meeting
all its targets. However, we wish to caution against
prejudging the review outcome and prematurely setting
in motion processes that would undermine the ideals of
the MDGs.
The protection and promotion of human rights
and fundamental freedoms should be at the centre of
our collective desire to resolve international disputes
by peaceful means. Racism and racial discrimination
continue to be an affront to the very basic founding
principles of the United Nations and must be fought
relentlessly. We should shun any idea in any part of the
world that seems to suggest that there is a superior race
or human being on the basis of skin colour. The danger
of such ideas is still fresh in our collective memory.
We have learned from the evils of colonialism, two
World Wars and the system of apartheid. We should all
renew our commitment to continue to build on the solid
foundation laid by the Durban Declaration and the Plan
of Action that we adopted more than a decade ago at
the end of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance.
In Durban last December, South Africa had
the honour of hosting the seventeenth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto
Protocol. Member States must ensure that agreements
are implemented. In that regard, the Durban Platform
offers an opportunity for progress that we must utilize
to move forward.

Today’s timely debate is a reminder that, ultimately,
peace is a choice. Peace is achievable. The wise and brave
choices we have the power to make can deliver lasting
peace to every corner of the world. We are called upon
at this sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly to
choose peace by reforming and strengthening the United
Nations so that it can play its rightful role and deliver
peace, security, sustainable development and respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout
the world. As the foremost multilateral forum bringing
together all nations of the world, the United Nations is
best placed to play this role. It requires our support as
Member States at all times, both for our sake and for
that of future generations.