This 
year has been an unusual one in China’s development. 
China’s new central collective leadership has put 
forward the concept of the “Chinese dream”, a dream of 
the great renewal of the Chinese nation, and it is leading 
the 1.3 billion Chinese people in an endeavour to fulfil 
the two centennial goals, namely, to finish building a 
moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020 
and to turn China into a modern socialist country by 
the mid-twenty-first century. Having experienced 
profound changes in the past 5,000 years and especially 
the past century, China has reached a new historical 
starting point today.

What development path will China take in the 
future? What domestic and foreign policies will it 
pursue? And what kind of international role will it play? 
I understand that those questions are of great interest to 
the international community. As the Foreign Minister 
of the new Chinese Government, I wish to give an 
emphatic answer to each of them.

China will stay firmly on the path of peaceful 
development. China’s rapid development over the years 
has given rise to worries that China might follow the 
old pattern of wealth breeding arrogance and strength 
leading to hegemony, and various versions of the China 
threat theory have surfaced. However, what happened 
in the past should not be applied to today’s China.

The outdated Cold War mentality has no place 
in the new era of globalization. The Chinese nation 
loves peace and the Chinese culture values harmony. 
Throughout history, the Chinese people have always 
embraced international exchanges and trade, not 
foreign aggression and expansion, and have adhered to 
the patriotic resolve to defend the homeland rather than 
the colonialist doctrine of seizing new territories.

The culture of a country determines its values, 
and its history points the way to its future. Close to 40 
years ago, it was from this rsotrum that the Chinese 
leader Deng Xiaoping solemnly declared on behalf of 
the Chinese Government that China would never seek 
hegemony in the world. Today, his statement remains 
our unchanging commitment and conviction. China has 
honoured and will continue to honour its promise and 
remain a staunch force for upholding world peace.

China pursues peaceful development and calls 
on all other countries to follow the same path. Since 
the beginning of reform and opening up, China has 
become increasingly interdependent with the global 
economy and integrated into the international system. 
We are committed to working with others to establish 
a new type of international relations, based on win-win 
cooperation, and to seek the peaceful resolution of 
international and regional disputes. With regard to 
China’s disputes with some countries over territorial 
sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, we 
sincerely hope to resolve them in accordance with 
proper procedures, through negotiation and consultation 
with the countries directly involved. Those disputes 
that cannot be resolved now can be shelved for future 
resolution. That is our consistent position and practice. 
On the other hand, we will, whatever the circumstances, 
firmly safeguard China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity and resolutely uphold China’s legitimate and 
lawful rights and interests.



China will remain committed to reform, to opening 
up and to sustainable development. It has been five 
years since the outbreak of the international financial 
crisis. The global economy is back on the right track 
to recovery, but the foundations of the recovery are not 
solid and the speed is not fast enough. The root causes 
of the financial crisis have yet to be removed, and the 
structural problems of developed countries remain 
unresolved. The adjustment of unconventional monetary 
policies from the outside, coupled with other factors, 
have posed new challenges and the risk of financial 
market volatility to emerging market countries.

Where the Chinese economy is heading engages 
both domestic and international attention. In that 
regard, I wish to inform the Assembly that both the 
fundamentals and the overall performance of China’s 
economy are sound, and China’s development prospects 
are bright. The leading indicators of the Chinese 
economy are generally good, and China leads the major 
economies in growth rate.

In pursuit of progress while maintaining stability, 
the Chinese Government has followed a macroeconomic 
policy that addresses both immediate and long-term 
needs and has adopted a series of innovative policy 
measures with a view to promoing steady growth, 
economic structural adjustment and reform. We are 
vigorously pursuing reform, opening up, deepening 
economic structural adjustment and accelerating 
the shift in our growth model. We are implementing 
the basic State policy of resource conservation and 
environmental protection and promoting green, 
circular and low-carbon development to build a sound 
ecological environment and a beautiful China.

With its increasing economic output and its 
changing growth model, China’s economy has entered 
a phase of high-to-medium growth rate. That is 
dictated by the law of economics, and it will ensure 
the sustained and healthy growth of the Chinese 
economy. The Chinese economy is being upgraded, 
and its future growth will deliver major dividends in 
four areas as a result of industrialization, information 
technology application, a new type of urbanization and 
agricultural modernization; reform and innovation; 
structural readjustment; and further opening up. It is 
projected that in the coming five years, China’s imports 
of commodities will exceed $10 trillion, its overseas 
investment will reach $500 billion, and Chinese 
tourists will make over 400 million outbound visits. 
That will give stronger impetus to the world economy 
and bring an increasing number of tangible benefits to 
other countries.

China will firmly promote reform of the global 
governance system with the United Nations at its core. 
The United Nations is a big stage for all countries to 
conduct consultation and cooperation with one another. 
It is also a big family where people of all countries are 
brought together. It is our consistent position that the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations form the cornerstone of current international 
relations and provide safeguards for world peace and 
stability. Respecting national sovereignty and opposing 
interference in internal affairs, safeguarding peace 
and opposing aggression, and promoting equality and 
opposing power politics; those are important principles 
that must be observed. China firmly upholds the role 
and authority of the United Nations, supports the United 
Nations in its renewal and self-improvement efforts, in 
keeping with a changing world, and looks forward to a 
United Nations that plays a larger role in international 
affairs. China is ready to deepen cooperation with 
the United Nations and get more actively involved in 
United Nations activities in various fields.

China is committed to promoting democracy 
in international relations and the trend toward a 
multipolar world. We call for a greater representation 
and voice for developing countries in the global 
governance system and support the Group of 20, the 
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — and other emerging mechanisms that are 
playing a key role in making the international order 
fairer and more equitable. We also call for the reform 
of the international monetary and financial systems and 
want the role of the World Trade Organization as the 
main forum in the area of trade to be maintained. We 
are opposed to trade protectionism and are working to 
make economic globalization more balanced, inclusive 
and beneficial to all. We call on countries to enhance 
macroeconomic policy coordination and be mindful 
of the spillover effects of their respective adjustment 
of economic policies. We call for the strengthening of 
North-South dialogue and South-South cooperation to 
make development benefits more accessible to people 
of all countries.

China will firmly fulfil its international 
responsibilities and obligations. The Chinese nation 
is responsible and ready to play its part. Although it 
remains a developing country facing the daunting task 
of development, China, as the second-largest economy 



and a permanent member of the Security Council, is 
fully aware of its responsibilities and the expectations 
placed on it by the international community. We will be 
fully and more actively engaged in international affairs 
and work closely with other countries to meet complex 
global challenges and tackle the difficult issues facing 
humankind. We will voice China’s views, offer China’s 
wisdom, propose China’s solutions, play China’s due 
role and provide more public goods to the international 
community.

We will vigorously advocate the right vision on 
justice versus special interests, and we will endeavour 
to build a community of common destiny with other 
developing countries. In our exchanges and cooperation 
with other developing countries, we will uphold justice 
and place it above special interests. We will provide 
assistance to other developing countries to the best 
of our ability, so as to enable developing countries to 
realize independent and sustainable development.

We will play a more proactive and constructive role 
in addressing international and regional hotspot issues 
to promote peace and dialogue, defuse conflicts and 
safeguard world peace and stability. We will maintain 
our escort missions and counter-piracy operations in the 
Gulf of Aden and increase our participation in United 
Nations peacekeeping operations so as to contribute 
more to peace and security in Africa and other relevant 
regions.

The turmoil in Syria has lasted for nearly three 
years, causing great suffering and trauma to both the 
Syrian people and Syria’s neighbours. The recent use of 
chemical weapons has met with universal condemnation. 
China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons. 
We hope to see the early adoption of a Security 
Council resolution to support the Organization for the 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in launching 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons, 
and we stand ready to make financial contributions to 
the OPCW for the destruction of chemical weapons in 
Syria and to send experts to work there on the ground.

China calls for an immediate end to hostilities and 
violence in Syria so that the necessary conditions for 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons 
can be created. We call for the early convening of 
the “Geneva II” conference and faster progress on a 
political resolution of the Syrian issue. China seeks 
no gains for itself in Syria. We respect the aspirations 
and choice of the Syrian people. China is following the 
humanitarian situation in Syria with great concern. We 
have provided and will continue to provide assistance 
within our means to the Syrian people, including Syrian 
refugees outside the country.

Recently, China has been providing emergency 
humanitarian aid to Jordan in the amount of ¥15 million, 
and has provided emergency humanitarian aid in cash 
worth ¥24 million to the World Food Programme and the 
World Health Organization for displaced people within 
Syria and Syrian refugees in Lebanon, respectively.

China has been working to promote a peaceful 
settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue through 
dialogue. We have played a constructive role in 
seeking a comprehensive, lasting and appropriate 
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue so as to uphold the 
international non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. The dialogue between Iran 
and the permanent members of the Security Council 
and Germany has created new opportunities. All the 
relevant parties should scale up diplomatic efforts and 
work for substantive progress in the dialogue at an early 
date.

The Palestinian issue is at the core of the Middle 
East conflict. Guided by President Xi Jinping’s four-
point proposal on resolving the Palestinian issue, China 
will continue to work for a comprehensive, just and 
durable solution to the issue.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of all the relevant 
parties, tensions on the Korean peninsula are easing. 
Achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula 
and maintaining long-term peace and stability on the 
peninsula will respond to the common interests of all 
parties concerned. It is China’s consistent position that 
a negotiated solution through dialogue is the right way 
to resolve the nuclear issue on the peninsula, and the 
Six-Party Talks are an effective platform to promote 
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula. This year 
marks the tenth anniversary of the launch of the Six-
Party Talks. We hope that all parties will create 
conducive conditions, build consensus, work towards 
the same goal and resume the talks at an early date.

International development cooperation is at a crucial 
stage, where we must build on past achievements to 
make new progress. China supports the continued and 
full implementation of the Millennium Development 
Goals and the early launch of intergovernmental 
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda. The 
post-2015 development agenda should continue to focus 
on development and poverty elimination, give due 



consideration to national conditions and the various 
stages of development in the different countries, and 
respect their independent choice of development path. 
The agenda should give priority to strengthening global 
development partnerships; adhere to the principles of 
common but differentiated responsibilities, equity and 
respective capabilities; improve follow-up mechanisms; 
step up development financing; promote trade and 
investment liberalization and facilitation; and increase 
official development aid and technical support to 
developing countries.

China welcomes the positive outcomes of the 
United Nations Climate Change Conference held in 
Doha in late 2012. China hopes that the developed 
countries will demonstrate political will and honour 
their commitments by scaling up emissions-reduction 
efforts and providing capital, technology and capacity-
building support to developing countries. The Chinese 
Government takes climate change seriously, and the 
many forceful policy measures it has taken have resulted 
in notable progress. China will continue to play its due 
role in addressing global climate change.

Time flies. We will soon be celebrating the 
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United 
Nations. Born out of the ashes of the Second World War, 
the United Nations embodies the yearning of the peoples 
of all countries for world peace and global development. 
The Chinese dream is a dream of prosperity for the 
country and happiness for the people; it has much in 
common with the dream of people across the world. As 
a responsible Member of the United Nations, China is 
ready to work with all other Member States to faithfully 
adhere to the purposes of the Charter of the United 
Nations, faithfully carry out its historic mission and 
continue to make relentless efforts to advance the noble 
cause of peace and development for humankind.
Exactly 
40 years ago, the two German States joined the United 
Nations. For Germans, that marked our full return to the 
community of nations. Germany supports the United 
Nations as the beating heart of a global order rooted 
in cooperation, peaceful compromise and cooperative 
solutions.

The world has changed dramatically since then. 
New centres of economic and political power are 
emerging. In recent years, Germany has established 
new strategic partnerships with the new global players 
in Asia, Latin America and Africa.

The setting of our meeting today is different 
from the usual one. The United Nations is undergoing 
renovation, which must not be restricted merely to the 
buildings. The United Nations must reflect the world 
as it is, not as it used to be. Only then will it be fit for 
the challenges of our age. A Security Council without 
permanent seats for Africa and Latin America does 



not reflect the realities of today’s world. A Council in 
which the emerging and highly populous region of Asia 
is represented by only one permanent seat does not 
reflect the realities of today’s world. Nor does it reflect 
the reality of tomorrow. Germany, with its partners 
Japan, India and Brazil, is prepared to assume greater 
responsibility. In essence, it is a matter of strengthening 
the United Nations. The authority of the United Nations 
depends on its being representative.


We are seeking reform of the United Nations so that 
its power to build consensus, establish global rules and 
act effectively in response to crises and conflicts can 
be demonstrably strengthened. This is a call not only 
to the United Nations itself, but also to each and every 
individual Member State. Only if we are prepared to 
compromise and are willing to act together will we 
be able to make the United Nations strong. Germany 
remains committed to the United Nations. A strong 
United Nations is in Germany’s interests.

Our cultural differences and diverse traditions are 
not going to vanish in the age of globalization, but it 
is not only the world’s markets that are becoming ever 
more closely interconnected: people’s expectations, 
hopes and ideas are globalizing too. The developments 
in the Arab world have shown us that a country’s 
stability depends primarily not on the stability of 
the Government but on social stability. The best 
guarantees for a society’s internal cohesion are respect 
for individual human rights, the triumph of the rule 
of law over the arbitrary, and broad economic, social 
and political participation on the part of the people. 
Germany is committed to democratic change and to 
respect for human and civil rights, not because we want 
to take the moral high ground but because we have 
learned from experience — from the painful experience 
of our own history.

In Syria the people took to the streets to protest 
against a repressive regime. For more than two years 
now, the regime’s response has been brutal violence, 
which has brought countless deaths, immeasurable 
suffering and terrible destruction on the Syrian 
people and is now jeopardizing stability in the entire 
region. The use of chemical weapons, ascertained by 
the United Nations, is a crime against civilization. Its 
terrible dimensions have consequences that extend far 
beyond Syria. All the facts available to us show that the 
regime is responsible for the use of chemical weapons.

The use of chemical weapons cannot be allowed to 
go unpunished. That we owe not only to the victims in 
Syria, but also to future generations. Those responsible 
for using such weapons must be called to account 
before the International Criminal Court, which must at 
last be able to begin its independent investigations. We 
welcome the agreement reached in the Security Council 
yesterday. The chemical weapons in Syria must be 
completely destroyed in accordance with a firmly 
agreed timetable. Germany is prepared to provide 
financial and technical help to destroy those chemical 
weapons. A world without weapons of mass destruction 
would be a better world.

We must take advantage of the opportunity for a 
political process offered by the agreement on destroying 
the chemical weapons. After all, people in Syria are 
still being killed every day by conventional weapons. 
But there will be no military solution in Syria. Only a 
political solution can bring lasting peace to Syria. That 
would include an immediate ceasefire. I am pleased 
that there is at last a timetable for a possible peace 
conference, details of which still have to be clarified 
even after yesterday’s decision in the Security Council. 
Only with a substantive political process can we counter 
the destabilization of the entire region.

To date, Germany has made available more than 
€420 million to ease the worst of the suffering of the 
Syrian people. But despite all of the outside help, 
millions of Syrians are fleeing. Ever more people are 
at acute risk of starvation, and very soon they will also 
be at the mercy of the cold weather. They do not have 
even the most basic medical care. We must seize every 
opportunity to provide humanitarian access to the 
suffering population as quickly as possible. Amid all 
the devastation and hatred, the United Nations and its 
staff are the face of compassion and, for many Syrians, 
the only hope. I would like expressly to pay tribute to 
their work and commitment.

The tragedy in Syria underlines the extraordinary 
and growing importance attached to disarmament 
aimed at eliminating weapons of mass destruction and 
the strengthening of the non-proliferation regimes. 
Attaining a world free of weapons of mass destruction is 
our generation’s prime task for the future. Disarmament 
is a crucial issue for the future of humankind.



Iran must allay the international community’s 
doubts about the exclusively peaceful nature of its 
nuclear programme. We welcome Iran’s announcement 
this week that it is prepared to do so. The talks with the 
Iranian Government were encouraging. They open up 
a window of opportunity. Now it is imperative that we 
rebuild trust. Germany is ready to conduct negotiations 
in a constructive manner. However, the new words 
coming out of Tehran must be followed by deeds, and 
not at some unspecified time in the future, but right 
now. But, I repeat: a fresh start has been made.

We welcome the great commitment shown by 
President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry 
in giving fresh impetus to the negotiations between 
Israel and the Palestinian leadership. Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas deserve our respect 
for their courage in embarking together on that course. 
They have our full support as they pursue that course 
towards a negotiated agreement. Only a negotiated two-
State solution can reconcile the legitimate interests of 
the two sides.

This week in New York has been an encouraging 
one for the world. I am gratified that it was not military 
solutions but the struggle for political and diplomatic 
solutions that came to the fore. The international 
community must continue to follow such an approach.

Beyond crisis diplomacy, the United Nations is 
the central forum for setting binding objectives for 
the international community. Just a few days ago, the 
General Assembly agreed on the next steps for drawing 
up a new post-2015 sustainable development agenda. 
Germany wants to make a contribution in that regard 
with its experience of combining economic prosperity 
and promoting political participation and sustainable 
management.

Sustainability and combating poverty are not only 
key social issues; they are also key foreign policy issues.

In formulating the future agenda, greater attention 
needs to be paid to human rights protection and good 
governance than has been the case in the past. The 
new agenda must incorporate all three dimensions of 
sustainability and take account of economic, social and 
environmental aspects. With such a comprehensive 
approach we can also strengthen the fragile statehood 
in many countries and eradicate safe havens for 
terrorists. Social stability is the best protection against 
radicalization and extremism.

German foreign policy is a policy for peace. It 
focuses on crisis prevention. We Germans accept our 
responsibility for international peacekeeping. We 
focus on personal and social development. We focus on 
strengthening civil society. We want to contribute to 
a global process in which we — in the North, South, 
East and West learn from each other and develop joint 
solutions by working together. Germany will continue 
in future to use its economic clout and full political 
strength to promote peace and the balancing of interests.

The digital age brings with it entirely new 
opportunities and challenges. We need an Internet in 
which freedom, security and the protection of privacy 
are appropriately reconciled. Just as we have to regulate 
international financial flows in order to prevent global 
crises, so we need binding rules and standards for 
global data flows. That is why Germany has submitted 
to the Human Rights Council an initiative regarding 
the protection of the right to privacy in the digital 
age. Everyone using the Internet should be able to be 
sure that their rights are being respected worldwide 
vis-à-vis private companies as well as vis-à-vis States. 
Not everything that is technically possible must be 
allowed to happen, nor is everything technically 
possible legitimate.

Germany remains firmly anchored in Europe. 
Europe is a community of shared cultures, bound 
together by a common destiny. Close union among 
the nations of Europe is and will remain the response 
to our history and to our future in a world of change. 
German foreign policy is firmly embedded in European 
foreign policy. Europe will continue to use its clout, 
its influence and its resources to uphold peace and 
justice, to encourage development and cooperation 
and to promote climate protection and disarmament 
throughout the world.

That is Germany’s twin obligation: a strong united 
Europe in the world and a strong, effective United 
Nations for the world.
It is an 
honour for the United Nations to act everywhere where 
the freedom of peoples is denied. It is an honour for 
the United Nations to act where fundamental rights are 
compromised. It is an honour for the United Nations to 
intervene where extremism threatens the security of the 
world. It is an honour for the United Nations to act on 
behalf of peace.

In Syria, the situation is becoming urgent because 
120,000 people have died over the past two and a half 
years — 90,000 in the past year alone. One-fourth of 
the population is displaced. Millions of Syrians have 
become refugees and the country has been destroyed. 
The worst happened on 21 August in Damascus, 
when chemical weapons were used against civilians, 
including women and children. United Nations 
inspectors, sent officially on behalf of the Organization 
have, established unequivocally and with certainty the 
use of these weapons. 

In the face of this horrifying crime, France sought a 
strong reaction to punish this violation of international 
law and to dissuade Bashir Al-Assad’s regime from 
committing new massacres. This pressure exerted by 
my country, along with others, in particular the United 
States, has seen some initial results. Negotiations are 
under way as we speak to ensure the verification and 
destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons. 

However, if these negotiations are to attain their 
ultimate end, I have set out three requirements. The 
first is that any text must clearly make it possible for 
the Security Council to become seized of this issue of 



chemical weapons at any given moment. The second 
requirement is that the draft resolution we are preparing 
provides for coercive measures under Chapter VII in 
the event that the Syrian regime fails to respect its 
commitments. Since the agreement signed between the 
United States and Russia has the same provision, that is 
all the more reason to include it in the draft resolution. 
The third requirement is that those who have committed 
these crimes must be held accountable before justice. 

But we cannot limit ourselves to this draft 
resolution, which must be adopted soon. We must 
end this war, the deadliest since the beginning of the 
century. The solution is political. Too much time has 
been squandered, and I will not refer again to the 
blocking of action in the Security Council. During this 
period, not only has the regime increased its violence, 
but terrorist groups have also taken advantage of the 
international community’s inertia, to the detriment of 
the democratic forces found within the Syrian National 
Coalition. 

This is why the “Geneva II” conference must be 
held as soon as possible. For France, however, Geneva 
II is not just a talk shop. It must be a conference to 
define the objective for putting in place a transitional 
Government with full executive powers, mandated to 
re-establish civil peace, to protect all communities and 
to organize elections in due time. I am sometimes asked 
about participants in this conference. My response is 
simple. All countries — and I repeat, all countries — that 
accept the goal of installing a transitional Government 
and clearly acknowledge their commitment to a political 
solution will be welcome at the conference. 

Of equal urgency is the humanitarian situation. In 
Syria, the displaced are in the millions, and there are 
now more than 1.5 million refugees in Turkey, Jordan 
and Lebanon. The prolongation of the crisis poses 
a direct threat to the unity and security of Lebanon, 
nearly 20 per cent of whose population is now of Syrian 
origin. 

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon for having organized the first meeting of the 
International Support Group for Lebanon. France is 
committed to that country because we know how much 
it has suffered in recent years from disturbances in the 
Middle East and how much it needs to be supported 
today in its efforts to host refugees.

There are serious concerns in that part of the 
Middle East, but there are also glimmers of hope. 
The first is the resumption of negotiations between 
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Only that will enable 
peace to be achieved. It requires the coexistence of 
two States, both with safe and recognized borders. 
We must do everything to ensure that the opportunity 
that now exists for Israelis, Palestinians and the entire 
region is seized to finally bring an end to a conflict that 
whose regional and international repercussions are well 
known to us all. Negotiating peace between Israel and 
Palestine would be an historic act.

The second glimmer of hope is found in the 
statements of the new Iranian President, which reflect 
an evolution. I will not exaggerate them, but the question 
now is to know whether those words will be translated 
into actions, in particular concerning the nuclear 
issue. For the past 10 years, our discussions have not 
progressed, leading the the international community 
to adopt increasingly severe sanctions. The situation 
is dangerous, as we all know. Therefore, France 
expects from Iran concrete gestures reflecting that 
country’s renunciation its military nuclear programme, 
although it clearly retains the right to pursue its civilian 
programme. That is why I have chosen to engage in 
direct and open dialogue with President Rouhani. I will 
also say from this rostrum that while I am in favour of 
dialogue, I remain firm on the serious issue of nuclear 
proliferation.

The Middle East is not the only region of the 
world that is of concern to us. Africa has fallen prey to 
terrorism, and the barbaric attack in Nairobi confirms 
that to us once again, tragically. Victories are possible 
against terrorism. In Mali, with the clear mandate of 
the Security Council, African and French forces, with 
the support of Europe, intervened in response to the 
appeal of the authorities in Bamako and brought an end 
to a broad terrorist offensive. Today we see the results. 
Mali has regained its territorial integrity. It has ensured 
the security of its population, and it has even been able 
to hold, on the scheduled date, a presidential election 
that has been recognized as incontestable. I welcome 
the new President of Mali, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar .eita. 
His election is evidence of a great victory for West 
Africa against terrorism.

However, the threat continues to weigh heavily on 
the Sahel and in Libya, where weapons are uniquitous 
and where terrorist groups have found refuge. We must 
assist the Libyan authorities to ensure the security 
of their territory and of their population. France is 
prepared to do so.



I would like to sound an alarm, as I did last year 
with respect to Mali. The warning here is about the 
Central African Republic — a small country that has 
been ravaged by coups and conflicts for years. Today, 
chaos has taken root and civilians are yet again its 
victims. We must bring an end to the abuse, which is 
also sectarian in nature. That is why I would like the 
Security Council to issue a mandate and provide the 
logistical and financial means to create an African 
force, with its first mission to re-establish stability in 
the Central African Republic.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, women 
and children are victims of violence every day in the 
Kivu region. Again, it is essential that we continue 
to strengthen the United Nations Organization 
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, to implement the Addis Ababa agreement, and 
to reject all external interference.

We must learn from the experience of recent years. 
Everywhere chaos reigns, terrorism takes root and 
grows. That is the case in Somalia, and the horrific 
attack against Kenya reminds us that Al-Shaabab-
affiliated groups, while they have been defeated, have 
not yet been eradicated. That is why the international 
community must help African States to protect 
themselves.

France will convene, late this year, a meeting on 
peace and security in Africa. France has invited all 
African countries; Europe will be represented, as will 
the United Nations. The purpose of the meeting is to 
enable the establishment, training and equipping of 
African armies to ensure the security of the continent 
and combat all traffickers, particularly drug traffickers, 
and piracy. Africans themselves must ensure their 
security, but we cannot leave them to face the terrorist 
threat alone. 

The best weapons we have are our development 
policies, because poverty, unemployment and inequality 
provide fertile soil for violence and insecurity. Again, 
France calls for the mobilization of the international 
community through new funds that we must create to 
finance the necessary infrastructures and to enable 
access to essential public services.

France is fighting, along with Europe, for the 
introduction of innovative financing. My country’s tax 
on airline tickets, which helps finance the International 
Drug Purchase Facility (UNITAID), has brought in 
more than €1 billion since 2006. My country has decided 
to increase that tax by a further 10 per cent to enhance 
our fight against the great pandemics: HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria. With Europe, France has 
also established a tax on financial transactions. I have 
decided to allocate 10 per cent of that income towards 
such development-related actions as access to water 
and renewable energy, because with development 
assistance we can help the poorest countries to ensure 
their future, and thereby their security, and to respond 
to global warming, which concerns us all.

France is available to host the 2015 climate 
conference. This matter, too, respresents a threat to 
our own security, because one report after another 
states that if we do nothing, by the end of this century 
the temperature of the planet will have increased by 
three or four degrees Centigrade, with the well-known 
consequences of flooding in some places, droughts in 
others. Those direct threats would in turn endanger 
peace throughout the world. We must therefore seek an 
agreement at the 2015 climate conference.

The foundations of the commitment are well known. 
The agreement must be equitable. Each country must do 
its part. The developed countries obviously must make 
he greatest effort. Emerging countries must protect their 
development, but they must also understand that they 
are directly threatened by global warming. The least 
developed countries, those that are the most fragile and 
vulnerable, must be aided in the transition. That is the 
purpose of the fund that was created in Durbin. The 
agreement must also be binding; it cannot simply be a 
reiteration of principles. It cannot simply be wording in 
resolutions that are not translated into concrete actions. 
If there is no assessment and there are no sanctions, 
there will be no progress and global temperature will 
inexorably rise.

My message is simple. In any domain, whether 
international security, nuclear proliferation, 
development or climate change, the worst threat is 
inaction, the worst decision is to take no decision, 
and the worst danger is to not see any. And the United 
Nations bears the responsibility to act. Each time the 
Organization appears powerless, peace is the first 
victim. That is why I am proposing that the permanent 
members of the Security Council define a code of 
conduct such that in cases of mass crimes, they may 
collectively decide to renounce the right of veto.

It is also my hope to see the Secretary-General’s 
powers of inquiry strengthened to enable the United 
Nations to ensure — as it has done in Syria — that 



the truth is established in all instances, carry out 
investigations and act on the results. The Assembly has 
the sovereign right to take such a decision. Our credibility 
depends upon our capacity to intervene quickly and 
effectively in ensuring respect for international law, 
punishing violations and promoting development to 
preserve future generations. Our legitimacy flows 
from the Charter of the United Nations. We must be 
worthy of it. Within that framework, France will always 
assume its responsibilities in all domains.
In my lifetime, the 
world has been sliced up and labelled in many different 
ways: East and West; communism and capitalism; 
North and South; Christian and Muslim; developed 
and developing, and so on. But as we meet today, the 
most important fault line is not one of geography, or 
ideology, or religion, or wealth; it is the divide between 
those societies which are open and those which are 
closed. Open societies choose democracy and freedom 
at home, and engagement and responsibility abroad. 
Closed societies suppress the liberty of their citizens, 
draw a veil across their actions and withdraw from our 
shared international life.

We must be honest — the forces of insularity and 
isolationism have gained momentum in recent years. 
Discrediting democracy feels easier. Authoritarian 
States point enthusiastically at the ongoing fallout of 
the 2008 financial crisis — proof, they say, of a broken 



Western model. They feel vindicated; their citizens 
may be less free, but their growth rates outstrip those 
in the West. At the same time, in many of the States 
affected by the financial crash, austerity has given rise 
to a period of introspection. The impulse is to turn 
inwards rather than face outwards.

And so a crisis of confidence has threatened to take 
hold in parts of the developed world. It is not surprising 
to hear some argue that liberal democracy has had 
its day and that our multilateral system is becoming 
obsolete. But those who make these claims are wrong. 
They are drawing the wrong conclusions from recent 
events.

The real lesson of the past five years has been 
the remarkable resilience of open societies and the 
acute need for international cooperation in today’s 
world. Liberal democracies in Europe and across the 
Atlantic have weathered profound economic difficulty. 
The eurozone did not fall over, as many said it would. 
By working together, disaster was averted and the 
sovereign debt crisis is being managed.

In Europe we have maintained stability at a time of 
great upheaval because, for the most part, our citizens 
have expressed their frustration peacefully and through 
the ballot box. And where there has been unrest, mature 
democracies have managed it with relative success. And 
so, just as the events of recent years have revealed the 
weaknesses of some Western economies, they have also 
underscored the great strength of open societies — the 
ability to evolve and adapt. Open societies do not fear 
change, and in the twenty-first century such openness 
to reform is critical to lasting stability and success.

Democracy, free speech, participation, equality 
before the law, the right to peaceful protest, the right 
to be educated, the chance to work — these are not 
Western values; they are the political and economic 
freedoms sought by citizens everywhere, and they 
are gaining force in every country around the globe. 
Governments that ignore them are fighting a losing 
battle. Democracy did not fail in Egypt; a single set of 
elections failed. Egypt now needs to return to the path 
of inclusive democracy. The democratic urge remains 
as strong among the people as it was when they first 
rejoiced in Tahrir Square.

In other parts of the region, while the picture is 
mixed, important progress has been made. In Libya, the 
General National Congress is working towards elections 
in early 2014. Morocco has a new Constitution and, for 
the first time, a Prime Minister elected by Parliament. 
Although difficult challenges remain, Yemen has chosen 
reconciliation, dialogue and democracy over violence. 
Tunisia is also focused on building a new democracy 
and economic growth, with progress towards a new 
Constitution, and further elections expected in 2014.

Yes, these nations will undergo more turbulence. 
That is certain. Well-functioning democracy cannot 
emerge overnight, be exported from the West or 
dropped on a country from 8,000 feet — that much we 
have learnt from the failures of the past. Developing 
the culture and institutions needed — the rule of law, 
plural politics, human rights — is a painstaking process 
for every country involved, and it requires strategic 
patience from the rest of the world.

But while the road to democracy is difficult, the 
direction of travel is set. Everywhere we look, people 
are standing together against discrimination and for 
equality; against oppression and for liberty. A wave 
of openness has emerged, transcending borders and 
cultures. Men and women of every creed, faith and 
colour are calling for fair opportunities and demanding 
to be heard.

The United Kingdom is clear. We are on the side of 
all those who support political freedom and economic 
empowerment. There will be no pulling up of the 
drawbridge from us; no heading into retreat. We will 
resist any impulse to turn our back on the world.

In North Africa and the Middle East, we are 
helping States put in place the building blocks for their 
democracies. Whether by training Libyan officials to 
supervise fair elections, or supporting a free media by 
training journalists in Morocco, these are the nuts and 
bolts of successful democratic transition.

We are also supporting these countries’ economies 
through our stewardship of the Group of Eight 
Deauville Partnership this year, leading efforts to boost 
trade and investment in the region, helping small- and 
medium-sized enterprises and, crucially, promoting 
greater participation by women. And we have kept the 
political spotlight on the need to return assets stolen by 
the former regimes in those countries.

In Syria, our priority is to help bring about a 
political settlement. The foundations for a settlement 
were agreed in Geneva last year — establishing, on 
the basis of mutual consent, a transitional governing 
body with full executive powers. We are in close touch 
with our partners about convening a second Geneva 



conference as soon as possible. No meaningful political 
solution can occur without the moderate Syrian 
opposition. We recognize the Syrian National Coalition 
as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people, 
and we recognize their commitments to the Geneva 
process and to building a secular, democratic and 
pluralist Syria that ensures equal rights for all.

On the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, on 
21 August the Al-Assad regime committed a war 
crime under international humanitarian law, launching 
a large-scale chemical-weapon attack on its own 
people — the first attack on this scale for 25 years and 
88 years after such weapons were universally banned. 
As President Obama said here on Tuesday (see A/68/
PV.5), it is an insult to human reason to suggest that 
the regime was not responsible for that war crime. 
The international community must react, and react 
in unison. That is why we hope to adopt later today a 
Security Council resolution establishing binding legal 
obligations on the Syrian regime for the removal and 
destruction of Syria’s vast chemical-weapons arsenal.

On Wednesday, I announced that the United Kingdom 
would provide a further $160 million of humanitarian 
support for the Syrian people, bringing total United 
Kingdom funding to $800 million — £500 million — our 
biggest-ever response to a humanitarian crisis, much of 
which is aimed at helping the many children caught up 
in this tragic conflict.

The world has raised close to $1 billion of 
humanitarian support this month, and I hope that others 
will step up and contribute. Most importantly, I call on 
all parties inside Syria to allow humanitarian agencies 
to operate without hindrance or the threat of violence. 
Unless that urgent humanitarian access is given, no 
amount of money can alleviate the scale of the Syrian 
people’s suffering.

I welcome President Rouhani’s comments on 
Tuesday that he wants a constructive engagement 
between Iran and the rest of the world and that he 
wants to engage immediately in time-bound talks on 
the nuclear issue. Those are encouraging words which I 
very much hope are matched with genuine action. I am 
pleased that negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme 
will restart in October. If Iran’s words are followed by 
concrete steps, then there is a real opportunity to make 
progress in resolving the serious international concerns 
about Iran’s nuclear programme. We also look to a more 
constructive approach from Iran in helping resolve the 
crisis in Syria, and we have made clear to Iran that we are 
ready, as the United Kingdom Government, to improve 
our relationship on a step-by-step and reciprocal basis.

One thing that would fundamentally transform the 
Middle East is a conclusive two-State agreement to end 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — an agreement based 
on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps that leads 
to a sovereign and viable Palestinian State living in 
peace alongside a safe and secure Israel, a universally 
recognized Palestine alongside a universally recognized 
Israel.

I commend the dedicated efforts of Secretary 
Kerry and the courageous leadership of Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas, which have enabled 
direct peace talks to resume. I sincerely hope that both 
parties will make every effort to keep talks going, 
including a halt in the building of new settlements. The 
international community must fully support the parties 
as they make the difficult decisions that are necessary 
for achieving a lasting peace. Britain stands ready to 
play its part.

As we wind up our military operations in 
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom continues to work 
with the Afghan Government to ensure a successful 
transition. The Afghan National Security Forces are now 
leading on security and continue to grow in confidence 
and capability. That is a significant achievement. In the 
United Kingdom, we recognize the serious challenges 
still ahead for Afghanistan, but we strongly believe that 
there is room for optimism about the country’s long-
term future. This is a crucial time for Afghan men, 
women and children, as they prepare for elections in 
2014, which must be credible, transparent and inclusive.

Poverty is as great a threat to stability and freedom 
as are conflict and oppression. Thus, despite the strain 
on our finances, the United Kingdom has met its target 
to spend 0.7 per cent of its gross national income on 
development assistance. We are the only country in 
the Group of 20 (G-20) to have done so. Following the 
global economic crisis, we said we would not balance 
our books on the backs of the world’s poorest and we 
have held true to our word.

On Monday, we announced that we would provide 
$1.6 billion to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria. That is 10 per cent of the 
Fund’s replenishment, so long as others join.

Women and girls remain at the heart of our 
development agenda. They are the key to economic 
growth, so investing in girls’ education is the single 



most effective thing we can do to break the cycle of 
poverty. We must end gender inequality, which is the 
root of violence against women. That ambition is at 
the heart of the United Kingdom’s initiative to end 
sexual violence in conflict, and I would encourage all 
States that have yet to do so to endorse the Declaration 
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. 
Over 115 States are already committed; we are sending 
a message to the victims of those devastating crimes 
that they are not alone and that their attackers will be 
punished.

We have also used our presidency of the Group 
of Eight (G-8) to focus on three areas where we can 
support global prosperity — boosting trade, ensuring 
better transparency to help developing nations benefit 
from resources that are rightfully theirs, and cracking 
down on tax evasion and closing tax loopholes. That 
was just the start of our work on that agenda, and we 
are pleased that the United Kingdom’s trade, tax and 
transparency priorities have been fully reflected in 
agreements reached by the G-20, including extending 
the commitment to resist protectionist measures by 
a further two years to the end of 2016, so that trade 
remains as free and open as possible.

Whether it be in the G-8, the G-20, the European 
Union, NATO or the Commonwealth, or as one of the 
five permanent members of the Security Council, the 
United Kingdom will continue to be an active and 
engaged player in the world. The biggest problems we 
face are problems we share.

Take climate change, for example — the report issued 
this morning by the United Nations Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change confirms that sea levels are 
already rising and that ice is melting faster than we had 
expected. The report is an authoritative rebuke to all 
those who persist in claiming that man-made climate 
change does not exist. The United Kingdom will 
continue to cut our emissions and give over $6 billion 
to assist developing countries to do the same and adapt 
to environmental changes.

But if we are to halt the devastating effects of 
climate change, we must listen to the science, act now 
and act together. We thus welcome the Secretary-
General’s announcement of a leaders’ summit next year 
as a key step towards all nations agreeing to a deal in 
2015 to take action to avert the crisis.

We are all affected by the scourge of terrorism. 
Whether it is a soldier brutally murdered on a quiet 
London street or innocent shoppers gunned down in a 
busy Nairobi mall, we are all vulnerable. Following the 
recent horrific events in Nairobi, the United Kingdom 
is working closely with the Governments of Kenya, 
Somalia and countries across the region to tackle the 
issue. Our global response to terrorism must be robust, 
intelligent and cover all those areas where our work 
together can make a genuine difference. Alone we can 
take small steps forward, but together we can take giant 
leaps.

That much was clear earlier this year when we 
signed the world’s first Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 
67/234 B) to better regulate the global sale of weapons. 
The United Kingdom is proud of the role we played in 
delivering it, and we urge any countries that have not 
signed it to do so. The Treaty reminds us that, with 
enough political will, we can come together and do the 
previously unthinkable, and that should embolden us to 
do still more.

The United Nations has many virtues, but it also has 
serious shortcomings that must be faced. The United 
Nations has no greater friend than the United Kingdom, 
but it does not adequately reflect the world we live in 
today. The Security Council must be reformed. Unless 
more room is made at the top table, it will fast become 
an anachronism, a relic of a different time. That is why 
the United Kingdom continues to support permanent 
seats for Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and 
permanent African representation, too. We call on all 
States to play their part in this forum, and in our other 
international institutions, just as we will play ours.

We are at our best when we engage constructively 
with one another and when we are ambitious in 
pursuing our shared goals. That is as important for 
those countries whose economies and influence have 
grown and transformed over more recent years as it 
is for the old, established Powers. Greater influence 
means greater responsibility. The world is a better place 
because Brazil is taking a lead in tackling deforestation, 
because Mexico has enshrined climate-change targets 
into law, because the Republic of Korea is leading the 
way on nuclear security.

But there is much more to do; there are many more 
areas where we need to take the lead. A global trade deal 
to cut bureaucracy at borders — the subject of a World 
Trade Organization meeting that will take place in 
Bali in early December — would mean a trillion-dollar 
boost for the global economy.



In the next two years, the United Kingdom wants 
to do as much as it can to drive progress on the United 
Nations Millennium Development Goals, and we are 
also working in the United Nations and with civil 
society to set out a post-2015 agenda that is even 
more ambitious. There can be no greater goal than to 
eradicate extreme poverty, leaving no one behind.

On these and all other issues facing our nations, we 
are quite simply stronger together than we are apart. 
Now more than ever, we must fend off the forces of 
insularity and isolationism, stand up for our values and 
look out to the world. That is what the United Kingdom 
will do. We stand ready to work with all others who will 
do the same.
Let me first of all congratulate 
you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We 
wish you every success and assure you of our fullest 
cooperation.

At a time when the world is facing multiple 
challenges, there is renewed attention to the role of 
the United Nations in advancing international peace, 
security and prosperity. However, never has scepticism 
about the capacity of the United Nations to do so been 
higher, or the external environment less propitious for 
multilateralism.

The nearly seven decades of work of the United 
Nations hold one simple lesson: that we are most 
successful when we adhere to the letter and spirit of 
the United Nations Charter, basing our decisions on the 
widest possible consensus and balancing equitably the 
needs and responsibilities of nations at different stages 
and levels of development.

In those seven decades, the world has changed in 
fundamental ways. Asia and Africa are independent 
and resurgent. Countries are now not only more 
interdependent, but also face new, increasingly complex 
challenges. For multilateralism to remain relevant and 
effective in the future, multilateral institutions need to 
be reformed urgently. The place to begin is right here.

The Security Council must be reformed and 
restructured to reflect current political realities. 
More developing countries should be included as both 
permanent and non-permanent members.

The multilateral financial institutions should also 
enable an enhanced voice for developing countries in 
their decision-making structures. Multilateral efforts 
must guide our quest for peace and security, wherever 
they are threatened, and the centrality and contribution 
of the United Nations system to development must be 
restored.

Those objectives require the building of a new 
international consensus suited to our time and rooted 
in today’s realities. It is only such a plan of action that 
will enable the United Nations to meet the twin tests of 
legitimacy, and effectiveness and efficiency.

We commend your choice of the theme of this 
session. Setting the stage for the post-2015 development 
agenda is especially important as we deal with a 
lingering global economic slowdown and continuing 
volatility in financial markets. These have imposed 
disproportionately heavy costs on developing countries 
and the vulnerable groups within them.

Growth and inclusive development are naturally 
important for all our countries. They require a 
supportive international economic environment, 
enhanced investment flows, including from multilateral 
development banks, the transfer of technology, and an 
open multilateral trading regime.

But the problems of the more than 1 billion people 
living in abject poverty around the world need to be 
attacked more directly. Poverty remains a major 
political and economic challenge, and its eradication 
requires special attention and a new collective thrust. 
That priority should anchor the post-2015 development 
agenda, which should be shaped by the Member States 
so that it enjoys the broadest possible support and 
acceptance.

Issues of peace, security, human rights and 
governance are important and need to be addressed. But 
we will fall short of realizing an ambitious post-2015 
development agenda if we focus merely on governance 
issues at the cost of robust economic growth. This 
agenda should not be merely about reprioritizing 
domestic spending, but also about fostering genuine 
international partnerships between developing and 
developed countries to bring about change. All of us 
need the policy space necessary to set our own domestic 
priorities. 

No one knows the condition of developing countries 
better than the developing countries themselves. It is 
therefore important that the United Nations set clear and 
concise goals and provide practical and well-defined 
means of implementation, including an adequate flow 
of resources and the transfer of technology, taking the 
views of developing countries fully into account.



A meaningful post-2015 agenda must place equally 
high priority on food and nutrition, health, education, 
infrastructure, water, sanitation, energy and combating 
discrimination against women. Especially critical is 
women’s equal access to economic opportunities and 
ensuring that they do not become victims of violence or 
the targets of prejudice.

In India, we have sought to promote inclusive 
development in multiple ways. Legislation has broadened 
access to education and secured rural livelihoods. We 
are now building the world’s largest programme for 
food security. Digital technology is being harnessed to 
improve the delivery of public services and benefits to 
the people.

India is proud of its partnerships with developing 
countries. Using modest resources, we have built strong 
ties with Africa and the least developed countries. We 
are committed to building 100 institutions in Africa 
and have offered capacity-building support, including 
thousands of scholarships, and made available over 
$9.5 billion of concessional assistance. India and Africa 
are engaging through the India-Africa Forum Summit 
process. We also look forward to participating actively 
in the third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, to be held in Samoa in 2014, and to 
contributing to its outcome.

Climate change is one of the defining challenges of 
our times. We must summon the political will necessary 
to craft a robust global response to climate change on 
the basis of equity and the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities.

We are deeply concerned about the future of West 
Asia, a region with which India shares deep bonds of 
history and one that is critical for our energy security 
as well as the livelihoods of the nearly 7 million 
Indians who work and live in the region. Not only is 
the increasingly lethal conflict in Syria a tragedy for 
the people of Syria, but it also threatens stability and 
security in the region and beyond. It has been made worse 
by the use of chemical weapons. The use of chemical 
weapons, whosoever may have deployed them, must 
be condemned in the strongest possible terms. India 
strongly supports the elimination of chemical-weapons 
material and equipment in Syria.There is no military 
solution to that conflict. We must intensify efforts to 
end the conflict and seek a political settlement. It is 
essential that the “Geneva II” conference be convened 
at the earliest opportunity.

We are encouraged that direct talks have resumed 
between Israel and Palestine. India supports the early 
realization of a sovereign, independent, viable and 
united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its 
capital, living within secure and recognized borders, 
side by side and at peace with Israel. We also remain 
committed to the Palestinian quest for full membership 
in the United Nations.

In our own region, Afghanistan prepares for a 
historic political, security and economic transition. 
The international community must support the people 
of Afghanistan through this transition and beyond in 
combating terrorism, preserving the progress of the 
past decade and creating a stable, united and prosperous 
Afghanistan.

Terrorism remains a grave threat to security and 
stability everywhere and exacts a heavy toll of innocent 
lives around the world. From Africa to Asia, we have 
seen several manifestations of this menace in the last 
few days alone. State-sponsored, cross-border terrorism 
is of particular concern to India, also on account of 
the fact that the epicentre of terrorism in our region is 
located in our neighbourhood, in Pakistan.

From this rostrum yesterday, Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif of Pakistan spoke of making a new beginning 
(see A/68/PV.15). I reciprocate his sentiments and 
am looking forward to meeting him tomorrow. India 
is sincerely committed to resolving all issues with 
Pakistan, including the issue of Jammu and Kashmir, 
through bilateral dialogue on the basis of the Simla 
Agreement. However, for progress to be made, it is 
imperative that the territory of Pakistan and the areas 
under its control not be utilized for aiding and abetting 
terrorism directed against India. It is equally important 
that the terrorist machinery that draws its sustenance 
from Pakistan be shut down. There must be a clear 
understanding of the fact that Jammu and Kashmir is 
an integral part of India and that there can never, ever, 
be a compromise with the unity and territorial integrity 
of India.

We need to renew our commitment, especially 
here at the United Nations, to concerted, cohesive and 
continuing global action against terrorism. There can 
be no tolerance for States sheltering, arming, training or 
financing terrorists. Nor can States absolve themselves 
of the responsibility to prevent their territories from 
being used to launch acts of terrorism.



The increasingly complex challenges to 
international peace and security require a new 
international consensus to be built, whether it is in the 
field of cybersecurity, non-proliferation or terrorism. 
This year, 25 years after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
put forward a comprehensive action plan for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world order, we must 
strengthen efforts against nuclear proliferation and 
pursue time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory, 
phased and verifiable nuclear disarmament. We must 
also guard against terrorists and non-State actors 
gaining access to sensitive materials and technologies.

Two years from now, the United Nations will be 
70 years old. Every new State born during that period 
of 70 years has taken its place in the Assembly not just 
with pride but also with hope. The year 2015 will be 
a time to celebrate our successes and ensure that the 
United Nations is ready for this century, by completing 
much-needed reforms of the Organization and its 
Security Council, developing an ambitious and balanced 
post-2015 development agenda and demonstrating our 
capacity to cooperate effectively for durable peace and 
security in the world we live in.
I feel deeply honoured and 
privileged to stand here before the General Assembly 
today representing the citizens of the State of Israel. 
We are an ancient people. We date back nearly 4,000 
years to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We have journeyed 
through time. We have overcome the greatest of 
adversities. And we re-established our sovereign State 
in our ancestral homeland, the land of Israel. The Jewish 
people’s odyssey through time has taught us two things: 
never give up hope and always remain vigilant. Hope 
charts the future, vigilance protects it.

Today our hope for the future is challenged by a 
nuclear-armed Iran that seeks our destruction. But I 
want members to know that that was not always the case. 
Some 2,500 years ago, the great Persian King Cyrus 
ended the Babylonian exile of the Jewish people. He 
issued a famous edict in which he proclaimed the right 
of the Jews to return to the land of Israel and rebuild the 
Jewish Temple in Jerusalem. That is a Persian decree, 
and thus began a historic friendship between the Jews 
and the Persians that lasted until modern times.

But, in 1979, a radical regime in Tehran tried to 
stamp out that friendship. As it was busy crushing 
the Iranian people’s hopes for democracy, it also led 
wild chants of “Death to the Jews!” Since that time, 
presidents of Iran have come and gone. Some presidents 
were considered moderates, others hard-liners. But 
they have all served that same unforgiving creed, that 
same unforgiving regime — that creed that is espoused 
and enforced by the real power in Iran, the dictator 
known in Iran as the Supreme Leader, first Ayatollah 
Khomeini and now Ayatollah Khamenei.

President Rouhani, like the presidents who came 
before him, is a loyal servant of the regime. He was 
one of only six candidates the regime permitted to run 
for office. Nearly 700 other candidates were rejected. 
What made him acceptable? Rouhani headed Iran’s 
Supreme National Security Council from 1989 through 
2003. During that time, Iran’s henchmen gunned 
down opposition leaders in a Berlin restaurant. They 
murdered 85 people at the Jewish community centre 
in Buenos Aires. They killed 19 American soldiers by 
blowing up the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia. Are we 
to believe that Rouhani, the national security adviser 
of Iran at the time, knew nothing about those attacks? 
Of course he did — just as 30 years ago Iran’s security 
chiefs knew about the bombings in Beirut that killed 
241 American marines and 58 French paratroopers.

Rouhani was also Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator 
between 2003 and 2005. He masterminded the strategy 
that enabled Iran to advance its nuclear-weapons 
programme behind a smokescreen of diplomatic 
engagement and very soothing rhetoric. I know that 
Rouhani does not sound like Ahmadinejad. But when it 
comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme, the only 
difference between them is this: Ahmadinejad was a 
wolf in wolf’s clothing, Rouhani is a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing — a wolf who thinks he can pull the wool over 
the eyes of the international community.

Like everyone else, I wish we could believe 
Rouhani’s words, but we must focus on Iran’s actions. 
And it is the brazen contrast — that extraordinary 
contradiction between Rouhani’s words and Iran’s 
actions — that is so startling. Rouhani stood at this very 
rostrum last week and praised Iranian democracy (see 
A/68/PV.6). Iranian democracy, he said. But the regime 
that he represents executes political dissidents by the 
hundreds and jails them by the thousands. Rouhani 
spoke of “the human tragedy in Syria”. Yet Iran directly 
participates in Al-Assad’s murder and massacre of tens 
of thousands of innocent men, women and children in 
Syria, and that regime is propping up a Syrian regime 
that just used chemical weapons against its own people. 
Rouhani condemned the “violent scourge” of terrorism. 
Yet in the past three years alone Iran has ordered, 
planned or perpetrated terrorist attacks in 25 cities 
on five continents. Rouhani denounced “attempts to 
change the regional balance through proxies”. Yet Iran 
is actively destabilizing Lebanon, Yemen, Bahrain and 
many other Middle Eastern countries. Rouhani promises 
“constructive engagement with other countries”. Yet 
two years ago, Iranian agents tried to assassinate Saudi 
Arabia’s Ambassador in Washington, D.C. Just three 
weeks ago, an Iranian agent was arrested while trying 
to collect information for possible attacks against the 
American Embassy in Tel Aviv. Some constructive 
engagement!

I wish I could be moved by Rouhani’s invitation 
to join his “WAVE” — a world against violence and 
extremism. Yet the only waves Iran has generated in the 
past 30 years are waves of violence and terrorism that 
it has unleashed on the region and across the world. I 
wish I could believe Rouhani, but I do not because facts 
are stubborn things. The facts are that Iran’s savage 



record flatly contradicts Rouhani’s soothing rhetoric. 
Last Friday, Rouhani assured us that in pursuit of its 
nuclear programme, Iran had “never chosen deceit and 
secrecy.” Never chosen deceit and secrecy?

In 2002, Iran was caught red-handed secretly 
building an underground centrifuge facility at Natanz. 
In 2009, Iran was again caught red-handed secretly 
building a huge underground nuclear facility for 
uranium enrichment in a mountain near Qom. Rouhani 
tells us not to worry. He assures us that all that is not 
intended for nuclear weapons. Does any here believe 
that? If so, here are a few questions to ask.

Why would a country that claims to only want 
peaceful nuclear energy build hidden underground 
enrichment facilities? Why would a country with vast 
natural energy reserves invest billions in developing 
nuclear energy? Why would a country intent on merely 
having civilian nuclear programmes continue to defy 
multiple Security Council resolutions and incur the costs 
of crippling sanctions on its economy? And why would 
a country with a peaceful nuclear programme develop 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) whose sole 
purpose is to deliver nuclear warheads? You do not build 
ICBMs to carry TNT thousands of miles away. You 
build them for one purpose: to carry nuclear warheads. 
Iran is now building ICBMs that the United States says 
could reach this city in three or four years.

Why would they do all that? The answer is simple. 
Iran is not building a peaceful nuclear programme. 
Iran is developing nuclear weapons. Last year alone, 
Iran enriched three tons of uranium to 3.5 per cent, 
doubled its stockpile of 20 per cent-enriched uranium 
and added thousands of new centrifuges, including 
advanced centrifuges. It also continued work on the 
heavy-water reactor in Arak in order to have another 
route to the bomb — a plutonium path. Since Rouhani’s 
election — and I stress this — that vast and feverish 
effort has continued unabated.

Underground nuclear facilities? Heavy water 
reactors? Advanced centrifuges? ICBMs? It is not that it 
is hard to find evidence that Iran has a nuclear-weapons 
programme; it is hard to find evidence that Iran does not 
have a nuclear-weapons programme. Last year, when 
I spoke here at the United Nations (see A/67/PV.12), I 
drew a red line. Iran has been very careful not to cross 
that line. But Iran is positioning itself to race across that 
line in future, at a time of its choosing. Iran wants to 
be in a position to rush forward to build nuclear bombs 
before the international community can detect it, much 
less prevent it. Yet Iran faces one big problem, and that 
problem is summed up in one word: sanctions.

I have argued for many years, including from 
this rostrum, that the only way to peacefully prevent 
Iran from developing nuclear weapons is to combine 
tough sanctions with a credible military threat. That 
policy is today bearing fruit. Thanks to the efforts of 
many countries, many represented here, and under the 
leadership of the United States, tough sanctions have 
taken a big bite out of Iran’s economy. Oil revenues 
have fallen. The currency has plummeted. Banks are 
hard pressed to transfer money. As a result, the regime 
is under intense pressure from the Iranian people to get 
the sanctions removed. That is why Rouhani got elected 
in the first place. That is why he launched his charm 
offensive. He definitely wants to get the sanctions 
lifted — I guarantee the Assembly that — but he does 
not want to give up Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme 
in return.

Here is the strategy to achieve that: first, smile a lot. 
Smiling never hurts. Secondly, pay lip service to peace, 
democracy and tolerance. Thirdly, offer meaningless 
concessions in exchange for lifting sanctions. Fourthly, 
and most important, ensure that Iran retains sufficient 
nuclear material and sufficient nuclear infrastructure 
to race to the bomb at a time that it chooses to do so. 
Why does Rouhani think he can get away with that? 
This is a ruse, a ploy. Why does Rouhani think he can 
get away with that? Because he has gotten away with it 
before. Because his strategy of talking a lot and doing 
little has worked for him in the past. He even brags 
about it. Here is what he said in his 2011 book about 
his time as Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator: “While 
we were talking to the Europeans in Tehran, we were 
installing equipment in Isfahan”. For those here who 
do not know, the Isfahan facility is an indispensable 
part of Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme. That is 
where uranium ore called yellowcake is converted into 
an enrichable form. Rouhani boasted: “By creating a 
calm environment, we were able to complete the work 
in Isfahan”. He fooled the world once; now he thinks 
he can fool it again. Rouhani thinks he can have his 
yellowcake and eat it too.

He has another reason to believe that he can get 
away with that, and that reason is called North Korea. 
Like Iran, North Korea also said its nuclear programme 
was for peaceful purposes. Like Iran, North Korea also 
offered meaningless concessions and empty promises 



in return for sanctions relief. In 2005, North Korea 
agreed to a deal that was celebrated the world over by 
many well-meaning people. Here is what a New York 
Times editorial had to say about it:

“For years now, foreign policy insiders have 
pointed to North Korea as the ultimate nightmare ... a 
closed, hostile and paranoid dictatorship with an 
aggressive nuclear-weapons programme. Very few 
could envision a successful outcome. And yet North 
Korea agreed in principle this week to dismantle its 
nuclear-weapons programme, return to the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, abide by the Treaty’s 
safeguards and admit international inspectors.
“Diplomacy, it seems, does work after all.” 
(New York Times, 20 September 2005)
A year later, North Korea exploded its first nuclear-
weapon device.
Yet as dangerous as a nuclear-armed North Korea 
is, it pales in comparison to the danger of a nuclear-
armed Iran. A nuclear-armed Iran would have a 
chokehold on the world’s main energy supplies. It would 
trigger nuclear proliferation throughout the Middle 
East, turning the most unstable part of the planet into 
a nuclear tinderbox. And for the first time in history, it 
would make the spectre of nuclear terrorism a clear and 
present danger.

A nuclear-armed Iran in the Middle East would 
not be another North Korea. It would be another 
50 North Koreas. I know that some in the international 
community think that I am exaggerating that threat. 
Sure, they know that Iran’s regime leads these chants: 
“Death to America!”, “Death to Israel!”. Then it 
pledges to wipe Israel off the map. But they think that 
wild rhetoric is just bluster for domestic consumption. 
Have those people learned nothing from history? The 
last century has taught us that, when a radical regime 
with global ambitions gets awesome power, sooner or 
later its appetite for aggression knows no bounds. That 
is the central lesson of the twentieth century. And we 
cannot forget it.

The world may have forgotten that lesson; the 
Jewish people have not. Iran’s fanaticism is not bluster. 
It is real. That fanatic regime must never be allowed to 
arm itself with nuclear weapons. I know that the world 
is weary of war. We in Israel know all too well the cost 
of war. But history has taught us that to prevent war 
tomorrow, we must be firm today.

That raises the question: Can diplomacy stop 
that threat? The only diplomatic solution that would 
work is one that fully dismantles Iran’s nuclear-
weapons programme and prevents it from having one 
in the future. President Obama rightly said that Iran’s 
conciliatory words must be matched by transparent, 
verifiable and meaningful action; and to be meaningful, 
a diplomatic solution would require Iran to do four 
things; first, cease all uranium enrichment, as called 
for by several Security Council resolutions; secondly, 
remove from Iran’s territory the stockpiles of enriched 
uranium; thirdly, dismantle the infrastructure for a 
nuclear-breakout capability, including the underground 
facility near Qom and the advanced centrifuges in 
Natanz; and, fourthly, stop all work at the heavy water-
reactor in Arak aimed at the production of plutonium. 
Those steps would put an end to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme and eliminate its breakout capability.

There are those who would readily agree to leave 
Iran with a residual capability to enrich uranium. I 
advise them to pay close attention to what Rouhani said 
in a speech to Iran’s Supreme Cultural Revolutionary 
Council published in 2005. This is what he said:

“A country that can enrich uranium to about 3.5 per 
cent will also have the capability to enrich it to 
about 90 per cent. Having fuel-cycle capability 
virtually means that a country that possesses this 
capability is able to produce nuclear weapons.”
Precisely: that is why Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme must be fully and verifiably dismantled. 
That is why the pressure on Iran must continue. Here 
is what the international community must do. First, 
keep up the sanctions. If Iran advances its nuclear-
weapons programme during negotiations, strengthen 
the sanctions. Secondly, do not agree to a partial deal. 
A partial deal would lift the international sanctions 
that have taken years to put in place, in exchange for 
cosmetic concessions that will take only weeks for Iran 
to reverse. Thirdly, lift the sanctions only when Iran 
fully dismantles its nuclear-weapons programme.

The international community has Iran on the 
ropes. If it wants to knock out Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme peacefully, do not let up on the pressure. 
Keep it up. We all want to give diplomacy with Iran a 
chance to succeed. But when it comes to Iran, the greater 
the pressure, the greater the chance. Three decades 
ago, President Ronald Reagan famously advised “trust 
but verify”. When it comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 



programme, here is my advice: distrust, dismantle and 
verify.

Israel will never acquiesce to nuclear arms in the 
hands of a rogue regime that repeatedly promises to 
wipe us off the map. Against such a threat, Israel will 
have no choice but to defend itself. I want there to be 
no confusion on this point: Israel will not allow Iran to 
get nuclear weapons. If Israel is forced to stand alone, 
Israel will stand alone. Yet in standing alone, Israel will 
know that we will be defending many others.

The dangers of a nuclear-armed Iran and the 
emergence of other threats in our region have led many 
of our Arab neighbours to finally recognize that Israel 
is not their enemy. That affords us the opportunity 
to overcome historic animosities and build new 
relationships, new friendships and new hopes. Israel 
welcomes engagement with the wider Arab world. We 
hope that our common interests and common challenges 
will help us forge a more peaceful future.

And Israel continues to seek a historic compromise 
with our Palestinian neighbours, one that ends our 
conflict once and for all. We want peace based on 
security and mutual recognition in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State of Israel.

I remain committed to achieving a historic 
reconciliation and building a better future for Israelis 
and Palestinians alike. I have no illusions about how 
difficult it will be to achieve. Twenty years ago, the 
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians began. 
Six Israeli Prime Ministers — myself included — have 
not succeeded in achieving peace with the Palestinians. 
My predecessors were prepared to make painful 
concessions. So am I.

But so far, Palestinian leaders have not been 
prepared to offer the painful concessions they must 
make in order to end the conflict. For peace to be 
achieved, the Palestinians must finally recognize 
the Jewish State and Israel’s security needs must be 
met. I am prepared to make a historic compromise 
for a genuine and enduring peace. But I will never 
compromise on the security of my people and of my 
country — the one and only Jewish State.

One cold day in the late nineteenth century, my 
grandfather, Nathan, and his younger brother, Judah, 
were standing in a railway station in the heart of Europe. 
They were seen by a group of anti-Semitic hoodlums, 
who ran towards them waving clubs, screaming, “Death 
to the Jews!” My grandfather shouted to his younger 
brother to flee and save himself. And he then stood 
alone against the raging mob to slow it down. They beat 
him senseless. They left him for dead. Before he passed 
out, covered in his own blood, he said to himself: 
“What a disgrace! What a disgrace! The descendants 
of the Maccabees lie in the mud, powerless to defend 
themselves.” He promised himself then that if he lived, 
he would take his family to the Jewish homeland and 
help to build a future for the Jewish people.

I stand here today as Israel’s Prime Minister because 
my grandfather kept that promise. So many other Israelis 
have a similar story: a parent or a grandparent who fled 
every conceivable oppression and went to Israel to start 
a new life in our ancient homeland. Together we have 
transformed a bludgeoned Jewish people, left for dead, 
into a vibrant, thriving nation, defending itself with the 
courage of modern Maccabees, developing limitless 
possibilities for the future.

In our time, the Biblical prophecies are being 
realized. As the prophet Amos said,

“They shall rebuild ruined cities and inhabit 
them. They shall plant vineyards and drink their 
wine. They shall till gardens and eat their fruit. 
And I will plant them upon their soil never to be 
uprooted again.”
The people of Israel have come home, never to be 
uprooted again.
Greetings! Let me begin 
by congratulating President Ashe on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. He is taking the 
reins at an important time. We wish him every success, 
and he has New Zealand’s support.

The recent events in Kenya, Iraq and Pakistan show 
how troubled the world can be. We commiserate with 
the Governments and peoples of those countries and 
extend our deepest sympathies to those who lost family 
and friends in those tragic incidents.

For most of us, born after the Second World War, the 
United Nations has been at the centre of our conception 
of how the world organizes itself. But the reality of the 
United Nations can be quite challenging. It is the one 
place where the countries of the world meet, talk and 
try to find solutions to global and regional issues.

Sadly, some of those discussions can become so 
arcane that they are sometimes quite removed from the 
issues they claim to be addressing. That is a concern in 
particular for small States, to which the Organization is 
so vitally important. 

Even more sadly, the United Nations has too often 
failed to provide solutions to the problems the world 
expects it to resolve. The gap between aspiration and 
delivery is all too apparent, as the situation in Syria 
has again so brutally reminded us. But any failures of 
this institution are less failures of the Organization 
than they are failures on our part, as its Member States, 
and on the part of those who have the responsibility of 
leading those States.

There would be no dreadful humanitarian situation 
in Syria if Syria’s leaders had upheld the commitments 
made to the international community and to the Syrian 
people when Syria joined the Organization and ratified 
the human rights covenants.

The Organization would not also have been a 
powerless bystander to the Syrian tragedy for over 
two years if the lack of agreement among the Security 
Council’s permanent members had not shielded the 
Al-Assad regime, thereby reconfirming the fears of 
New Zealand and others that had opposed the veto at 
the original San Francisco Conference, in 1945.

New Zealand is pleased that the Security Council 
has at last met on the situation in Syria. The Secretary-
General has advised the Council and the General 
Assembly that the United Nations Mission has now 
confirmed, unequivocally and objectively, that 
chemical weapons have been used in Syria. The report 
(see A/67/997) found clear and convincing evidence 
that surface-to-surface rockets containing the nerve 
agent Sarin were used on 21 August.

The information in the report also makes it very 
clear that those rockets must have been fired by the 
Syrian regime. As the Secretary-General has said, these 
are war crimes, and those responsible must be brought 
to account.

Those that try to cast doubt on the report’s 
conclusions make themselves look foolish and do a 
disservice to the United Nations.

It is imperative now that the Council act. It must 
adopt a resolution that responds to the use of chemical 
weapons. It must find a means to hold those responsible 
to account and establish an effective mechanism 
for the destruction of those weapons in line with the 
proposal developed by the United States and Russia. 
The resolution must also provide for the protection of 
the civilian population. 

While Syria necessarily commands our attention, 
I also want to spend some time on some more positive 
developments for both the Organization and its Member 
States. I want to begin with my own country, New 
Zealand, whose emergence as a fully independent State 
has proceeded in parallel with the development of the 
United Nations.



New Zealand was present at the founding in San 
Francisco. We take pride in the fact that we were able 
to influence the drafting of the Charter, particularly the 
section on the Trusteeship Council, which paved the 
way for a number of States to become full Members of 
the Organization.

New Zealand has come a long way since the Charter 
was adopted. Then, we were emerging from our status 
as a dominion of the United Kingdom. Today we proudly 
assert ourselves as a small but independent and diverse 
country that has a wide network of friends and trading 
relationships in all the major regions and markets of 
the world. We value our traditional relationships with 
Australia and the Pacific, and in Europe and North 
America as we build new links with partners in Asia, 
the rest of the Americas and the Caribbean, and Africa.

Building and sustaining political and commercial 
links across the regions of the world is no small matter 
for a country like New Zealand. We are surrounded by 
the Pacific Ocean and located over three hours’ flying 
time from our nearest neighbour, Australia, in one of 
the least populated parts of the world. We share with 
our Pacific island neighbours the challenges of distance 
and isolation, and of having to hold our own against 
much larger countries whose economies of scale 
and proximity to markets give them a considerable 
competitive advantage. These factors have reinforced 
New Zealand’s approach to the United Nations and to 
the other international organizations that have shaped 
the post-Second World War environment.

We have a strong preference for a rules-based, 
multilateralist approach, whether in the United 
Nations, the World Trade Organization (WTO) or the 
World Bank. We know that rules and standards set 
internationally provide us the greatest certainty and 
the greatest protection. We draw strength from global 
agreements and from the collective commitment they 
represent.

That is why we attach such importance to the 
completion of the Doha Round. While New Zealand 
continues to actively negotiate bilateral and regional 
trade agreements, we acknowledge that free trade 
agreements often leave least developed countries on the 
sidelines. The benefit of the WTO, as with the United 
Nations, is that the rules negotiated there apply across 
the globe, irrespective of a country’s size or wealth.

Our preference for international rules reflects New 
Zealand’s national approach to governance. We have 
a robust and transparent system of Government and 
sound financial institutions that have helped us ride out 
the worst effects of the global financial crisis. That was 
despite the significant economic and social challenges 
we faced after the destructive earthquake that struck 
Christchurch, our second largest city, in 2011.

As we work to restore the built environment in 
Christchurch, New Zealanders are also conscious 
of our dependence on and our responsibility towards 
the natural environment. In policy terms, climate 
change has been a challenge for New Zealand and 
for the international community more broadly, but 
New Zealanders know we must play our part, and we 
have taken action. We have introduced an extensive 
emissions-trading scheme. We are investing in the 
Global Research Alliance to find new ways to manage 
agricultural greenhouse gases, and we have committed 
to reducing emissions to 5 per cent below 1990 levels 
by 2020.

We made that commitment under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
rather than the Kyoto Protocol. We did that because, 
while the Kyoto Protocol once seemed to provide a path 
forward, things have changed. The Protocol now covers 
only a small percentage of global emissions. We need a 
single legal framework that commits all major emitters. 

While climate change is an important issue, it pales 
in comparison to the problems faced by many Member 
States. One of the most intractable is that of Israel and 
Palestine. As long as that problem is left unresolved, 
there can be no assured peace in the Middle East and no 
security for the wider region. There can be no resolution 
without the Israeli and Palestinian peoples both being 
assured of viable homelands within secure borders. 
New Zealand pays tribute to the tenacity of United 
States Secretary of State Kerry and to the courage of 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu in 
agreeing to resume the Middle East peace process.

In our own region, we have celebrated the successful 
conclusion of the United Nations Mission in Timor-Leste 
and the transition of the Regional Assistance Mission 
to the Solomon Islands from a military to a police-led 
operation. We look forward with intense interest and 
cautious hope to the reinstatement of democracy in 
Fiji. We acknowledge the positive developments there, 
including with regard to election preparations and voter 
registration. The countries of the Pacific, including 
New Zealand, want and need Fiji to be successful, 
democratic and well-governed.


Earlier this year, New Zealand withdrew the bulk 
of its forces from Afghanistan, following the closure of 
the New Zealand-led provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamian province, which provided security and helped 
bring about a significant improvement in governance 
and development. Schools and hospitals were rebuilt and 
health centres re-opened. Mortality rates for children 
under 5 were halved. Maternal deaths are now a quarter 
of the Taliban-era levels. Girls now make up half the 
number of primary-school-age children. New Zealand 
expertise also helped substantially improve agricultural 
yields through the implementation of modern farming 
techniques. We are building the largest solar energy 
system in Afghanistan, which will bring a renewable 
source of electricity to much of Bamian township. That 
was a big commitment by a small country situated far 
away. It also came at a considerable cost: 10 of our 
servicemen and women lost their lives while on duty 
there. Even so, we are proud of what we achieved in 
partnership with the people of Bamian and hope that 
those gains can be sustained in the years ahead.

In Africa we see a continent where many countries 
have faced real challenges. However, as the President of 
Nigeria reminded us earlier this week (see A/68/PV.5), 
the new story of Africa is the growing number of 
countries in the region that are enjoying the benefits 
of good governance, sound economic growth and 
development, driving positive change throughout the 
continent. All of that is good news for Africa and for 
the world. New Zealand will do what it can to help 
with targeted assistance in areas where we have real 
expertise to offer, namely, in the fields of agriculture, 
renewable energy and good governance. New Zealand 
also recognizes and supports the critical roles of the 
African Union and Africa’s subregional bodies in 
ensuring Africa’s security and future prosperity.

New Zealand recognizes the importance to Africa, 
the Caribbean and our own region of the Arms Trade 
Treaty, adopted in April and signed by New Zealand 
and many others on 3 June The Treaty should curb the 
flows of small arms and other weapons, especially to 
conflict regions, and help arrest the deaths and human 
misery that they cause.

I want to also applaud the progress made in 
implementing the Millennium Development Goals, 
while at the same time acknowledging the fact that 
much work remains to be done. We now need to work 
together on a post-2015 development agenda focused on 
creating economic opportunities and the eradication of 
poverty.

Many of the same issues will be addressed at 
the Third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, which Samoa is to host in 2014. 
New Zealand is pleased to be a major supporter of that 
important United Nations effort and, with the rest of 
the Pacific, looks forward to welcoming the world to 
our region.

We need to remind ourselves that sound governance 
arrangements and transparency of process are also 
vital virtues for international organizations, including 
the United Nations. By any objective assessment, the 
Organization has not been equipped with the structures 
and rules it needs to operate as it should. Yet there has 
been deep resistance to efforts to make things better. 
That needs to change. The rationale for United Nations 
reform is clear. Membership has quadrupled since 1945, 
yet over the same period its key organs — particularly 
the Security Council — have become hostage to their 
own traditions and to the interests of the most powerful. 

From the 1950s to the 1990s, we could blame the 
Cold War when the Security Council did not act. That 
does not wash today. The problems are more systemic 
and relate both to the composition and the formal and 
informal processes of the Council. We now seem to have 
a practice whereby the permanent members not only 
can block Council actions through the use of the veto, 
but also appear to have privileged access to information 
and can stop the Council from meeting if it does not 
suit their collective purposes. Such behaviour damages 
the reputation and credibility of the wider Organization 
and must be challenged. Such issues are not necessarily 
matters of Charter reform, which we know is difficult, 
but have to do with the effective functioning of the 
Organization — an issue in which we all have a stake.

New Zealand is not advocating revolution, but we 
are asserting that the Council can and must do better in 
the way it conducts its business. That is the approach 
New Zealand will bring to the Security Council if we 
are elected next October. If successful, it will be 21 
years since New Zealand last served on the Council — a 
long time ago, but not so long that we have forgotten the 
lessons learned during our last term. At the top of that 
list is the imperative that members have to be engaged; 
they must listen to the concerns of others and have a 
view and a voice if they are to be relevant. There is 
no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 



numbers. Sometimes there is a need to speak up and 
shine a light on what is going on, or not going on, even 
when that may be inconvenient to others. That applies 
whether the issue was Rwanda, Somalia, Yemen or 
Yugoslavia in 1993-94, or is the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, the Sudan or Syria in 2013 to 2014.

My hope is that when Member States make their 
decision on whom to vote for in October 2014, they will 
look at New Zealand’s record and know that we will be 
a credible, positive influence on the Security Council 
and a voice for the interests of the wider Organization.
International relations are becoming increasingly 
complex and multidimensional, while developments 
in the world are even more rapid and less predictable. 
Under these circumstances as never before, there is an 
urgent need to agree upon collective responses to the 
key issues of today. It is solely within the power of such 
a truly universal Organization as the United Nations 
to do so. Moreover, such solidarity-based efforts will 
be productive only if they reflect the entire spectrum 
of views of the international community on global 
challenges and threats, a broad range of historical 
experiences and the full cultural and civilizational 
diversity of the modern world.

For most of the Members of the United Nations 
family, that approach is axiomatic. However, there is 
also another tendency whereby collective actions are 
understood primarily as agreement with the viewpoint 
of one group of countries. Such views manifest 
themselves in various areas: international security, the 
settlement of conflict situations, the functioning of the 
world economy, and the choice of development models 
and core values.

Many problems affecting today’s world are reflected 
in the tragic situation in Syria and in the uncertainty 
surrounding the development of events in the Middle 
East and North Africa overall. From the very onset of 
the turmoil in that region, Russia has consistently called 
for the development by the international community 
of a common approach combining support for the 
Arab peoples on their path to transformation with 
an understanding of the fact that, objectively, those 
processes will be lengthy and sometimes painful, and 
that it will be quite important not to undermine them 
through gross outside interference.

We have emphasized the need to act in a balanced 
way and to take account of the fact that current complex 
developments are associated with, among other things, 
a tireless quest for compromises among the various 
ethnic and religious groups that make up the mosaic 
of Arab societies. We have consistently supported the 
choice of the evolutionary way of development and the 
peaceful settlement of crises through national dialogue 
and reconciliation.

Another perspective has been reflected in the 
attempts made to determine who is and is not legitimate 
among the leaders of the Middle East and North Africa 
region, to impose a view as to which side should be 
supported in domestic national conflicts, and to dictate 
external, ready-made prescriptions for democratic 
transformation.

Attempts to portray, in a simplified way, the 
developments in the Arab world as the struggle of 
democracy against tyranny or of good against evil 
have long obscured the problems associated with the 
rising wave of extremism, which is spilling over into 
other regions today. The terrorist attacks in Kenya 
have demonstrated the full gravity of that threat. It is 
common knowledge that jihadist groups that include 
numerous radical elements from all parts of the world 
are the most combat-capable units of the opposition. 
The goals that they are pursuing have nothing to do with 
democracy but are based on intolerance and aimed at 
the destruction of secular States and the establishment 
of caliphates. It is difficult to qualify as far-sighted a 
policy that entails fighting in Mali the same extremist 
groups that are being supported in Syria.

The use of chemical weapons is inadmissible. That 
does not mean, however, that one can usurp the right 
to accuse and to render verdicts. All of the incidents 
associated with the use of chemical weapons in Syria, 
by whomsoever committed, must be investigated in a 
professional and unbiased manner and then considered 
by the Security Council exclusively on the basis of 
facts rather than of allegations or assumptions. In that 
respect, at the Group of 20 (G-20) summit held in June, 
an agreement was reached by leaders of the eight key 
States.



Recently a common argument has been 
increasingly made to the effect that the threat or use 
of force, directly prohibited by the Charter of the 
United Nations, is virtually the most effective method 
of addressing international problems, including the 
settlement of domestic conflicts. There have been 
attempts to extrapolate such an approach to the 
situation in Syria as well, despite the fact that recent 
experience with such interventions has proved that they 
are ineffective, meaningless and destructive. That is an 
extremely dangerous path leading to the erosion of the 
foundations of today’s world order and the subversion 
of the weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation 
regimes.

It is alarming to hear statements about the right 
to use military force to ensure one’s own interests in 
the Middle East region under the pretext of a persistent 
leadership gap in the international arena. Recent history 
shows that no State, no matter how big or powerful, 
can cope alone with challenges of the scope faced by 
humankind today.

There is no doubt that leadership is required. 
However, today it can only be collective leadership 
based on agreed actions of the leading members of 
the international community, with strict respect for 
the principles and norms of international law. It is 
the growing understanding of that reality that has 
opened the way towards achieving Russia-United 
States understandings relating to the placing under 
international control and subsequent elimination of the 
Syrian chemical arsenals. That became possible thanks 
to the decision by Damascus to join the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and fulfil the relevant obligations 
following the expedited procedure.

We expect that the decisions of the Organization 
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Executive 
Council and the Security Council will contribute to 
creating the framework required for the elimination of 
chemical arsenals in Syria.

Progress in the area of chemical disarmament in 
Syria should give impetus to the implementation of 
existing arrangements to convene a conference on 
establishing a zone free of weapons of mass destruction 
and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We know 
that there are a number of complicated issues related to 
ensuring full participation of the countries of the region 
in such a conference, but they cannot be discussed 
endlessly. That is exactly when true leadership and 
resolve must be demonstrated for the common benefit.

People are continuing to die and innocent civilians 
to suffer every day in Syria. Religious minorities, 
including Christian communities, are becoming 
victims of the conflict, which is increasingly acquiring 
a sectarian character. Virtually the only possibility 
remaining today to put an end to this turmoil is 
to break the deadlock regarding the process of a 
political settlement of the Syrian crisis. We continue 
to work tirelessly for the earliest convening of a peace 
conference to implement the Geneva communiqué 
of 30 July 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We hope that, 
following the example set by the Government of Syria, 
the opposition will also constructively respond to the 
Russia-United States initiative.

The Syrian crisis should not overshadow the need to 
address the Palestinian problem. We expect the Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders to shoulder their responsibility 
for the future of their people at this current critical 
stage, where the parties have resumed direct talks 
after a lengthy interruption. While duly recognizing 
the efforts made by the United States in the Middle 
East settlement process, we deem it necessary to 
intensify the activity of the Quartet, the internationally 
recognized mechanism for providing assistance to the 
peace process in the region on the basis of the relevant 
decisions of the United Nations, the Madrid principles 
and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is also important to 
ensure the close involvement of the Arab countries in 
the activities of the Quartet.

Approaches based on negotiation are also required 
with respect to other situations, including the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the nuclear problem in the 
Korean peninsula. As President Vladimir Putin noted 
in his recent article in the 11 September 2013 issue of 
The New York Times,

“We must stop using the language of force and 
return to the path of civilized diplomatic and 
political settlement.”
This would help to improve the international 
environment and contribute to stepping up collective 
efforts to counter global challenges, including terrorism 
and drug trafficking. Russia intends to attach priority 
attention to these challenges during its presidency of 
the Group of Eight, in 2014.

Today, when the rigid frame of the bipolar system 
has been long relegated to the past, a mark of the time 
is the strengthening of the democratic foundations both 
within States and in international relations. That means 



in particular that the recognition of the right of peoples 
to independently determine their destiny and to choose 
the optimal forms of social and political structure 
and social and economic systems should become an 
indisputable norm of conduct. In the same way, the 
complex of exclusiveness and supremacy regarding 
one’s own customs in the human rights area should be 
abandoned and instead the universal criteria enshrined 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights should 
be used as a guideline. Moreover, it is important to 
respect the traditional values that are common to all 
the religions.

It is obvious that a genuine partnership is hardly 
achievable without reliance on the foundations of 
economic cooperation. The prevailing majority of 
States are interacting within the framework of the 
World Trade Organization and in that sense they are 
already operating in a common economic space. 
This creates the prerequisites for working towards 
harmonization of integration processes in various 
regions of the world instead of trying to artificially pit 
them against each other by creating new division lines. 
Russia is proceeding from that exact understanding in 
its joint work with its partners in the establishment of 
the Eurasian Economic Union.

Russia attaches great importance to achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals and the drafting of the 
global development agenda for the post-2015 period 
on their basis. The main priorities are the eradication 
of poverty and support for economic growth through 
the expansion of investment opportunities and the 
creation of new jobs. Some of the most urgent issues 
are the strengthening of the energy and transport 
infrastructures, the fight against infectious diseases 
and road safety.

Cooperation among States should rely on efficient 
mechanisms and an adequate resource base. In that 
context, we support the further strengthening of the 
coordinating role and potential of the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council. During its chairmanship 
of the Group of 20, Russia has consistently pursued 
a policy of developing its interaction with the United 
Nations. We believe that the General Assembly, in 
cooperation with the G-20, will develop a realistic 
programme of long-term cooperation.

I firmly believe that, by joining forces on the basis 
of genuine respect and considering the interests of each 
and everyone, we will be able to achieve the lofty goals 
that are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Each year we come together to 
reaffirm the founding vision of this institution. For most 
of recorded history, individual aspirations were subject 
to the whims of tyrants and empires, and divisions of 
race, religion and tribe were settled through the sword 
and the clash of armies. 

The idea that nations and peoples could come 
together in peace to solve their disputes and advance a 
common prosperity seemed unimaginable. It took the 
awful carnage of two world wars to shift our thinking. 
The leaders who built the United Nations were not naive. 
They did not think that this body could eradicate all 
wars. But in the wake of millions dead and continents 
in rubble and with the development of nuclear weapons 
that could annihilate a planet, they understood that 
humanity could not survive the course it was on. They 
gave us this institution, believing that it could allow 
us to resolve conflicts, enforce rules of behaviour and 
build habits of cooperation that would grow stronger 
over time.

For decades, the United Nations has in fact made 
a difference, from helping to eradicate disease to 



educating children and brokering peace. But like 
every generation of leaders, we face new and profound 
challenges, and this body continues to be tested. The 
question is whether we possess the wisdom and the 
courage as nation States and members of an international 
community to squarely meet those challenges. Can the 
United Nations meet the test of our time?

And for much of my tenure as President, some of 
our most urgent challenges have revolved around an 
increasingly integrated global economy and our efforts 
to recover from the worst economic crisis of our lifetime. 
Now, five years after the global economy collapsed and 
thanks to coordinated efforts by the countries here 
today, jobs are being created, global financial systems 
have stabilized and people are once again being lifted 
out of poverty. But this progress is fragile and unequal, 
and we still have work to do together to assure that our 
citizens can access the opportunities that they need in 
order to thrive in the twenty-first century.

Together, we have also worked to end a decade of 
war. Five years ago nearly 180,000 Americans were 
serving in harm’s way, and the war in Iraq was the 
dominant issue in our relationship with the rest of the 
world. Today, all of our troops have left Iraq. Next year an 
international coalition will end its war in Afghanistan, 
having achieved its mission of dismantling the core of 
Al Qaida that attacked us on 9/11.

For the United States, those new circumstances 
have also meant shifting away from a perpetual war 
footing. Beyond bringing our troops home we have 
limited the use of drones so that they target only those 
who pose a continuing imminent threat to the United 
States, when capture is not feasible and when there 
is a near certainty of no civilian casualties. We are 
transferring detainees to other countries and trying 
terrorists in courts of law, while working diligently to 
close the prison at Guantanamo Bay. Just as we have 
reviewed how we deploy our extraordinary military 
capabilities in a way that lives up to our ideals, we have 
begun to review the way that we gather intelligence, 
so that we properly balance the legitimate security 
concerns of our citizens and allies with the privacy 
concerns that all people share.

As a result of such work and cooperation with 
allies and partners, the world is more stable than it was 
five years ago. But even a glance at today’s headlines 
indicates that dangers remain. In Kenya, we have 
seen terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded 
shopping mall. Our hearts go out to the families of 
those who have been affected. In Pakistan, nearly 100 
people were recently killed by suicide bombers outside 
a church. In Iraq, killings and car bombs continue to be 
a terrible part of life.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida has splintered into regional 
networks and militias, which does not give them the 
capacity at this point to carry out attacks like 9/11 
but does pose serious threats to Governments and 
diplomats, businesses and civilians all across the globe. 
Just as significantly, the convulsions in the Middle East 
and North Africa have laid bare deep divisions within 
societies, as an old order is upended and people grapple 
with what is coming next. Peaceful movements have too 
often been answered by violence from those resisting 
change and from extremists trying to hijack change. 
Sectarian conflict has re-emerged, and the potential 
spread of weapons of mass destruction continues to cast 
a shadow over the pursuit of peace.

Nowhere have we seen those trends converge 
more powerfully than in Syria. There, peaceful 
protests against an authoritarian regime were met with 
repression and slaughter. In the face of such carnage, 
many retreated to their sectarian identities — Alawite 
and Sunni, Christian and Kurd — and the situation 
spiralled into civil war.

The international community recognized the stakes 
early on, but our response has not matched the scale of 
the challenge. Aid cannot keep pace with the suffering 
of the wounded and displaced. A peace process is 
stillborn. America and others have worked to bolster 
the moderate opposition, but extremist groups have still 
taken root to exploit the crisis.

Al-Assad’s traditional allies have propped him up, 
citing principles of sovereignty to shield his regime. 
On 21 August, the regime used chemical weapons in 
an attack that killed more than 1,000 people, including 
hundreds of children. Today, the crisis in Syria and the 
destabilization of the region goes to the heart of broader 
challenges that the international community must now 
confront. How should we respond to conflicts in the 
Middle East and North Africa — conflicts between 
countries, but also conflicts within them? How do we 
address the choice between standing callously by while 
children are subjected to nerve gas and embroiling 
ourselves in someone else’s civil war? What is the role of 
force in resolving disputes that threaten the stability of 
a region and undermine all basic standards of civilized 
conduct? And what is the role of the United Nations and 
international law in meeting cries for justice?



Today, I want to outline where the United States of 
America stands on those issues.

With respect to Syria, we believe that, as a starting 
point, the international community must enforce the ban 
on chemical weapons. When I stated my willingness to 
order a limited strike against the Al-Assad regime in 
response to its brazen use of chemical weapons, I did 
not do so lightly. I did so because I believe that it is 
in the national security interests of the United States 
and in the interest of the world to meaningfully enforce 
a prohibition whose origins are older than the United 
Nations itself. The ban against the use of chemical 
weapons, even in war, has been agreed to by 98 percent 
of humanity. It is strengthened by the searing memories 
of soldiers suffocated in the trenches, Jews slaughtered 
in gas chambers, Iranians poisoned in the many tens of 
thousands.

The evidence is overwhelming that the Al-Assad 
regime used such weapons on 21 August. United 
Nations inspectors gave a clear accounting of their 
findings that advanced rockets had fired large 
quantities of sarin gas at civilians. Those rockets were 
fired from a regime-controlled neighbourhood and 
landed in opposition neighbourhoods. It is an insult to 
human reason and to the legitimacy of this institution 
to suggest that anyone other than the regime carried out 
this attack.

I know that in the immediate aftermath of the attack 
there were those who questioned the legitimacy of even 
a limited strike in the absence of a clear mandate from 
the Security Council. But without a credible military 
threat, the Security Council had demonstrated no 
inclination to act at all. However, as I have discussed 
with President Putin for over a year, most recently in 
St. Petersburg, my preference has always been to work 
for a diplomatic resolution to this issue, and in the past 
several weeks, the United States, Russia and our allies 
have reached an agreement to place Syria’s chemical 
weapons under international control and then destroy 
them.

The Syrian Government took a first step by giving 
an accounting of its stockpiles. Now, there must be a 
strong Security Council resolution to verify that the 
Al-Assad regime is keeping its commitments, and there 
must be consequences if they fail to do so. If we cannot 
agree even on that, then that will show that the United 
Nations is incapable of enforcing the most basic of 
international laws. On the other hand, if we succeed, it 
will send a powerful message that the use of chemical 
weapons has no place in the twenty-first century and 
that this Organization means what it says.

Our agreement on chemical weapons should 
energize a larger diplomatic effort to reach a political 
settlement within Syria. I do not believe that military 
action by those within Syria or by external Powers can 
achieve a lasting peace, nor do I believe that America 
or any nation should determine who will lead Syria. 
That is for the Syrian people to decide. Nevertheless, a 
leader who has slaughtered his own citizens and gassed 
children to death cannot regain the legitimacy to lead 
a badly fractured country. The notion that Syria can 
return to a pre-war status quo is a fantasy. 

It is time for Russia and Iran to realize that insisting 
on Al-Assad’s rule will lead directly to the outcome that 
they fear — an increasingly violent space for extremists 
to operate in. In turn, those of us who continue to 
support the moderate opposition must persuade them 
that the Syrian people cannot afford a collapse of State 
institutions and that a political settlement cannot be 
reached without addressing the legitimate fears and 
concerns of Alawites and other minorities. 

We are committed to working this political track, 
and as we pursue a settlement, let us remember that 
this is not a zero-sum endeavour. We are no longer in 
a cold war. There is no great game to be won, nor does 
America have any interest in Syria beyond the well-
being of its people, the stability of its neighbours, the 
elimination of chemical weapons and ensuring that it 
does not become a safe haven for terrorists. I welcome 
the influence of all nations that can help bring about a 
peaceful resolution of Syria’s civil war. 

As we move the Geneva process forward, I 
urge all nations represented here to step up to meet 
the humanitarian needs in Syria and surrounding 
countries. America has committed over a billion dollars 
to that effort, and today I can announce that we will be 
providing an additional $340 million. No aid can take 
the place of a political resolution that gives the Syrian 
people the chance to begin rebuilding their country, but 
it can help desperate people survive.

What broader conclusions can be drawn from 
America’s policy towards Syria? I know that there are 
those who have been frustrated by our unwillingness 
to use our military might to depose Al-Assad and 
believe that a failure to do so indicates a weakening of 
America’s resolve in the region. Others have suggested 
that my willingness to direct even limited military 



strikes to deter the further use of chemical weapons 
shows that we have learned nothing from Iraq, and that 
America continues to seek control over the Middle East 
for our own purposes. The situation in Syria mirrors 
a contradiction that has persisted in the region for 
decades. The United States is chastised for meddling in 
the region and accused of having a hand in all manner 
of conspiracies. At the same time, the United States is 
blamed for failing to do enough to solve the region’s 
problems and for showing indifference toward suffering 
Muslim populations.

I realize that some of that is inevitable, given 
America’s role in the world, but such contradictory 
attitudes have a practical impact on the American 
people’s support for our involvement in the region 
and allow leaders in the region, and the international 
community sometimes, to avoid addressing difficult 
problems themselves. So let me take this opportunity 
to outline what has been United States policy towards 
the Middle East and North Africa and what will be my 
policy during the remainder of my presidency.

The United States of America is prepared to use 
all elements of our power, including military force, 
to secure these core interests in the region. We will 
confront external aggression against our allies and 
partners, as we did in the Gulf War. We will ensure 
the free flow of energy from the region to the world. 
Although America is steadily reducing its own 
dependence on imported oil, the world still depends 
upon the region’s energy supply, and a severe disruption 
could destabilize the entire global economy. We will 
dismantle terrorist networks that threaten our people. 
Wherever possible, we will build the capacity of our 
partners, respect the sovereignty of nations and work 
to address the root causes of terror, but when it is 
necessary to defend the United States against terrorist 
attack, we will take direct action. Finally, we will not 
tolerate the development or use of weapons of mass 
destruction. Just as we consider the use of chemical 
weapons in Syria to be a threat to our own national 
security, we reject the development of nuclear weapons 
that could trigger a nuclear arms race in the region and 
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.

Now, to say that those are America’s core interests 
is not to say that they are our only interests. We deeply 
believe that it is in our interest to see a Middle East and 
North Africa that are peaceful and prosperous, and we 
will continue to promote democracy, human rights and 
open markets, because we believe that those practices 
help achieve peace and prosperity. But I also believe 
that we can rarely achieve those objectives through 
unilateral American action, particularly military 
action. Iraq has shown us that democracy cannot 
simply be imposed by force. Rather, such objectives are 
best achieved when we partner with the international 
community and with the countries and peoples of the 
region.

So what does that mean going forward? In the near 
term, America’s diplomatic efforts will focus on two 
particular issues: Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons 
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. While those issues are 
not the cause of all of the region’s problems, they have 
been a major source of instability for far too long, and 
resolving them can help serve as a foundation for a 
broader peace.

The United States and Iran have been isolated 
from one another since the Islamic revolution of 1979. 
That mistrust has deep roots. Iranians have long 
complained of a history of United States interference 
in their affairs and of America’s role in overthrowing 
an Iranian Government during the cold war. On the 
other hand, Americans see an Iranian Government that 
has declared the United States an enemy and directly 
or through proxies has taken Americans hostage, killed 
United States troops and civilians and threatened our 
ally Israel with destruction.

I do not believe such a difficult history can be 
overcome overnight. The suspicion runs too deep. But 
I do believe that, if we can resolve the issue of Iran’s 
nuclear programme, that can serve as a major step down 
a long road towards a different relationship, one based 
on mutual interests and mutual respect.

Since I took office, I have made it clear, in letters 
to the Supreme Leader in Iran and, more recently, to 
President Rouhani, that America prefers to resolve its 
concerns over Iran’s nuclear programme peacefully, 
although we are determined to prevent Iran from 
developing a nuclear weapon. We are not seeking regime 
change, and we respect the right of the Iranian people 
to access peaceful nuclear energy. Instead, we insist 
that the Iranian Government meet its responsibilities 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and Security Council resolutions. Meanwhile, 
the Supreme Leader has issued a fatwa against the 
development of nuclear weapons, and President 
Rouhani has just recently reiterated that the Islamic 
Republic will never develop a nuclear weapon.



Those statements made by our respective 
Governments should offer the basis for a meaningful 
agreement. We should be able to achieve a resolution 
that respects the rights of the Iranian people while 
giving the world confidence that the Iranian programme 
is peaceful. But to succeed, conciliatory words will 
have to be matched by actions that are transparent and 
verifiable. After all, it is the Iranian Government’s 
choices that have led to the comprehensive sanctions 
that are currently in place. That is not simply an issue 
between the United States and Iran. The world has 
seen Iran evade its responsibilities in the past and has 
an abiding interest in making sure that Iran meets its 
obligations in future.

But I want to be clear. We are encouraged by the 
fact that President Rouhani received from the Iranian 
people a mandate to pursue a more moderate course. 
Given President Rouhani’s stated commitment to reach 
an agreement, I am directing John Kerry to pursue this 
effort with the Iranian Government, in close cooperation 
with the European Union, the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Russia and China.

The roadblocks may prove to be too great, but I 
firmly believe that the diplomatic path must be tested. 
For while the status quo will only deepen Iran’s isolation, 
Iran’s genuine commitment to go down a different path 
will be good for the region and the world, and will help 
the Iranian people meet their extraordinary potential in 
commerce and culture, in science and education.

We are also determined to resolve a conflict that 
goes back even further than our differences with 
Iran: the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis. 
I have made it clear that the United States will never 
compromise our commitment to Israel’s security, nor 
our support for its existence as a Jewish State. Earlier 
this year, in Jerusalem, I was inspired by young Israelis 
who stood up for the belief that peace was necessary, 
just and possible, and I believe that there is a growing 
recognition within Israel that the occupation of the West 
Bank is tearing at the democratic fabric of the Jewish 
State. But the children of Israel have the right to live in 
a world where the nations assembled in this body fully 
recognize their country and where we unequivocally 
reject those who fire rockets at their homes or incite 
others to hate them.

Likewise, the United States remains committed to 
the belief that the Palestinian people have a right to live 
in security and dignity in their own sovereign State. On 
the same trip, I had the opportunity to meet with young 
Palestinians in Ramallah whose ambition and incredible 
potential are matched only by the pain they feel in 
having no firm place in the community of nations. They 
are understandably cynical as to whether real progress 
will ever be made, and they are frustrated by their 
families enduring the daily indignity of occupation. 
But they, too, recognize that two States is the only real 
path to peace, because, just as the Palestinian people 
must not be displaced, the State of Israel is here to stay.

The time is now ripe for the entire international 
community to get behind the pursuit of peace. Already 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated a 
willingness to take significant political risks. President 
Abbas has put aside efforts to short-cut the pursuit 
of peace and come to the negotiating table. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu has released Palestinian prisoners 
and reaffirmed his commitment to a Palestinian State. 
Current talks are focused on final status issues of 
borders and security, refugees and Jerusalem.

So now the rest of us must be willing to take risks 
as well. Friends of Israel, including the United States, 
must recognize that Israel’s security as a Jewish and 
democratic State depends upon the realization of a 
Palestinian State, and we should say so clearly. Arab 
States, and those who have supported the Palestinians, 
must recognize that stability will be served only through 
a two-State solution and a secure Israel. All of us must 
recognize that peace will be a powerful tool to defeat 
extremists throughout the region and embolden those 
who are prepared to build a better future. Moreover, 
ties of trade and commerce between Israelis and Arabs 
could be an engine of growth and opportunity at a 
time when too many young people in the region are 
languishing without work. So let us emerge from the 
familiar corners of blame and prejudice. Let us support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are prepared to walk 
the difficult road to peace.

Real breakthroughs on these two issues — Iran’s 
nuclear programme and Israeli-Palestinian peace — would 
have a profound and positive impact on the entire Middle 
East and North Africa. But the current convulsions 
arising out of the Arab Spring remind us that a just and 
lasting peace cannot be measured only by agreements 
between nations. It must also be measured by our ability 
to resolve conflict and promote justice within nations. 
And by that measure, it is clear that all of us have a lot 
more work to do. 

When peaceful transitions began in Tunisia and 
Egypt, the entire world was filled with hope. And 



although the United States, like others, was struck by 
the speed of transition, and although we did not — and 
in fact could not — dictate events, we chose to support 
those who called for change. We did so based on the 
belief that while these transitions will be hard and take 
time, societies based upon democracy and openness 
and the dignity of the individual will ultimately be 
more stable, more prosperous and more peaceful. 

Over the last few years, particularly in Egypt, 
we have seen just how hard this transition will be. 
Mohammed Morsi was democratically elected, but 
proved unwilling or unable to govern in a way that was 
fully inclusive. The interim Government that replaced 
him responded to the desires of millions of Egyptians 
who believed the revolution had taken a wrong turn, but 
it, too, has made decisions inconsistent with inclusive 
democracy, through an emergency law and restrictions 
on the press, civil society and opposition parties.

Of course, America has been attacked by all sides 
of this internal conflict, simultaneously accused of 
supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and engineering 
its removal from power. In fact, the United States has 
purposely avoided choosing sides. Our overriding 
interest throughout these past few years has been to 
encourage a Government that legitimately reflects 
the will of the Egyptian people and recognizes true 
democracy as requiring a respect for minority rights, 
the rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, and a 
strong civil society.

That remains our interest today. And so, going 
forward, the United States will maintain a constructive 
relationship with the interim Government that promotes 
core interests like the Camp David Accords and counter-
terrorism. We will continue support in areas such as 
education that directly benefit the Egyptian people. 
But we have not proceeded with the delivery of certain 
military systems, and our support will depend upon 
Egypt’s progress in pursuing a more democratic path. 

Our approach to Egypt reflects a larger point: the 
United States will at times work with Governments 
that do not meet — at least in our view — the highest 
international expectations, but who work with us on our 
core interests. Nevertheless, we will not stop asserting 
principles that are consistent with our ideals, whether 
that means opposing the use of violence as a means 
of suppressing dissent or supporting the principles 
embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. We will reject the notion that those principles 
are simply Western exports, incompatible with Islam or 
the Arab world. We believe that they are the birthright 
of every person. And while we recognize that our 
influence will at times be limited, although we will be 
wary of efforts to impose democracy through military 
force, and although we will at times be accused of 
hypocrisy and inconsistency, we will be engaged in the 
region for the long haul. For the hard work of forging 
freedom and democracy is the task of a generation. 
That includes efforts to resolve sectarian tensions that 
continue to surface in places like Iraq, Bahrain and 
Syria. 

We understand that such long-standing issues 
cannot be solved by outsiders; they must be addressed 
by Muslim communities themselves. But we have seen 
grinding conflicts come to an end before, most recently 
in Northern Ireland, where Catholics and Protestants 
finally recognized that an endless cycle of conflict was 
causing both communities to fall behind a fast-moving 
world. And so we believe that those same sectarian 
conflicts can be overcome in the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

To summarize, the United States has a hard-earned 
humility when it comes to our ability to determine 
events inside other countries. The notion of American 
empire may be useful propaganda, but it is not borne 
out by America’s current policy or public opinion. 
Indeed, as recent debates within the United States over 
Syria clearly showed, the danger for the world is not an 
America that is too eager to immerse itself in the affairs 
of other countries or to take on every problem in the 
region as its own. The danger for the world is that the 
United States, after a decade of war, rightly concerned 
about issues back home and aware of the hostility 
that our engagement in the region has engendered 
throughout the Muslim world, may disengage, creating 
a vacuum of leadership that no other nation is ready to 
fill.

I believe that such disengagement would be a 
mistake. I believe that America must remain engaged 
for our own security, but I also believe that the world 
is better for it. Some may disagree, but I believe that 
America is exceptional, in part because we have shown 
a willingness, through the sacrifice of blood and 
treasure, to stand up not only for our own narrow self-
interest, but for the interests of all. I must be honest, 
though; we are far more likely to invest our energy 
in those countries that want to work with us, that 
invest in their people instead of in a corrupt few, and 
that embrace a vision of society where everyone can 



contribute — men and women, Shia or Sunni, Muslim, 
Christian or Jew. Because from Europe to Asia, from 
Africa to the Americas, nations that have persevered on 
a democratic path have emerged more prosperous, more 
peaceful and more invested in upholding our common 
security and our common humanity. And I believe that 
the same will hold true for the Arab world.

That leads me to a final point. There will be 
times when the breakdown of societies is so great and 
the violence against civilians so substantial, that the 
international community will be called upon to act. 
That will require new thinking and some very tough 
choices. While the United Nations was designed to 
prevent wars between States, increasingly we face 
the challenge of preventing slaughter within States. 
And those challenges will grow more pronounced 
as we are confronted with States that are fragile or 
failing — places where horrendous violence can put 
innocent men, women and children at risk with no hope 
of protection from their national institutions.

I have made it clear that even when America’s core 
interests are not directly threatened, we stand ready to 
do our part to prevent mass atrocities and protect basic 
human rights. But we cannot and should not bear that 
burden alone. In Mali, we supported both the French 
intervention that successfully pushed back Al-Qaida 
and the African forces who are keeping the peace. In 
East Africa, we are working with partners to bring the 
Lord’s Resistance Army to an end. And in Libya, when 
the Security Council provided a mandate to protect 
civilians, America joined a coalition that took action. 
Because of what we did there, countless lives were 
saved and a tyrant could not kill his way back to power.

I know that some now criticize the action in 
Libya as an object lesson. They point to the problems 
that the country now confronts — a democratically 
elected Government struggling to provide security; 
armed groups, in some places extremists, ruling parts 
of a fractured land — and these critics argue that any 
intervention to protect civilians is doomed to fail. Look 
at Libya. No one is more mindful of those problems 
than I am, for they resulted in the death of four 
outstanding United States citizens who were committed 
to the Libyan people, including Ambassador Chris 
Stevens — a man whose courageous efforts helped save 
the city of Benghazi. But does anyone truly believe that 
the situation in Libya would be better if Al-Qadhafi had 
been allowed to kill, imprison or brutalize his people 
into submission? It is far more likely that without 
international action, Libya would now be engulfed in 
civil war and bloodshed.

We live in a world of imperfect choices. Different 
nations will not agree on the need for action in every 
instance, and the principle of sovereignty is at the centre 
of our international order. But sovereignty cannot be 
a shield for tyrants to commit wanton murder or an 
excuse for the international community to turn a blind 
eye. While we need to be modest in our belief that we 
can remedy every evil, and while we need to be mindful 
that the world is full of unintended consequences, 
should we really accept the notion that the world is 
powerless in the face of a Rwanda or a Srebrenica? If 
that is the world that people want to live in, they should 
say so and reckon with the cold logic of mass graves.

I believe that we can embrace a different future. If 
we do not want to choose between inaction and war, we 
must get better — all of us — at the policies that prevent 
the breakdown of basic order through respect for the 
responsibilities of nations and the rights of individuals, 
through meaningful sanctions for those who break 
the rules, through dogged diplomacy that resolves the 
root causes of conflict and not merely its aftermath, 
and through development assistance that brings hope 
to the marginalized. And yes sometimes, all this will 
not be enough and there will be moments when the 
international community will need to acknowledge that 
the multilateral use of military force may be required to 
prevent the very worst from occurring. 

Ultimately, that is the international community 
that America seeks — one where nations do not covet 
the land or resources of other nations, but one in which 
we carry out the founding purpose of this institution 
and where we all take responsibility; a world in which 
the rules established out of the horrors of war can help 
us resolve conflicts peacefully and prevent the kind of 
wars that our forefathers fought; a world where human 
beings can live with dignity and meet their basic needs, 
whether they live in New York or Nairobi, in Peshawar 
or Damascus.

These are extraordinary times with extraordinary 
opportunities. Thanks to human progress, a child 
born anywhere on Earth today can do things that 
60 years ago would have been out of reach for the mass 
of humankind. I saw this in Africa, where nations 
moving beyond conflict are now poised to take off. 
America is with them: partnering to feed the hungry 
and to care for the sick and to bring power to places 
off the grid. I see it across the Pacific region, where 



hundreds of millions have been lifted out of poverty in 
a single generation. I see it in the faces of young people 
everywhere who can access the entire world with the 
click of a button and who are eager to join the cause of 
eradicating extreme poverty, combating climate change, 
starting businesses, expanding freedom, and leaving 
behind the old ideological battles of the past. That is 
what is happening in Asia and Africa, it is happening 
in Europe and the Americas. That is the future that the 
people of the Middle East and North Africa deserve as 
well, one where they can focus on opportunity, instead 
of on whether they will be killed or repressed because 
of who they are or what they believe. 

Time and again, nations and people have shown 
a capacity to change, to live up to humanity’s highest 
ideals, to choose a better history. Last month, I stood 
where 50 years ago Martin Luther King Jr. told America 
about his dream, at a time when many people of my 
race could not even vote for President. Earlier this year, 
I stood in the small cell where Nelson Mandela endured 
for decades, cut off from his own people and the world. 
Who are we to believe that today’s challenges cannot be 
overcome, when we have seen what changes the human 
spirit can bring? Who in this Hall can argue that the 
future belongs to those who seek to repress that spirit, 
rather than to those who seek to liberate it? 

I know what side of history I want the United States 
of America to be on. We are ready to meet tomorrow’s 
challenges with you, firm in the belief that all men 
and women are in fact created equal, each individual 
possessed with a dignity and inalienable rights that 
cannot be denied. That is why we look to the future 
not with fear, but with hope. That is why we remain 
convinced that this community of nations can deliver 
a more peaceful, prosperous, and just world to the next 
generation. 
It is an honour and a privilege 
for me to once again address this body. South Africa 
attaches the utmost importance to the General Assembly 
as the most representative and democratic organ of the 
United Nations serving the international community.



We congratulate President Ashe and the Republic of 
Antigua and Barbuda on his election as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We also 
thank Mr. Vuk Jeremi. for the splendid way in which he 
presided over the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.

Let me begin by reiterating our condemnation of 
the horrific terrorist attack over the weekend in Kenya, 
in which a number of civilians, including a South 
African national, were killed. We express our deepest 
condolences to the Government and people of Kenya 
and to all those families who lost loved ones, and wish 
the wounded survivors a speedy recovery. We continue 
to support the efforts of Kenya and the international 
community aimed at peacekeeping, stability, democracy 
and nation-building in Somalia.

The theme for our debate this year, “The post-
2015 development agenda: setting the stage”, is most 
appropriate. In the year 2000, the commitment was 
made by world leaders in the Millennium Declaration 
to eradicate extreme poverty and adopt the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). The MDGs are measurable 
and achievable targets that were specifically crafted to 
address the most pressing development needs of the 
most vulnerable countries. The full implementation of 
the MDGs remains the key priority on the development 
agenda for the next two years.

A development agenda for beyond 2015 should 
allow individual regions and States the space to 
address the development needs peculiar to their 
circumstances and priorities. For Africa in particular, 
the future development agenda should address poverty 
eradication, income inequality and job creation. We 
furthermore believe that the new development agenda 
can be effective only if it is focused on all three 
dimensions of sustainable development, namely, the 
eradication of poverty through economic development, 
social development and environmental sustainability.

We also wish to emphasize that any development 
agenda beyond 2015 must be based on the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities in 
order to equalize the international playing field. We 
raise this point out of our concern that the global 
economic meltdown seems to have brought about new 
developments that are detrimental to the developing 
world, especially Africa. Some of the new developments 
include the tendency to renegotiate the rules of the 
game. New issues are being introduced as prerequisites 
for development and partnerships and have, in fact, 
become huge non-tariff barriers. They include the green 
economy and clean technology. While those issues are 
important for Africa and developing countries and need 
to be attended to, the manner in which they have been 
crafted restrains economic development, as they are 
used as obstacles.

We also wish to emphasize our expectations that the 
developed North and developing South will continue 
to engage in a genuine partnership. In that regard, 
the developed North countries should stand ready to 
meet their commitment to contribute 0.7 per cent of 
their gross national income to official development 
assistance.

We are aware of the challenges in the North caused 
by the economic meltdown, but we are of the view that 
investing in development in the South, especially in 
Africa, is of primary importance as a source of much-
needed sustainable development and stability in the 
world. Attempts to delegate some of those historical 
responsibilities to new emerging economies in the South 
are unacceptable and unworkable, as such emerging 
nations have their own historical challenges and 
backlogs to deal with. Furthermore, any commitment 
we make to the future beyond 2015 must build on 
existing agreements, which include Agenda 21, the 
MDGs, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and 
the outcome document of the Rio de Janeiro Conference 
on Sustainable Development. In the case of Africa, 
they must build on the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development.

Development and security are two sides of the 
same coin. The best way to ensure both is through good 
governance and the promotion of democratic values in 
all societies. Allow me, therefore, to register once again 
our serious concern that the Security Council, almost 
70 years since its establishment, remains undemocratic, 
unrepresentative and unfair to developing nations and 
small States, and disenfranchises the majority of the 
States Members of the United Nations, which form the 
majority in the General Assembly. We cannot remain 
beholden indefinitely to the will of an unrepresentative 
minority on the most important issues of international 
peace and security.

There has been too much talk about the need for 
reform, with too little action. We would like to challenge 
the Assembly today by saying “Let us set ourselves the 
target to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the 
United Nations in 2015 with a reformed, more inclusive, 
democratic and representative Security Council!”.



When discussing the Security Council, the matter 
of the Syrian Arab Republic comes into focus. We have 
expressed our dismay at the use of chemical weapons 
in Syria. There is no cause that could justify the use 
of weapons of mass destruction by anyone under any 
circumstances. It is, however, our strongly held view 
that any political transition in Syria must come about as 
a result of the will of the Syrian people and not through 
the force of arms.

We welcome the recent positive developments, 
such as the decision by Syria to accede to the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and the ongoing bilateral 
consultations between the Russian Federation and 
the United States. We support all of the diplomatic 
efforts aimed at finding a solution to this matter. The 
international community has an opportunity to use the 
Syrian experience to ensure that matters of this nature 
are handled correctly going forward, using existing 
instruments within the multilateral system of global 
governance.

Next year South Africa will celebrate its twentieth 
anniversary of freedom and democracy. We will forever 
be grateful to those in the international community, 
including the United Nations, who stood beside us in 
our long struggle for liberation. We look forward to 
celebrating our anniversary of freedom with the United 
Nations and to strengthening our partnership. A strong 
partnership with the United Nations is critical for the 
future we want for the people of South Africa. 

We also take this opportunity to thank the United 
Nations and the international community for their 
support during the recent hospitalization of our beloved 
founding President of the free and democratic South 
Africa, His Excellency Mr. Nelson Mandela. We thank 
them for all for their support and good wishes. The 
United Nations declared 18 July, his birthday, as Nelson 
Mandela International Day. That has become a catalyst 
promoting service to humankind worldwide. We 
thank the United Nations for that gesture. Our revered 
former President continues to respond to treatment 
at his home. His family and our people have warmly 
welcomed the support he continues to receive from the 
global community. We are humbled and very grateful 
for that support.

As we celebrate our freedom and democracy, we 
remain mindful that our struggle is not complete until 
the people of Palestine and Western Sahara enjoy 
their rights to self-determination. Just as the United 
Nations stood by South Africa, we would like to see the 
Organization be at the forefront of efforts towards self-
determination for the peoples of Palestine and Western 
Sahara.

We are deeply concerned about continued illegal 
settlement activities in the West Bank in violation of 
international law. Such illegal settlement activities 
jeopardize the realization of the two-State solution.

The Cuban people also hold a special place in our 
hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for African 
peoples in their quest for freedom. We will therefore 
continue to struggle with them for their economic 
liberation.

At its sixty-eighth session the General Assembly 
will undertake critical work for the future of our people. 
Let us tackle the work ahead in such a manner that when 
future generations look back on this moment, they will 
be able to say that the leaders of this generation laid the 
foundation for the eradication of poverty, for building a 
global society of equality, and for world peace.

Let me borrow from the words of our former 
President Nelson Mandela on his inauguration day in 
1994 when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation-building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
This 
year has been an unusual one in China’s development. 
China’s new central collective leadership has put 
forward the concept of the “Chinese dream”, a dream of 
the great renewal of the Chinese nation, and it is leading 
the 1.3 billion Chinese people in an endeavour to fulfil 
the two centennial goals, namely, to finish building a 
moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020 
and to turn China into a modern socialist country by 
the mid-twenty-first century. Having experienced 
profound changes in the past 5,000 years and especially 
the past century, China has reached a new historical 
starting point today.

What development path will China take in the 
future? What domestic and foreign policies will it 
pursue? And what kind of international role will it play? 
I understand that those questions are of great interest to 
the international community. As the Foreign Minister 
of the new Chinese Government, I wish to give an 
emphatic answer to each of them.

China will stay firmly on the path of peaceful 
development. China’s rapid development over the years 
has given rise to worries that China might follow the 
old pattern of wealth breeding arrogance and strength 
leading to hegemony, and various versions of the China 
threat theory have surfaced. However, what happened 
in the past should not be applied to today’s China.

The outdated Cold War mentality has no place 
in the new era of globalization. The Chinese nation 
loves peace and the Chinese culture values harmony. 
Throughout history, the Chinese people have always 
embraced international exchanges and trade, not 
foreign aggression and expansion, and have adhered to 
the patriotic resolve to defend the homeland rather than 
the colonialist doctrine of seizing new territories.

The culture of a country determines its values, 
and its history points the way to its future. Close to 40 
years ago, it was from this rsotrum that the Chinese 
leader Deng Xiaoping solemnly declared on behalf of 
the Chinese Government that China would never seek 
hegemony in the world. Today, his statement remains 
our unchanging commitment and conviction. China has 
honoured and will continue to honour its promise and 
remain a staunch force for upholding world peace.

China pursues peaceful development and calls 
on all other countries to follow the same path. Since 
the beginning of reform and opening up, China has 
become increasingly interdependent with the global 
economy and integrated into the international system. 
We are committed to working with others to establish 
a new type of international relations, based on win-win 
cooperation, and to seek the peaceful resolution of 
international and regional disputes. With regard to 
China’s disputes with some countries over territorial 
sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, we 
sincerely hope to resolve them in accordance with 
proper procedures, through negotiation and consultation 
with the countries directly involved. Those disputes 
that cannot be resolved now can be shelved for future 
resolution. That is our consistent position and practice. 
On the other hand, we will, whatever the circumstances, 
firmly safeguard China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity and resolutely uphold China’s legitimate and 
lawful rights and interests.



China will remain committed to reform, to opening 
up and to sustainable development. It has been five 
years since the outbreak of the international financial 
crisis. The global economy is back on the right track 
to recovery, but the foundations of the recovery are not 
solid and the speed is not fast enough. The root causes 
of the financial crisis have yet to be removed, and the 
structural problems of developed countries remain 
unresolved. The adjustment of unconventional monetary 
policies from the outside, coupled with other factors, 
have posed new challenges and the risk of financial 
market volatility to emerging market countries.

Where the Chinese economy is heading engages 
both domestic and international attention. In that 
regard, I wish to inform the Assembly that both the 
fundamentals and the overall performance of China’s 
economy are sound, and China’s development prospects 
are bright. The leading indicators of the Chinese 
economy are generally good, and China leads the major 
economies in growth rate.

In pursuit of progress while maintaining stability, 
the Chinese Government has followed a macroeconomic 
policy that addresses both immediate and long-term 
needs and has adopted a series of innovative policy 
measures with a view to promoing steady growth, 
economic structural adjustment and reform. We are 
vigorously pursuing reform, opening up, deepening 
economic structural adjustment and accelerating 
the shift in our growth model. We are implementing 
the basic State policy of resource conservation and 
environmental protection and promoting green, 
circular and low-carbon development to build a sound 
ecological environment and a beautiful China.

With its increasing economic output and its 
changing growth model, China’s economy has entered 
a phase of high-to-medium growth rate. That is 
dictated by the law of economics, and it will ensure 
the sustained and healthy growth of the Chinese 
economy. The Chinese economy is being upgraded, 
and its future growth will deliver major dividends in 
four areas as a result of industrialization, information 
technology application, a new type of urbanization and 
agricultural modernization; reform and innovation; 
structural readjustment; and further opening up. It is 
projected that in the coming five years, China’s imports 
of commodities will exceed $10 trillion, its overseas 
investment will reach $500 billion, and Chinese 
tourists will make over 400 million outbound visits. 
That will give stronger impetus to the world economy 
and bring an increasing number of tangible benefits to 
other countries.

China will firmly promote reform of the global 
governance system with the United Nations at its core. 
The United Nations is a big stage for all countries to 
conduct consultation and cooperation with one another. 
It is also a big family where people of all countries are 
brought together. It is our consistent position that the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations form the cornerstone of current international 
relations and provide safeguards for world peace and 
stability. Respecting national sovereignty and opposing 
interference in internal affairs, safeguarding peace 
and opposing aggression, and promoting equality and 
opposing power politics; those are important principles 
that must be observed. China firmly upholds the role 
and authority of the United Nations, supports the United 
Nations in its renewal and self-improvement efforts, in 
keeping with a changing world, and looks forward to a 
United Nations that plays a larger role in international 
affairs. China is ready to deepen cooperation with 
the United Nations and get more actively involved in 
United Nations activities in various fields.

China is committed to promoting democracy 
in international relations and the trend toward a 
multipolar world. We call for a greater representation 
and voice for developing countries in the global 
governance system and support the Group of 20, the 
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — and other emerging mechanisms that are 
playing a key role in making the international order 
fairer and more equitable. We also call for the reform 
of the international monetary and financial systems and 
want the role of the World Trade Organization as the 
main forum in the area of trade to be maintained. We 
are opposed to trade protectionism and are working to 
make economic globalization more balanced, inclusive 
and beneficial to all. We call on countries to enhance 
macroeconomic policy coordination and be mindful 
of the spillover effects of their respective adjustment 
of economic policies. We call for the strengthening of 
North-South dialogue and South-South cooperation to 
make development benefits more accessible to people 
of all countries.

China will firmly fulfil its international 
responsibilities and obligations. The Chinese nation 
is responsible and ready to play its part. Although it 
remains a developing country facing the daunting task 
of development, China, as the second-largest economy 



and a permanent member of the Security Council, is 
fully aware of its responsibilities and the expectations 
placed on it by the international community. We will be 
fully and more actively engaged in international affairs 
and work closely with other countries to meet complex 
global challenges and tackle the difficult issues facing 
humankind. We will voice China’s views, offer China’s 
wisdom, propose China’s solutions, play China’s due 
role and provide more public goods to the international 
community.

We will vigorously advocate the right vision on 
justice versus special interests, and we will endeavour 
to build a community of common destiny with other 
developing countries. In our exchanges and cooperation 
with other developing countries, we will uphold justice 
and place it above special interests. We will provide 
assistance to other developing countries to the best 
of our ability, so as to enable developing countries to 
realize independent and sustainable development.

We will play a more proactive and constructive role 
in addressing international and regional hotspot issues 
to promote peace and dialogue, defuse conflicts and 
safeguard world peace and stability. We will maintain 
our escort missions and counter-piracy operations in the 
Gulf of Aden and increase our participation in United 
Nations peacekeeping operations so as to contribute 
more to peace and security in Africa and other relevant 
regions.

The turmoil in Syria has lasted for nearly three 
years, causing great suffering and trauma to both the 
Syrian people and Syria’s neighbours. The recent use of 
chemical weapons has met with universal condemnation. 
China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons. 
We hope to see the early adoption of a Security 
Council resolution to support the Organization for the 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in launching 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons, 
and we stand ready to make financial contributions to 
the OPCW for the destruction of chemical weapons in 
Syria and to send experts to work there on the ground.

China calls for an immediate end to hostilities and 
violence in Syria so that the necessary conditions for 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons 
can be created. We call for the early convening of 
the “Geneva II” conference and faster progress on a 
political resolution of the Syrian issue. China seeks 
no gains for itself in Syria. We respect the aspirations 
and choice of the Syrian people. China is following the 
humanitarian situation in Syria with great concern. We 
have provided and will continue to provide assistance 
within our means to the Syrian people, including Syrian 
refugees outside the country.

Recently, China has been providing emergency 
humanitarian aid to Jordan in the amount of ¥15 million, 
and has provided emergency humanitarian aid in cash 
worth ¥24 million to the World Food Programme and the 
World Health Organization for displaced people within 
Syria and Syrian refugees in Lebanon, respectively.

China has been working to promote a peaceful 
settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue through 
dialogue. We have played a constructive role in 
seeking a comprehensive, lasting and appropriate 
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue so as to uphold the 
international non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. The dialogue between Iran 
and the permanent members of the Security Council 
and Germany has created new opportunities. All the 
relevant parties should scale up diplomatic efforts and 
work for substantive progress in the dialogue at an early 
date.

The Palestinian issue is at the core of the Middle 
East conflict. Guided by President Xi Jinping’s four-
point proposal on resolving the Palestinian issue, China 
will continue to work for a comprehensive, just and 
durable solution to the issue.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of all the relevant 
parties, tensions on the Korean peninsula are easing. 
Achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula 
and maintaining long-term peace and stability on the 
peninsula will respond to the common interests of all 
parties concerned. It is China’s consistent position that 
a negotiated solution through dialogue is the right way 
to resolve the nuclear issue on the peninsula, and the 
Six-Party Talks are an effective platform to promote 
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula. This year 
marks the tenth anniversary of the launch of the Six-
Party Talks. We hope that all parties will create 
conducive conditions, build consensus, work towards 
the same goal and resume the talks at an early date.

International development cooperation is at a crucial 
stage, where we must build on past achievements to 
make new progress. China supports the continued and 
full implementation of the Millennium Development 
Goals and the early launch of intergovernmental 
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda. The 
post-2015 development agenda should continue to focus 
on development and poverty elimination, give due 



consideration to national conditions and the various 
stages of development in the different countries, and 
respect their independent choice of development path. 
The agenda should give priority to strengthening global 
development partnerships; adhere to the principles of 
common but differentiated responsibilities, equity and 
respective capabilities; improve follow-up mechanisms; 
step up development financing; promote trade and 
investment liberalization and facilitation; and increase 
official development aid and technical support to 
developing countries.

China welcomes the positive outcomes of the 
United Nations Climate Change Conference held in 
Doha in late 2012. China hopes that the developed 
countries will demonstrate political will and honour 
their commitments by scaling up emissions-reduction 
efforts and providing capital, technology and capacity-
building support to developing countries. The Chinese 
Government takes climate change seriously, and the 
many forceful policy measures it has taken have resulted 
in notable progress. China will continue to play its due 
role in addressing global climate change.

Time flies. We will soon be celebrating the 
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United 
Nations. Born out of the ashes of the Second World War, 
the United Nations embodies the yearning of the peoples 
of all countries for world peace and global development. 
The Chinese dream is a dream of prosperity for the 
country and happiness for the people; it has much in 
common with the dream of people across the world. As 
a responsible Member of the United Nations, China is 
ready to work with all other Member States to faithfully 
adhere to the purposes of the Charter of the United 
Nations, faithfully carry out its historic mission and 
continue to make relentless efforts to advance the noble 
cause of peace and development for humankind.
Exactly 
40 years ago, the two German States joined the United 
Nations. For Germans, that marked our full return to the 
community of nations. Germany supports the United 
Nations as the beating heart of a global order rooted 
in cooperation, peaceful compromise and cooperative 
solutions.

The world has changed dramatically since then. 
New centres of economic and political power are 
emerging. In recent years, Germany has established 
new strategic partnerships with the new global players 
in Asia, Latin America and Africa.

The setting of our meeting today is different 
from the usual one. The United Nations is undergoing 
renovation, which must not be restricted merely to the 
buildings. The United Nations must reflect the world 
as it is, not as it used to be. Only then will it be fit for 
the challenges of our age. A Security Council without 
permanent seats for Africa and Latin America does 



not reflect the realities of today’s world. A Council in 
which the emerging and highly populous region of Asia 
is represented by only one permanent seat does not 
reflect the realities of today’s world. Nor does it reflect 
the reality of tomorrow. Germany, with its partners 
Japan, India and Brazil, is prepared to assume greater 
responsibility. In essence, it is a matter of strengthening 
the United Nations. The authority of the United Nations 
depends on its being representative.


We are seeking reform of the United Nations so that 
its power to build consensus, establish global rules and 
act effectively in response to crises and conflicts can 
be demonstrably strengthened. This is a call not only 
to the United Nations itself, but also to each and every 
individual Member State. Only if we are prepared to 
compromise and are willing to act together will we 
be able to make the United Nations strong. Germany 
remains committed to the United Nations. A strong 
United Nations is in Germany’s interests.

Our cultural differences and diverse traditions are 
not going to vanish in the age of globalization, but it 
is not only the world’s markets that are becoming ever 
more closely interconnected: people’s expectations, 
hopes and ideas are globalizing too. The developments 
in the Arab world have shown us that a country’s 
stability depends primarily not on the stability of 
the Government but on social stability. The best 
guarantees for a society’s internal cohesion are respect 
for individual human rights, the triumph of the rule 
of law over the arbitrary, and broad economic, social 
and political participation on the part of the people. 
Germany is committed to democratic change and to 
respect for human and civil rights, not because we want 
to take the moral high ground but because we have 
learned from experience — from the painful experience 
of our own history.

In Syria the people took to the streets to protest 
against a repressive regime. For more than two years 
now, the regime’s response has been brutal violence, 
which has brought countless deaths, immeasurable 
suffering and terrible destruction on the Syrian 
people and is now jeopardizing stability in the entire 
region. The use of chemical weapons, ascertained by 
the United Nations, is a crime against civilization. Its 
terrible dimensions have consequences that extend far 
beyond Syria. All the facts available to us show that the 
regime is responsible for the use of chemical weapons.

The use of chemical weapons cannot be allowed to 
go unpunished. That we owe not only to the victims in 
Syria, but also to future generations. Those responsible 
for using such weapons must be called to account 
before the International Criminal Court, which must at 
last be able to begin its independent investigations. We 
welcome the agreement reached in the Security Council 
yesterday. The chemical weapons in Syria must be 
completely destroyed in accordance with a firmly 
agreed timetable. Germany is prepared to provide 
financial and technical help to destroy those chemical 
weapons. A world without weapons of mass destruction 
would be a better world.

We must take advantage of the opportunity for a 
political process offered by the agreement on destroying 
the chemical weapons. After all, people in Syria are 
still being killed every day by conventional weapons. 
But there will be no military solution in Syria. Only a 
political solution can bring lasting peace to Syria. That 
would include an immediate ceasefire. I am pleased 
that there is at last a timetable for a possible peace 
conference, details of which still have to be clarified 
even after yesterday’s decision in the Security Council. 
Only with a substantive political process can we counter 
the destabilization of the entire region.

To date, Germany has made available more than 
€420 million to ease the worst of the suffering of the 
Syrian people. But despite all of the outside help, 
millions of Syrians are fleeing. Ever more people are 
at acute risk of starvation, and very soon they will also 
be at the mercy of the cold weather. They do not have 
even the most basic medical care. We must seize every 
opportunity to provide humanitarian access to the 
suffering population as quickly as possible. Amid all 
the devastation and hatred, the United Nations and its 
staff are the face of compassion and, for many Syrians, 
the only hope. I would like expressly to pay tribute to 
their work and commitment.

The tragedy in Syria underlines the extraordinary 
and growing importance attached to disarmament 
aimed at eliminating weapons of mass destruction and 
the strengthening of the non-proliferation regimes. 
Attaining a world free of weapons of mass destruction is 
our generation’s prime task for the future. Disarmament 
is a crucial issue for the future of humankind.



Iran must allay the international community’s 
doubts about the exclusively peaceful nature of its 
nuclear programme. We welcome Iran’s announcement 
this week that it is prepared to do so. The talks with the 
Iranian Government were encouraging. They open up 
a window of opportunity. Now it is imperative that we 
rebuild trust. Germany is ready to conduct negotiations 
in a constructive manner. However, the new words 
coming out of Tehran must be followed by deeds, and 
not at some unspecified time in the future, but right 
now. But, I repeat: a fresh start has been made.

We welcome the great commitment shown by 
President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry 
in giving fresh impetus to the negotiations between 
Israel and the Palestinian leadership. Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas deserve our respect 
for their courage in embarking together on that course. 
They have our full support as they pursue that course 
towards a negotiated agreement. Only a negotiated two-
State solution can reconcile the legitimate interests of 
the two sides.

This week in New York has been an encouraging 
one for the world. I am gratified that it was not military 
solutions but the struggle for political and diplomatic 
solutions that came to the fore. The international 
community must continue to follow such an approach.

Beyond crisis diplomacy, the United Nations is 
the central forum for setting binding objectives for 
the international community. Just a few days ago, the 
General Assembly agreed on the next steps for drawing 
up a new post-2015 sustainable development agenda. 
Germany wants to make a contribution in that regard 
with its experience of combining economic prosperity 
and promoting political participation and sustainable 
management.

Sustainability and combating poverty are not only 
key social issues; they are also key foreign policy issues.

In formulating the future agenda, greater attention 
needs to be paid to human rights protection and good 
governance than has been the case in the past. The 
new agenda must incorporate all three dimensions of 
sustainability and take account of economic, social and 
environmental aspects. With such a comprehensive 
approach we can also strengthen the fragile statehood 
in many countries and eradicate safe havens for 
terrorists. Social stability is the best protection against 
radicalization and extremism.

German foreign policy is a policy for peace. It 
focuses on crisis prevention. We Germans accept our 
responsibility for international peacekeeping. We 
focus on personal and social development. We focus on 
strengthening civil society. We want to contribute to 
a global process in which we — in the North, South, 
East and West learn from each other and develop joint 
solutions by working together. Germany will continue 
in future to use its economic clout and full political 
strength to promote peace and the balancing of interests.

The digital age brings with it entirely new 
opportunities and challenges. We need an Internet in 
which freedom, security and the protection of privacy 
are appropriately reconciled. Just as we have to regulate 
international financial flows in order to prevent global 
crises, so we need binding rules and standards for 
global data flows. That is why Germany has submitted 
to the Human Rights Council an initiative regarding 
the protection of the right to privacy in the digital 
age. Everyone using the Internet should be able to be 
sure that their rights are being respected worldwide 
vis-à-vis private companies as well as vis-à-vis States. 
Not everything that is technically possible must be 
allowed to happen, nor is everything technically 
possible legitimate.

Germany remains firmly anchored in Europe. 
Europe is a community of shared cultures, bound 
together by a common destiny. Close union among 
the nations of Europe is and will remain the response 
to our history and to our future in a world of change. 
German foreign policy is firmly embedded in European 
foreign policy. Europe will continue to use its clout, 
its influence and its resources to uphold peace and 
justice, to encourage development and cooperation 
and to promote climate protection and disarmament 
throughout the world.

That is Germany’s twin obligation: a strong united 
Europe in the world and a strong, effective United 
Nations for the world.
It is an 
honour for the United Nations to act everywhere where 
the freedom of peoples is denied. It is an honour for 
the United Nations to act where fundamental rights are 
compromised. It is an honour for the United Nations to 
intervene where extremism threatens the security of the 
world. It is an honour for the United Nations to act on 
behalf of peace.

In Syria, the situation is becoming urgent because 
120,000 people have died over the past two and a half 
years — 90,000 in the past year alone. One-fourth of 
the population is displaced. Millions of Syrians have 
become refugees and the country has been destroyed. 
The worst happened on 21 August in Damascus, 
when chemical weapons were used against civilians, 
including women and children. United Nations 
inspectors, sent officially on behalf of the Organization 
have, established unequivocally and with certainty the 
use of these weapons. 

In the face of this horrifying crime, France sought a 
strong reaction to punish this violation of international 
law and to dissuade Bashir Al-Assad’s regime from 
committing new massacres. This pressure exerted by 
my country, along with others, in particular the United 
States, has seen some initial results. Negotiations are 
under way as we speak to ensure the verification and 
destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons. 

However, if these negotiations are to attain their 
ultimate end, I have set out three requirements. The 
first is that any text must clearly make it possible for 
the Security Council to become seized of this issue of 



chemical weapons at any given moment. The second 
requirement is that the draft resolution we are preparing 
provides for coercive measures under Chapter VII in 
the event that the Syrian regime fails to respect its 
commitments. Since the agreement signed between the 
United States and Russia has the same provision, that is 
all the more reason to include it in the draft resolution. 
The third requirement is that those who have committed 
these crimes must be held accountable before justice. 

But we cannot limit ourselves to this draft 
resolution, which must be adopted soon. We must 
end this war, the deadliest since the beginning of the 
century. The solution is political. Too much time has 
been squandered, and I will not refer again to the 
blocking of action in the Security Council. During this 
period, not only has the regime increased its violence, 
but terrorist groups have also taken advantage of the 
international community’s inertia, to the detriment of 
the democratic forces found within the Syrian National 
Coalition. 

This is why the “Geneva II” conference must be 
held as soon as possible. For France, however, Geneva 
II is not just a talk shop. It must be a conference to 
define the objective for putting in place a transitional 
Government with full executive powers, mandated to 
re-establish civil peace, to protect all communities and 
to organize elections in due time. I am sometimes asked 
about participants in this conference. My response is 
simple. All countries — and I repeat, all countries — that 
accept the goal of installing a transitional Government 
and clearly acknowledge their commitment to a political 
solution will be welcome at the conference. 

Of equal urgency is the humanitarian situation. In 
Syria, the displaced are in the millions, and there are 
now more than 1.5 million refugees in Turkey, Jordan 
and Lebanon. The prolongation of the crisis poses 
a direct threat to the unity and security of Lebanon, 
nearly 20 per cent of whose population is now of Syrian 
origin. 

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon for having organized the first meeting of the 
International Support Group for Lebanon. France is 
committed to that country because we know how much 
it has suffered in recent years from disturbances in the 
Middle East and how much it needs to be supported 
today in its efforts to host refugees.

There are serious concerns in that part of the 
Middle East, but there are also glimmers of hope. 
The first is the resumption of negotiations between 
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Only that will enable 
peace to be achieved. It requires the coexistence of 
two States, both with safe and recognized borders. 
We must do everything to ensure that the opportunity 
that now exists for Israelis, Palestinians and the entire 
region is seized to finally bring an end to a conflict that 
whose regional and international repercussions are well 
known to us all. Negotiating peace between Israel and 
Palestine would be an historic act.

The second glimmer of hope is found in the 
statements of the new Iranian President, which reflect 
an evolution. I will not exaggerate them, but the question 
now is to know whether those words will be translated 
into actions, in particular concerning the nuclear 
issue. For the past 10 years, our discussions have not 
progressed, leading the the international community 
to adopt increasingly severe sanctions. The situation 
is dangerous, as we all know. Therefore, France 
expects from Iran concrete gestures reflecting that 
country’s renunciation its military nuclear programme, 
although it clearly retains the right to pursue its civilian 
programme. That is why I have chosen to engage in 
direct and open dialogue with President Rouhani. I will 
also say from this rostrum that while I am in favour of 
dialogue, I remain firm on the serious issue of nuclear 
proliferation.

The Middle East is not the only region of the 
world that is of concern to us. Africa has fallen prey to 
terrorism, and the barbaric attack in Nairobi confirms 
that to us once again, tragically. Victories are possible 
against terrorism. In Mali, with the clear mandate of 
the Security Council, African and French forces, with 
the support of Europe, intervened in response to the 
appeal of the authorities in Bamako and brought an end 
to a broad terrorist offensive. Today we see the results. 
Mali has regained its territorial integrity. It has ensured 
the security of its population, and it has even been able 
to hold, on the scheduled date, a presidential election 
that has been recognized as incontestable. I welcome 
the new President of Mali, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar .eita. 
His election is evidence of a great victory for West 
Africa against terrorism.

However, the threat continues to weigh heavily on 
the Sahel and in Libya, where weapons are uniquitous 
and where terrorist groups have found refuge. We must 
assist the Libyan authorities to ensure the security 
of their territory and of their population. France is 
prepared to do so.



I would like to sound an alarm, as I did last year 
with respect to Mali. The warning here is about the 
Central African Republic — a small country that has 
been ravaged by coups and conflicts for years. Today, 
chaos has taken root and civilians are yet again its 
victims. We must bring an end to the abuse, which is 
also sectarian in nature. That is why I would like the 
Security Council to issue a mandate and provide the 
logistical and financial means to create an African 
force, with its first mission to re-establish stability in 
the Central African Republic.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, women 
and children are victims of violence every day in the 
Kivu region. Again, it is essential that we continue 
to strengthen the United Nations Organization 
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, to implement the Addis Ababa agreement, and 
to reject all external interference.

We must learn from the experience of recent years. 
Everywhere chaos reigns, terrorism takes root and 
grows. That is the case in Somalia, and the horrific 
attack against Kenya reminds us that Al-Shaabab-
affiliated groups, while they have been defeated, have 
not yet been eradicated. That is why the international 
community must help African States to protect 
themselves.

France will convene, late this year, a meeting on 
peace and security in Africa. France has invited all 
African countries; Europe will be represented, as will 
the United Nations. The purpose of the meeting is to 
enable the establishment, training and equipping of 
African armies to ensure the security of the continent 
and combat all traffickers, particularly drug traffickers, 
and piracy. Africans themselves must ensure their 
security, but we cannot leave them to face the terrorist 
threat alone. 

The best weapons we have are our development 
policies, because poverty, unemployment and inequality 
provide fertile soil for violence and insecurity. Again, 
France calls for the mobilization of the international 
community through new funds that we must create to 
finance the necessary infrastructures and to enable 
access to essential public services.

France is fighting, along with Europe, for the 
introduction of innovative financing. My country’s tax 
on airline tickets, which helps finance the International 
Drug Purchase Facility (UNITAID), has brought in 
more than €1 billion since 2006. My country has decided 
to increase that tax by a further 10 per cent to enhance 
our fight against the great pandemics: HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria. With Europe, France has 
also established a tax on financial transactions. I have 
decided to allocate 10 per cent of that income towards 
such development-related actions as access to water 
and renewable energy, because with development 
assistance we can help the poorest countries to ensure 
their future, and thereby their security, and to respond 
to global warming, which concerns us all.

France is available to host the 2015 climate 
conference. This matter, too, respresents a threat to 
our own security, because one report after another 
states that if we do nothing, by the end of this century 
the temperature of the planet will have increased by 
three or four degrees Centigrade, with the well-known 
consequences of flooding in some places, droughts in 
others. Those direct threats would in turn endanger 
peace throughout the world. We must therefore seek an 
agreement at the 2015 climate conference.

The foundations of the commitment are well known. 
The agreement must be equitable. Each country must do 
its part. The developed countries obviously must make 
he greatest effort. Emerging countries must protect their 
development, but they must also understand that they 
are directly threatened by global warming. The least 
developed countries, those that are the most fragile and 
vulnerable, must be aided in the transition. That is the 
purpose of the fund that was created in Durbin. The 
agreement must also be binding; it cannot simply be a 
reiteration of principles. It cannot simply be wording in 
resolutions that are not translated into concrete actions. 
If there is no assessment and there are no sanctions, 
there will be no progress and global temperature will 
inexorably rise.

My message is simple. In any domain, whether 
international security, nuclear proliferation, 
development or climate change, the worst threat is 
inaction, the worst decision is to take no decision, 
and the worst danger is to not see any. And the United 
Nations bears the responsibility to act. Each time the 
Organization appears powerless, peace is the first 
victim. That is why I am proposing that the permanent 
members of the Security Council define a code of 
conduct such that in cases of mass crimes, they may 
collectively decide to renounce the right of veto.

It is also my hope to see the Secretary-General’s 
powers of inquiry strengthened to enable the United 
Nations to ensure — as it has done in Syria — that 



the truth is established in all instances, carry out 
investigations and act on the results. The Assembly has 
the sovereign right to take such a decision. Our credibility 
depends upon our capacity to intervene quickly and 
effectively in ensuring respect for international law, 
punishing violations and promoting development to 
preserve future generations. Our legitimacy flows 
from the Charter of the United Nations. We must be 
worthy of it. Within that framework, France will always 
assume its responsibilities in all domains.
In my lifetime, the 
world has been sliced up and labelled in many different 
ways: East and West; communism and capitalism; 
North and South; Christian and Muslim; developed 
and developing, and so on. But as we meet today, the 
most important fault line is not one of geography, or 
ideology, or religion, or wealth; it is the divide between 
those societies which are open and those which are 
closed. Open societies choose democracy and freedom 
at home, and engagement and responsibility abroad. 
Closed societies suppress the liberty of their citizens, 
draw a veil across their actions and withdraw from our 
shared international life.

We must be honest — the forces of insularity and 
isolationism have gained momentum in recent years. 
Discrediting democracy feels easier. Authoritarian 
States point enthusiastically at the ongoing fallout of 
the 2008 financial crisis — proof, they say, of a broken 



Western model. They feel vindicated; their citizens 
may be less free, but their growth rates outstrip those 
in the West. At the same time, in many of the States 
affected by the financial crash, austerity has given rise 
to a period of introspection. The impulse is to turn 
inwards rather than face outwards.

And so a crisis of confidence has threatened to take 
hold in parts of the developed world. It is not surprising 
to hear some argue that liberal democracy has had 
its day and that our multilateral system is becoming 
obsolete. But those who make these claims are wrong. 
They are drawing the wrong conclusions from recent 
events.

The real lesson of the past five years has been 
the remarkable resilience of open societies and the 
acute need for international cooperation in today’s 
world. Liberal democracies in Europe and across the 
Atlantic have weathered profound economic difficulty. 
The eurozone did not fall over, as many said it would. 
By working together, disaster was averted and the 
sovereign debt crisis is being managed.

In Europe we have maintained stability at a time of 
great upheaval because, for the most part, our citizens 
have expressed their frustration peacefully and through 
the ballot box. And where there has been unrest, mature 
democracies have managed it with relative success. And 
so, just as the events of recent years have revealed the 
weaknesses of some Western economies, they have also 
underscored the great strength of open societies — the 
ability to evolve and adapt. Open societies do not fear 
change, and in the twenty-first century such openness 
to reform is critical to lasting stability and success.

Democracy, free speech, participation, equality 
before the law, the right to peaceful protest, the right 
to be educated, the chance to work — these are not 
Western values; they are the political and economic 
freedoms sought by citizens everywhere, and they 
are gaining force in every country around the globe. 
Governments that ignore them are fighting a losing 
battle. Democracy did not fail in Egypt; a single set of 
elections failed. Egypt now needs to return to the path 
of inclusive democracy. The democratic urge remains 
as strong among the people as it was when they first 
rejoiced in Tahrir Square.

In other parts of the region, while the picture is 
mixed, important progress has been made. In Libya, the 
General National Congress is working towards elections 
in early 2014. Morocco has a new Constitution and, for 
the first time, a Prime Minister elected by Parliament. 
Although difficult challenges remain, Yemen has chosen 
reconciliation, dialogue and democracy over violence. 
Tunisia is also focused on building a new democracy 
and economic growth, with progress towards a new 
Constitution, and further elections expected in 2014.

Yes, these nations will undergo more turbulence. 
That is certain. Well-functioning democracy cannot 
emerge overnight, be exported from the West or 
dropped on a country from 8,000 feet — that much we 
have learnt from the failures of the past. Developing 
the culture and institutions needed — the rule of law, 
plural politics, human rights — is a painstaking process 
for every country involved, and it requires strategic 
patience from the rest of the world.

But while the road to democracy is difficult, the 
direction of travel is set. Everywhere we look, people 
are standing together against discrimination and for 
equality; against oppression and for liberty. A wave 
of openness has emerged, transcending borders and 
cultures. Men and women of every creed, faith and 
colour are calling for fair opportunities and demanding 
to be heard.

The United Kingdom is clear. We are on the side of 
all those who support political freedom and economic 
empowerment. There will be no pulling up of the 
drawbridge from us; no heading into retreat. We will 
resist any impulse to turn our back on the world.

In North Africa and the Middle East, we are 
helping States put in place the building blocks for their 
democracies. Whether by training Libyan officials to 
supervise fair elections, or supporting a free media by 
training journalists in Morocco, these are the nuts and 
bolts of successful democratic transition.

We are also supporting these countries’ economies 
through our stewardship of the Group of Eight 
Deauville Partnership this year, leading efforts to boost 
trade and investment in the region, helping small- and 
medium-sized enterprises and, crucially, promoting 
greater participation by women. And we have kept the 
political spotlight on the need to return assets stolen by 
the former regimes in those countries.

In Syria, our priority is to help bring about a 
political settlement. The foundations for a settlement 
were agreed in Geneva last year — establishing, on 
the basis of mutual consent, a transitional governing 
body with full executive powers. We are in close touch 
with our partners about convening a second Geneva 



conference as soon as possible. No meaningful political 
solution can occur without the moderate Syrian 
opposition. We recognize the Syrian National Coalition 
as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people, 
and we recognize their commitments to the Geneva 
process and to building a secular, democratic and 
pluralist Syria that ensures equal rights for all.

On the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, on 
21 August the Al-Assad regime committed a war 
crime under international humanitarian law, launching 
a large-scale chemical-weapon attack on its own 
people — the first attack on this scale for 25 years and 
88 years after such weapons were universally banned. 
As President Obama said here on Tuesday (see A/68/
PV.5), it is an insult to human reason to suggest that 
the regime was not responsible for that war crime. 
The international community must react, and react 
in unison. That is why we hope to adopt later today a 
Security Council resolution establishing binding legal 
obligations on the Syrian regime for the removal and 
destruction of Syria’s vast chemical-weapons arsenal.

On Wednesday, I announced that the United Kingdom 
would provide a further $160 million of humanitarian 
support for the Syrian people, bringing total United 
Kingdom funding to $800 million — £500 million — our 
biggest-ever response to a humanitarian crisis, much of 
which is aimed at helping the many children caught up 
in this tragic conflict.

The world has raised close to $1 billion of 
humanitarian support this month, and I hope that others 
will step up and contribute. Most importantly, I call on 
all parties inside Syria to allow humanitarian agencies 
to operate without hindrance or the threat of violence. 
Unless that urgent humanitarian access is given, no 
amount of money can alleviate the scale of the Syrian 
people’s suffering.

I welcome President Rouhani’s comments on 
Tuesday that he wants a constructive engagement 
between Iran and the rest of the world and that he 
wants to engage immediately in time-bound talks on 
the nuclear issue. Those are encouraging words which I 
very much hope are matched with genuine action. I am 
pleased that negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme 
will restart in October. If Iran’s words are followed by 
concrete steps, then there is a real opportunity to make 
progress in resolving the serious international concerns 
about Iran’s nuclear programme. We also look to a more 
constructive approach from Iran in helping resolve the 
crisis in Syria, and we have made clear to Iran that we are 
ready, as the United Kingdom Government, to improve 
our relationship on a step-by-step and reciprocal basis.

One thing that would fundamentally transform the 
Middle East is a conclusive two-State agreement to end 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — an agreement based 
on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps that leads 
to a sovereign and viable Palestinian State living in 
peace alongside a safe and secure Israel, a universally 
recognized Palestine alongside a universally recognized 
Israel.

I commend the dedicated efforts of Secretary 
Kerry and the courageous leadership of Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas, which have enabled 
direct peace talks to resume. I sincerely hope that both 
parties will make every effort to keep talks going, 
including a halt in the building of new settlements. The 
international community must fully support the parties 
as they make the difficult decisions that are necessary 
for achieving a lasting peace. Britain stands ready to 
play its part.

As we wind up our military operations in 
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom continues to work 
with the Afghan Government to ensure a successful 
transition. The Afghan National Security Forces are now 
leading on security and continue to grow in confidence 
and capability. That is a significant achievement. In the 
United Kingdom, we recognize the serious challenges 
still ahead for Afghanistan, but we strongly believe that 
there is room for optimism about the country’s long-
term future. This is a crucial time for Afghan men, 
women and children, as they prepare for elections in 
2014, which must be credible, transparent and inclusive.

Poverty is as great a threat to stability and freedom 
as are conflict and oppression. Thus, despite the strain 
on our finances, the United Kingdom has met its target 
to spend 0.7 per cent of its gross national income on 
development assistance. We are the only country in 
the Group of 20 (G-20) to have done so. Following the 
global economic crisis, we said we would not balance 
our books on the backs of the world’s poorest and we 
have held true to our word.

On Monday, we announced that we would provide 
$1.6 billion to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria. That is 10 per cent of the 
Fund’s replenishment, so long as others join.

Women and girls remain at the heart of our 
development agenda. They are the key to economic 
growth, so investing in girls’ education is the single 



most effective thing we can do to break the cycle of 
poverty. We must end gender inequality, which is the 
root of violence against women. That ambition is at 
the heart of the United Kingdom’s initiative to end 
sexual violence in conflict, and I would encourage all 
States that have yet to do so to endorse the Declaration 
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. 
Over 115 States are already committed; we are sending 
a message to the victims of those devastating crimes 
that they are not alone and that their attackers will be 
punished.

We have also used our presidency of the Group 
of Eight (G-8) to focus on three areas where we can 
support global prosperity — boosting trade, ensuring 
better transparency to help developing nations benefit 
from resources that are rightfully theirs, and cracking 
down on tax evasion and closing tax loopholes. That 
was just the start of our work on that agenda, and we 
are pleased that the United Kingdom’s trade, tax and 
transparency priorities have been fully reflected in 
agreements reached by the G-20, including extending 
the commitment to resist protectionist measures by 
a further two years to the end of 2016, so that trade 
remains as free and open as possible.

Whether it be in the G-8, the G-20, the European 
Union, NATO or the Commonwealth, or as one of the 
five permanent members of the Security Council, the 
United Kingdom will continue to be an active and 
engaged player in the world. The biggest problems we 
face are problems we share.

Take climate change, for example — the report issued 
this morning by the United Nations Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change confirms that sea levels are 
already rising and that ice is melting faster than we had 
expected. The report is an authoritative rebuke to all 
those who persist in claiming that man-made climate 
change does not exist. The United Kingdom will 
continue to cut our emissions and give over $6 billion 
to assist developing countries to do the same and adapt 
to environmental changes.

But if we are to halt the devastating effects of 
climate change, we must listen to the science, act now 
and act together. We thus welcome the Secretary-
General’s announcement of a leaders’ summit next year 
as a key step towards all nations agreeing to a deal in 
2015 to take action to avert the crisis.

We are all affected by the scourge of terrorism. 
Whether it is a soldier brutally murdered on a quiet 
London street or innocent shoppers gunned down in a 
busy Nairobi mall, we are all vulnerable. Following the 
recent horrific events in Nairobi, the United Kingdom 
is working closely with the Governments of Kenya, 
Somalia and countries across the region to tackle the 
issue. Our global response to terrorism must be robust, 
intelligent and cover all those areas where our work 
together can make a genuine difference. Alone we can 
take small steps forward, but together we can take giant 
leaps.

That much was clear earlier this year when we 
signed the world’s first Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 
67/234 B) to better regulate the global sale of weapons. 
The United Kingdom is proud of the role we played in 
delivering it, and we urge any countries that have not 
signed it to do so. The Treaty reminds us that, with 
enough political will, we can come together and do the 
previously unthinkable, and that should embolden us to 
do still more.

The United Nations has many virtues, but it also has 
serious shortcomings that must be faced. The United 
Nations has no greater friend than the United Kingdom, 
but it does not adequately reflect the world we live in 
today. The Security Council must be reformed. Unless 
more room is made at the top table, it will fast become 
an anachronism, a relic of a different time. That is why 
the United Kingdom continues to support permanent 
seats for Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and 
permanent African representation, too. We call on all 
States to play their part in this forum, and in our other 
international institutions, just as we will play ours.

We are at our best when we engage constructively 
with one another and when we are ambitious in 
pursuing our shared goals. That is as important for 
those countries whose economies and influence have 
grown and transformed over more recent years as it 
is for the old, established Powers. Greater influence 
means greater responsibility. The world is a better place 
because Brazil is taking a lead in tackling deforestation, 
because Mexico has enshrined climate-change targets 
into law, because the Republic of Korea is leading the 
way on nuclear security.

But there is much more to do; there are many more 
areas where we need to take the lead. A global trade deal 
to cut bureaucracy at borders — the subject of a World 
Trade Organization meeting that will take place in 
Bali in early December — would mean a trillion-dollar 
boost for the global economy.



In the next two years, the United Kingdom wants 
to do as much as it can to drive progress on the United 
Nations Millennium Development Goals, and we are 
also working in the United Nations and with civil 
society to set out a post-2015 agenda that is even 
more ambitious. There can be no greater goal than to 
eradicate extreme poverty, leaving no one behind.

On these and all other issues facing our nations, we 
are quite simply stronger together than we are apart. 
Now more than ever, we must fend off the forces of 
insularity and isolationism, stand up for our values and 
look out to the world. That is what the United Kingdom 
will do. We stand ready to work with all others who will 
do the same.
Let me first of all congratulate 
you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We 
wish you every success and assure you of our fullest 
cooperation.

At a time when the world is facing multiple 
challenges, there is renewed attention to the role of 
the United Nations in advancing international peace, 
security and prosperity. However, never has scepticism 
about the capacity of the United Nations to do so been 
higher, or the external environment less propitious for 
multilateralism.

The nearly seven decades of work of the United 
Nations hold one simple lesson: that we are most 
successful when we adhere to the letter and spirit of 
the United Nations Charter, basing our decisions on the 
widest possible consensus and balancing equitably the 
needs and responsibilities of nations at different stages 
and levels of development.

In those seven decades, the world has changed in 
fundamental ways. Asia and Africa are independent 
and resurgent. Countries are now not only more 
interdependent, but also face new, increasingly complex 
challenges. For multilateralism to remain relevant and 
effective in the future, multilateral institutions need to 
be reformed urgently. The place to begin is right here.

The Security Council must be reformed and 
restructured to reflect current political realities. 
More developing countries should be included as both 
permanent and non-permanent members.

The multilateral financial institutions should also 
enable an enhanced voice for developing countries in 
their decision-making structures. Multilateral efforts 
must guide our quest for peace and security, wherever 
they are threatened, and the centrality and contribution 
of the United Nations system to development must be 
restored.

Those objectives require the building of a new 
international consensus suited to our time and rooted 
in today’s realities. It is only such a plan of action that 
will enable the United Nations to meet the twin tests of 
legitimacy, and effectiveness and efficiency.

We commend your choice of the theme of this 
session. Setting the stage for the post-2015 development 
agenda is especially important as we deal with a 
lingering global economic slowdown and continuing 
volatility in financial markets. These have imposed 
disproportionately heavy costs on developing countries 
and the vulnerable groups within them.

Growth and inclusive development are naturally 
important for all our countries. They require a 
supportive international economic environment, 
enhanced investment flows, including from multilateral 
development banks, the transfer of technology, and an 
open multilateral trading regime.

But the problems of the more than 1 billion people 
living in abject poverty around the world need to be 
attacked more directly. Poverty remains a major 
political and economic challenge, and its eradication 
requires special attention and a new collective thrust. 
That priority should anchor the post-2015 development 
agenda, which should be shaped by the Member States 
so that it enjoys the broadest possible support and 
acceptance.

Issues of peace, security, human rights and 
governance are important and need to be addressed. But 
we will fall short of realizing an ambitious post-2015 
development agenda if we focus merely on governance 
issues at the cost of robust economic growth. This 
agenda should not be merely about reprioritizing 
domestic spending, but also about fostering genuine 
international partnerships between developing and 
developed countries to bring about change. All of us 
need the policy space necessary to set our own domestic 
priorities. 

No one knows the condition of developing countries 
better than the developing countries themselves. It is 
therefore important that the United Nations set clear and 
concise goals and provide practical and well-defined 
means of implementation, including an adequate flow 
of resources and the transfer of technology, taking the 
views of developing countries fully into account.



A meaningful post-2015 agenda must place equally 
high priority on food and nutrition, health, education, 
infrastructure, water, sanitation, energy and combating 
discrimination against women. Especially critical is 
women’s equal access to economic opportunities and 
ensuring that they do not become victims of violence or 
the targets of prejudice.

In India, we have sought to promote inclusive 
development in multiple ways. Legislation has broadened 
access to education and secured rural livelihoods. We 
are now building the world’s largest programme for 
food security. Digital technology is being harnessed to 
improve the delivery of public services and benefits to 
the people.

India is proud of its partnerships with developing 
countries. Using modest resources, we have built strong 
ties with Africa and the least developed countries. We 
are committed to building 100 institutions in Africa 
and have offered capacity-building support, including 
thousands of scholarships, and made available over 
$9.5 billion of concessional assistance. India and Africa 
are engaging through the India-Africa Forum Summit 
process. We also look forward to participating actively 
in the third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, to be held in Samoa in 2014, and to 
contributing to its outcome.

Climate change is one of the defining challenges of 
our times. We must summon the political will necessary 
to craft a robust global response to climate change on 
the basis of equity and the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities.

We are deeply concerned about the future of West 
Asia, a region with which India shares deep bonds of 
history and one that is critical for our energy security 
as well as the livelihoods of the nearly 7 million 
Indians who work and live in the region. Not only is 
the increasingly lethal conflict in Syria a tragedy for 
the people of Syria, but it also threatens stability and 
security in the region and beyond. It has been made worse 
by the use of chemical weapons. The use of chemical 
weapons, whosoever may have deployed them, must 
be condemned in the strongest possible terms. India 
strongly supports the elimination of chemical-weapons 
material and equipment in Syria.There is no military 
solution to that conflict. We must intensify efforts to 
end the conflict and seek a political settlement. It is 
essential that the “Geneva II” conference be convened 
at the earliest opportunity.

We are encouraged that direct talks have resumed 
between Israel and Palestine. India supports the early 
realization of a sovereign, independent, viable and 
united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its 
capital, living within secure and recognized borders, 
side by side and at peace with Israel. We also remain 
committed to the Palestinian quest for full membership 
in the United Nations.

In our own region, Afghanistan prepares for a 
historic political, security and economic transition. 
The international community must support the people 
of Afghanistan through this transition and beyond in 
combating terrorism, preserving the progress of the 
past decade and creating a stable, united and prosperous 
Afghanistan.

Terrorism remains a grave threat to security and 
stability everywhere and exacts a heavy toll of innocent 
lives around the world. From Africa to Asia, we have 
seen several manifestations of this menace in the last 
few days alone. State-sponsored, cross-border terrorism 
is of particular concern to India, also on account of 
the fact that the epicentre of terrorism in our region is 
located in our neighbourhood, in Pakistan.

From this rostrum yesterday, Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif of Pakistan spoke of making a new beginning 
(see A/68/PV.15). I reciprocate his sentiments and 
am looking forward to meeting him tomorrow. India 
is sincerely committed to resolving all issues with 
Pakistan, including the issue of Jammu and Kashmir, 
through bilateral dialogue on the basis of the Simla 
Agreement. However, for progress to be made, it is 
imperative that the territory of Pakistan and the areas 
under its control not be utilized for aiding and abetting 
terrorism directed against India. It is equally important 
that the terrorist machinery that draws its sustenance 
from Pakistan be shut down. There must be a clear 
understanding of the fact that Jammu and Kashmir is 
an integral part of India and that there can never, ever, 
be a compromise with the unity and territorial integrity 
of India.

We need to renew our commitment, especially 
here at the United Nations, to concerted, cohesive and 
continuing global action against terrorism. There can 
be no tolerance for States sheltering, arming, training or 
financing terrorists. Nor can States absolve themselves 
of the responsibility to prevent their territories from 
being used to launch acts of terrorism.



The increasingly complex challenges to 
international peace and security require a new 
international consensus to be built, whether it is in the 
field of cybersecurity, non-proliferation or terrorism. 
This year, 25 years after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
put forward a comprehensive action plan for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world order, we must 
strengthen efforts against nuclear proliferation and 
pursue time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory, 
phased and verifiable nuclear disarmament. We must 
also guard against terrorists and non-State actors 
gaining access to sensitive materials and technologies.

Two years from now, the United Nations will be 
70 years old. Every new State born during that period 
of 70 years has taken its place in the Assembly not just 
with pride but also with hope. The year 2015 will be 
a time to celebrate our successes and ensure that the 
United Nations is ready for this century, by completing 
much-needed reforms of the Organization and its 
Security Council, developing an ambitious and balanced 
post-2015 development agenda and demonstrating our 
capacity to cooperate effectively for durable peace and 
security in the world we live in.
I feel deeply honoured and 
privileged to stand here before the General Assembly 
today representing the citizens of the State of Israel. 
We are an ancient people. We date back nearly 4,000 
years to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We have journeyed 
through time. We have overcome the greatest of 
adversities. And we re-established our sovereign State 
in our ancestral homeland, the land of Israel. The Jewish 
people’s odyssey through time has taught us two things: 
never give up hope and always remain vigilant. Hope 
charts the future, vigilance protects it.

Today our hope for the future is challenged by a 
nuclear-armed Iran that seeks our destruction. But I 
want members to know that that was not always the case. 
Some 2,500 years ago, the great Persian King Cyrus 
ended the Babylonian exile of the Jewish people. He 
issued a famous edict in which he proclaimed the right 
of the Jews to return to the land of Israel and rebuild the 
Jewish Temple in Jerusalem. That is a Persian decree, 
and thus began a historic friendship between the Jews 
and the Persians that lasted until modern times.

But, in 1979, a radical regime in Tehran tried to 
stamp out that friendship. As it was busy crushing 
the Iranian people’s hopes for democracy, it also led 
wild chants of “Death to the Jews!” Since that time, 
presidents of Iran have come and gone. Some presidents 
were considered moderates, others hard-liners. But 
they have all served that same unforgiving creed, that 
same unforgiving regime — that creed that is espoused 
and enforced by the real power in Iran, the dictator 
known in Iran as the Supreme Leader, first Ayatollah 
Khomeini and now Ayatollah Khamenei.

President Rouhani, like the presidents who came 
before him, is a loyal servant of the regime. He was 
one of only six candidates the regime permitted to run 
for office. Nearly 700 other candidates were rejected. 
What made him acceptable? Rouhani headed Iran’s 
Supreme National Security Council from 1989 through 
2003. During that time, Iran’s henchmen gunned 
down opposition leaders in a Berlin restaurant. They 
murdered 85 people at the Jewish community centre 
in Buenos Aires. They killed 19 American soldiers by 
blowing up the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia. Are we 
to believe that Rouhani, the national security adviser 
of Iran at the time, knew nothing about those attacks? 
Of course he did — just as 30 years ago Iran’s security 
chiefs knew about the bombings in Beirut that killed 
241 American marines and 58 French paratroopers.

Rouhani was also Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator 
between 2003 and 2005. He masterminded the strategy 
that enabled Iran to advance its nuclear-weapons 
programme behind a smokescreen of diplomatic 
engagement and very soothing rhetoric. I know that 
Rouhani does not sound like Ahmadinejad. But when it 
comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme, the only 
difference between them is this: Ahmadinejad was a 
wolf in wolf’s clothing, Rouhani is a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing — a wolf who thinks he can pull the wool over 
the eyes of the international community.

Like everyone else, I wish we could believe 
Rouhani’s words, but we must focus on Iran’s actions. 
And it is the brazen contrast — that extraordinary 
contradiction between Rouhani’s words and Iran’s 
actions — that is so startling. Rouhani stood at this very 
rostrum last week and praised Iranian democracy (see 
A/68/PV.6). Iranian democracy, he said. But the regime 
that he represents executes political dissidents by the 
hundreds and jails them by the thousands. Rouhani 
spoke of “the human tragedy in Syria”. Yet Iran directly 
participates in Al-Assad’s murder and massacre of tens 
of thousands of innocent men, women and children in 
Syria, and that regime is propping up a Syrian regime 
that just used chemical weapons against its own people. 
Rouhani condemned the “violent scourge” of terrorism. 
Yet in the past three years alone Iran has ordered, 
planned or perpetrated terrorist attacks in 25 cities 
on five continents. Rouhani denounced “attempts to 
change the regional balance through proxies”. Yet Iran 
is actively destabilizing Lebanon, Yemen, Bahrain and 
many other Middle Eastern countries. Rouhani promises 
“constructive engagement with other countries”. Yet 
two years ago, Iranian agents tried to assassinate Saudi 
Arabia’s Ambassador in Washington, D.C. Just three 
weeks ago, an Iranian agent was arrested while trying 
to collect information for possible attacks against the 
American Embassy in Tel Aviv. Some constructive 
engagement!

I wish I could be moved by Rouhani’s invitation 
to join his “WAVE” — a world against violence and 
extremism. Yet the only waves Iran has generated in the 
past 30 years are waves of violence and terrorism that 
it has unleashed on the region and across the world. I 
wish I could believe Rouhani, but I do not because facts 
are stubborn things. The facts are that Iran’s savage 



record flatly contradicts Rouhani’s soothing rhetoric. 
Last Friday, Rouhani assured us that in pursuit of its 
nuclear programme, Iran had “never chosen deceit and 
secrecy.” Never chosen deceit and secrecy?

In 2002, Iran was caught red-handed secretly 
building an underground centrifuge facility at Natanz. 
In 2009, Iran was again caught red-handed secretly 
building a huge underground nuclear facility for 
uranium enrichment in a mountain near Qom. Rouhani 
tells us not to worry. He assures us that all that is not 
intended for nuclear weapons. Does any here believe 
that? If so, here are a few questions to ask.

Why would a country that claims to only want 
peaceful nuclear energy build hidden underground 
enrichment facilities? Why would a country with vast 
natural energy reserves invest billions in developing 
nuclear energy? Why would a country intent on merely 
having civilian nuclear programmes continue to defy 
multiple Security Council resolutions and incur the costs 
of crippling sanctions on its economy? And why would 
a country with a peaceful nuclear programme develop 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) whose sole 
purpose is to deliver nuclear warheads? You do not build 
ICBMs to carry TNT thousands of miles away. You 
build them for one purpose: to carry nuclear warheads. 
Iran is now building ICBMs that the United States says 
could reach this city in three or four years.

Why would they do all that? The answer is simple. 
Iran is not building a peaceful nuclear programme. 
Iran is developing nuclear weapons. Last year alone, 
Iran enriched three tons of uranium to 3.5 per cent, 
doubled its stockpile of 20 per cent-enriched uranium 
and added thousands of new centrifuges, including 
advanced centrifuges. It also continued work on the 
heavy-water reactor in Arak in order to have another 
route to the bomb — a plutonium path. Since Rouhani’s 
election — and I stress this — that vast and feverish 
effort has continued unabated.

Underground nuclear facilities? Heavy water 
reactors? Advanced centrifuges? ICBMs? It is not that it 
is hard to find evidence that Iran has a nuclear-weapons 
programme; it is hard to find evidence that Iran does not 
have a nuclear-weapons programme. Last year, when 
I spoke here at the United Nations (see A/67/PV.12), I 
drew a red line. Iran has been very careful not to cross 
that line. But Iran is positioning itself to race across that 
line in future, at a time of its choosing. Iran wants to 
be in a position to rush forward to build nuclear bombs 
before the international community can detect it, much 
less prevent it. Yet Iran faces one big problem, and that 
problem is summed up in one word: sanctions.

I have argued for many years, including from 
this rostrum, that the only way to peacefully prevent 
Iran from developing nuclear weapons is to combine 
tough sanctions with a credible military threat. That 
policy is today bearing fruit. Thanks to the efforts of 
many countries, many represented here, and under the 
leadership of the United States, tough sanctions have 
taken a big bite out of Iran’s economy. Oil revenues 
have fallen. The currency has plummeted. Banks are 
hard pressed to transfer money. As a result, the regime 
is under intense pressure from the Iranian people to get 
the sanctions removed. That is why Rouhani got elected 
in the first place. That is why he launched his charm 
offensive. He definitely wants to get the sanctions 
lifted — I guarantee the Assembly that — but he does 
not want to give up Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme 
in return.

Here is the strategy to achieve that: first, smile a lot. 
Smiling never hurts. Secondly, pay lip service to peace, 
democracy and tolerance. Thirdly, offer meaningless 
concessions in exchange for lifting sanctions. Fourthly, 
and most important, ensure that Iran retains sufficient 
nuclear material and sufficient nuclear infrastructure 
to race to the bomb at a time that it chooses to do so. 
Why does Rouhani think he can get away with that? 
This is a ruse, a ploy. Why does Rouhani think he can 
get away with that? Because he has gotten away with it 
before. Because his strategy of talking a lot and doing 
little has worked for him in the past. He even brags 
about it. Here is what he said in his 2011 book about 
his time as Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator: “While 
we were talking to the Europeans in Tehran, we were 
installing equipment in Isfahan”. For those here who 
do not know, the Isfahan facility is an indispensable 
part of Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme. That is 
where uranium ore called yellowcake is converted into 
an enrichable form. Rouhani boasted: “By creating a 
calm environment, we were able to complete the work 
in Isfahan”. He fooled the world once; now he thinks 
he can fool it again. Rouhani thinks he can have his 
yellowcake and eat it too.

He has another reason to believe that he can get 
away with that, and that reason is called North Korea. 
Like Iran, North Korea also said its nuclear programme 
was for peaceful purposes. Like Iran, North Korea also 
offered meaningless concessions and empty promises 



in return for sanctions relief. In 2005, North Korea 
agreed to a deal that was celebrated the world over by 
many well-meaning people. Here is what a New York 
Times editorial had to say about it:

“For years now, foreign policy insiders have 
pointed to North Korea as the ultimate nightmare ... a 
closed, hostile and paranoid dictatorship with an 
aggressive nuclear-weapons programme. Very few 
could envision a successful outcome. And yet North 
Korea agreed in principle this week to dismantle its 
nuclear-weapons programme, return to the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, abide by the Treaty’s 
safeguards and admit international inspectors.
“Diplomacy, it seems, does work after all.” 
(New York Times, 20 September 2005)
A year later, North Korea exploded its first nuclear-
weapon device.
Yet as dangerous as a nuclear-armed North Korea 
is, it pales in comparison to the danger of a nuclear-
armed Iran. A nuclear-armed Iran would have a 
chokehold on the world’s main energy supplies. It would 
trigger nuclear proliferation throughout the Middle 
East, turning the most unstable part of the planet into 
a nuclear tinderbox. And for the first time in history, it 
would make the spectre of nuclear terrorism a clear and 
present danger.

A nuclear-armed Iran in the Middle East would 
not be another North Korea. It would be another 
50 North Koreas. I know that some in the international 
community think that I am exaggerating that threat. 
Sure, they know that Iran’s regime leads these chants: 
“Death to America!”, “Death to Israel!”. Then it 
pledges to wipe Israel off the map. But they think that 
wild rhetoric is just bluster for domestic consumption. 
Have those people learned nothing from history? The 
last century has taught us that, when a radical regime 
with global ambitions gets awesome power, sooner or 
later its appetite for aggression knows no bounds. That 
is the central lesson of the twentieth century. And we 
cannot forget it.

The world may have forgotten that lesson; the 
Jewish people have not. Iran’s fanaticism is not bluster. 
It is real. That fanatic regime must never be allowed to 
arm itself with nuclear weapons. I know that the world 
is weary of war. We in Israel know all too well the cost 
of war. But history has taught us that to prevent war 
tomorrow, we must be firm today.

That raises the question: Can diplomacy stop 
that threat? The only diplomatic solution that would 
work is one that fully dismantles Iran’s nuclear-
weapons programme and prevents it from having one 
in the future. President Obama rightly said that Iran’s 
conciliatory words must be matched by transparent, 
verifiable and meaningful action; and to be meaningful, 
a diplomatic solution would require Iran to do four 
things; first, cease all uranium enrichment, as called 
for by several Security Council resolutions; secondly, 
remove from Iran’s territory the stockpiles of enriched 
uranium; thirdly, dismantle the infrastructure for a 
nuclear-breakout capability, including the underground 
facility near Qom and the advanced centrifuges in 
Natanz; and, fourthly, stop all work at the heavy water-
reactor in Arak aimed at the production of plutonium. 
Those steps would put an end to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme and eliminate its breakout capability.

There are those who would readily agree to leave 
Iran with a residual capability to enrich uranium. I 
advise them to pay close attention to what Rouhani said 
in a speech to Iran’s Supreme Cultural Revolutionary 
Council published in 2005. This is what he said:

“A country that can enrich uranium to about 3.5 per 
cent will also have the capability to enrich it to 
about 90 per cent. Having fuel-cycle capability 
virtually means that a country that possesses this 
capability is able to produce nuclear weapons.”
Precisely: that is why Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme must be fully and verifiably dismantled. 
That is why the pressure on Iran must continue. Here 
is what the international community must do. First, 
keep up the sanctions. If Iran advances its nuclear-
weapons programme during negotiations, strengthen 
the sanctions. Secondly, do not agree to a partial deal. 
A partial deal would lift the international sanctions 
that have taken years to put in place, in exchange for 
cosmetic concessions that will take only weeks for Iran 
to reverse. Thirdly, lift the sanctions only when Iran 
fully dismantles its nuclear-weapons programme.

The international community has Iran on the 
ropes. If it wants to knock out Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme peacefully, do not let up on the pressure. 
Keep it up. We all want to give diplomacy with Iran a 
chance to succeed. But when it comes to Iran, the greater 
the pressure, the greater the chance. Three decades 
ago, President Ronald Reagan famously advised “trust 
but verify”. When it comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 



programme, here is my advice: distrust, dismantle and 
verify.

Israel will never acquiesce to nuclear arms in the 
hands of a rogue regime that repeatedly promises to 
wipe us off the map. Against such a threat, Israel will 
have no choice but to defend itself. I want there to be 
no confusion on this point: Israel will not allow Iran to 
get nuclear weapons. If Israel is forced to stand alone, 
Israel will stand alone. Yet in standing alone, Israel will 
know that we will be defending many others.

The dangers of a nuclear-armed Iran and the 
emergence of other threats in our region have led many 
of our Arab neighbours to finally recognize that Israel 
is not their enemy. That affords us the opportunity 
to overcome historic animosities and build new 
relationships, new friendships and new hopes. Israel 
welcomes engagement with the wider Arab world. We 
hope that our common interests and common challenges 
will help us forge a more peaceful future.

And Israel continues to seek a historic compromise 
with our Palestinian neighbours, one that ends our 
conflict once and for all. We want peace based on 
security and mutual recognition in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State of Israel.

I remain committed to achieving a historic 
reconciliation and building a better future for Israelis 
and Palestinians alike. I have no illusions about how 
difficult it will be to achieve. Twenty years ago, the 
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians began. 
Six Israeli Prime Ministers — myself included — have 
not succeeded in achieving peace with the Palestinians. 
My predecessors were prepared to make painful 
concessions. So am I.

But so far, Palestinian leaders have not been 
prepared to offer the painful concessions they must 
make in order to end the conflict. For peace to be 
achieved, the Palestinians must finally recognize 
the Jewish State and Israel’s security needs must be 
met. I am prepared to make a historic compromise 
for a genuine and enduring peace. But I will never 
compromise on the security of my people and of my 
country — the one and only Jewish State.

One cold day in the late nineteenth century, my 
grandfather, Nathan, and his younger brother, Judah, 
were standing in a railway station in the heart of Europe. 
They were seen by a group of anti-Semitic hoodlums, 
who ran towards them waving clubs, screaming, “Death 
to the Jews!” My grandfather shouted to his younger 
brother to flee and save himself. And he then stood 
alone against the raging mob to slow it down. They beat 
him senseless. They left him for dead. Before he passed 
out, covered in his own blood, he said to himself: 
“What a disgrace! What a disgrace! The descendants 
of the Maccabees lie in the mud, powerless to defend 
themselves.” He promised himself then that if he lived, 
he would take his family to the Jewish homeland and 
help to build a future for the Jewish people.

I stand here today as Israel’s Prime Minister because 
my grandfather kept that promise. So many other Israelis 
have a similar story: a parent or a grandparent who fled 
every conceivable oppression and went to Israel to start 
a new life in our ancient homeland. Together we have 
transformed a bludgeoned Jewish people, left for dead, 
into a vibrant, thriving nation, defending itself with the 
courage of modern Maccabees, developing limitless 
possibilities for the future.

In our time, the Biblical prophecies are being 
realized. As the prophet Amos said,

“They shall rebuild ruined cities and inhabit 
them. They shall plant vineyards and drink their 
wine. They shall till gardens and eat their fruit. 
And I will plant them upon their soil never to be 
uprooted again.”
The people of Israel have come home, never to be 
uprooted again.
Greetings! Let me begin 
by congratulating President Ashe on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. He is taking the 
reins at an important time. We wish him every success, 
and he has New Zealand’s support.

The recent events in Kenya, Iraq and Pakistan show 
how troubled the world can be. We commiserate with 
the Governments and peoples of those countries and 
extend our deepest sympathies to those who lost family 
and friends in those tragic incidents.

For most of us, born after the Second World War, the 
United Nations has been at the centre of our conception 
of how the world organizes itself. But the reality of the 
United Nations can be quite challenging. It is the one 
place where the countries of the world meet, talk and 
try to find solutions to global and regional issues.

Sadly, some of those discussions can become so 
arcane that they are sometimes quite removed from the 
issues they claim to be addressing. That is a concern in 
particular for small States, to which the Organization is 
so vitally important. 

Even more sadly, the United Nations has too often 
failed to provide solutions to the problems the world 
expects it to resolve. The gap between aspiration and 
delivery is all too apparent, as the situation in Syria 
has again so brutally reminded us. But any failures of 
this institution are less failures of the Organization 
than they are failures on our part, as its Member States, 
and on the part of those who have the responsibility of 
leading those States.

There would be no dreadful humanitarian situation 
in Syria if Syria’s leaders had upheld the commitments 
made to the international community and to the Syrian 
people when Syria joined the Organization and ratified 
the human rights covenants.

The Organization would not also have been a 
powerless bystander to the Syrian tragedy for over 
two years if the lack of agreement among the Security 
Council’s permanent members had not shielded the 
Al-Assad regime, thereby reconfirming the fears of 
New Zealand and others that had opposed the veto at 
the original San Francisco Conference, in 1945.

New Zealand is pleased that the Security Council 
has at last met on the situation in Syria. The Secretary-
General has advised the Council and the General 
Assembly that the United Nations Mission has now 
confirmed, unequivocally and objectively, that 
chemical weapons have been used in Syria. The report 
(see A/67/997) found clear and convincing evidence 
that surface-to-surface rockets containing the nerve 
agent Sarin were used on 21 August.

The information in the report also makes it very 
clear that those rockets must have been fired by the 
Syrian regime. As the Secretary-General has said, these 
are war crimes, and those responsible must be brought 
to account.

Those that try to cast doubt on the report’s 
conclusions make themselves look foolish and do a 
disservice to the United Nations.

It is imperative now that the Council act. It must 
adopt a resolution that responds to the use of chemical 
weapons. It must find a means to hold those responsible 
to account and establish an effective mechanism 
for the destruction of those weapons in line with the 
proposal developed by the United States and Russia. 
The resolution must also provide for the protection of 
the civilian population. 

While Syria necessarily commands our attention, 
I also want to spend some time on some more positive 
developments for both the Organization and its Member 
States. I want to begin with my own country, New 
Zealand, whose emergence as a fully independent State 
has proceeded in parallel with the development of the 
United Nations.



New Zealand was present at the founding in San 
Francisco. We take pride in the fact that we were able 
to influence the drafting of the Charter, particularly the 
section on the Trusteeship Council, which paved the 
way for a number of States to become full Members of 
the Organization.

New Zealand has come a long way since the Charter 
was adopted. Then, we were emerging from our status 
as a dominion of the United Kingdom. Today we proudly 
assert ourselves as a small but independent and diverse 
country that has a wide network of friends and trading 
relationships in all the major regions and markets of 
the world. We value our traditional relationships with 
Australia and the Pacific, and in Europe and North 
America as we build new links with partners in Asia, 
the rest of the Americas and the Caribbean, and Africa.

Building and sustaining political and commercial 
links across the regions of the world is no small matter 
for a country like New Zealand. We are surrounded by 
the Pacific Ocean and located over three hours’ flying 
time from our nearest neighbour, Australia, in one of 
the least populated parts of the world. We share with 
our Pacific island neighbours the challenges of distance 
and isolation, and of having to hold our own against 
much larger countries whose economies of scale 
and proximity to markets give them a considerable 
competitive advantage. These factors have reinforced 
New Zealand’s approach to the United Nations and to 
the other international organizations that have shaped 
the post-Second World War environment.

We have a strong preference for a rules-based, 
multilateralist approach, whether in the United 
Nations, the World Trade Organization (WTO) or the 
World Bank. We know that rules and standards set 
internationally provide us the greatest certainty and 
the greatest protection. We draw strength from global 
agreements and from the collective commitment they 
represent.

That is why we attach such importance to the 
completion of the Doha Round. While New Zealand 
continues to actively negotiate bilateral and regional 
trade agreements, we acknowledge that free trade 
agreements often leave least developed countries on the 
sidelines. The benefit of the WTO, as with the United 
Nations, is that the rules negotiated there apply across 
the globe, irrespective of a country’s size or wealth.

Our preference for international rules reflects New 
Zealand’s national approach to governance. We have 
a robust and transparent system of Government and 
sound financial institutions that have helped us ride out 
the worst effects of the global financial crisis. That was 
despite the significant economic and social challenges 
we faced after the destructive earthquake that struck 
Christchurch, our second largest city, in 2011.

As we work to restore the built environment in 
Christchurch, New Zealanders are also conscious 
of our dependence on and our responsibility towards 
the natural environment. In policy terms, climate 
change has been a challenge for New Zealand and 
for the international community more broadly, but 
New Zealanders know we must play our part, and we 
have taken action. We have introduced an extensive 
emissions-trading scheme. We are investing in the 
Global Research Alliance to find new ways to manage 
agricultural greenhouse gases, and we have committed 
to reducing emissions to 5 per cent below 1990 levels 
by 2020.

We made that commitment under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
rather than the Kyoto Protocol. We did that because, 
while the Kyoto Protocol once seemed to provide a path 
forward, things have changed. The Protocol now covers 
only a small percentage of global emissions. We need a 
single legal framework that commits all major emitters. 

While climate change is an important issue, it pales 
in comparison to the problems faced by many Member 
States. One of the most intractable is that of Israel and 
Palestine. As long as that problem is left unresolved, 
there can be no assured peace in the Middle East and no 
security for the wider region. There can be no resolution 
without the Israeli and Palestinian peoples both being 
assured of viable homelands within secure borders. 
New Zealand pays tribute to the tenacity of United 
States Secretary of State Kerry and to the courage of 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu in 
agreeing to resume the Middle East peace process.

In our own region, we have celebrated the successful 
conclusion of the United Nations Mission in Timor-Leste 
and the transition of the Regional Assistance Mission 
to the Solomon Islands from a military to a police-led 
operation. We look forward with intense interest and 
cautious hope to the reinstatement of democracy in 
Fiji. We acknowledge the positive developments there, 
including with regard to election preparations and voter 
registration. The countries of the Pacific, including 
New Zealand, want and need Fiji to be successful, 
democratic and well-governed.


Earlier this year, New Zealand withdrew the bulk 
of its forces from Afghanistan, following the closure of 
the New Zealand-led provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamian province, which provided security and helped 
bring about a significant improvement in governance 
and development. Schools and hospitals were rebuilt and 
health centres re-opened. Mortality rates for children 
under 5 were halved. Maternal deaths are now a quarter 
of the Taliban-era levels. Girls now make up half the 
number of primary-school-age children. New Zealand 
expertise also helped substantially improve agricultural 
yields through the implementation of modern farming 
techniques. We are building the largest solar energy 
system in Afghanistan, which will bring a renewable 
source of electricity to much of Bamian township. That 
was a big commitment by a small country situated far 
away. It also came at a considerable cost: 10 of our 
servicemen and women lost their lives while on duty 
there. Even so, we are proud of what we achieved in 
partnership with the people of Bamian and hope that 
those gains can be sustained in the years ahead.

In Africa we see a continent where many countries 
have faced real challenges. However, as the President of 
Nigeria reminded us earlier this week (see A/68/PV.5), 
the new story of Africa is the growing number of 
countries in the region that are enjoying the benefits 
of good governance, sound economic growth and 
development, driving positive change throughout the 
continent. All of that is good news for Africa and for 
the world. New Zealand will do what it can to help 
with targeted assistance in areas where we have real 
expertise to offer, namely, in the fields of agriculture, 
renewable energy and good governance. New Zealand 
also recognizes and supports the critical roles of the 
African Union and Africa’s subregional bodies in 
ensuring Africa’s security and future prosperity.

New Zealand recognizes the importance to Africa, 
the Caribbean and our own region of the Arms Trade 
Treaty, adopted in April and signed by New Zealand 
and many others on 3 June The Treaty should curb the 
flows of small arms and other weapons, especially to 
conflict regions, and help arrest the deaths and human 
misery that they cause.

I want to also applaud the progress made in 
implementing the Millennium Development Goals, 
while at the same time acknowledging the fact that 
much work remains to be done. We now need to work 
together on a post-2015 development agenda focused on 
creating economic opportunities and the eradication of 
poverty.

Many of the same issues will be addressed at 
the Third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, which Samoa is to host in 2014. 
New Zealand is pleased to be a major supporter of that 
important United Nations effort and, with the rest of 
the Pacific, looks forward to welcoming the world to 
our region.

We need to remind ourselves that sound governance 
arrangements and transparency of process are also 
vital virtues for international organizations, including 
the United Nations. By any objective assessment, the 
Organization has not been equipped with the structures 
and rules it needs to operate as it should. Yet there has 
been deep resistance to efforts to make things better. 
That needs to change. The rationale for United Nations 
reform is clear. Membership has quadrupled since 1945, 
yet over the same period its key organs — particularly 
the Security Council — have become hostage to their 
own traditions and to the interests of the most powerful. 

From the 1950s to the 1990s, we could blame the 
Cold War when the Security Council did not act. That 
does not wash today. The problems are more systemic 
and relate both to the composition and the formal and 
informal processes of the Council. We now seem to have 
a practice whereby the permanent members not only 
can block Council actions through the use of the veto, 
but also appear to have privileged access to information 
and can stop the Council from meeting if it does not 
suit their collective purposes. Such behaviour damages 
the reputation and credibility of the wider Organization 
and must be challenged. Such issues are not necessarily 
matters of Charter reform, which we know is difficult, 
but have to do with the effective functioning of the 
Organization — an issue in which we all have a stake.

New Zealand is not advocating revolution, but we 
are asserting that the Council can and must do better in 
the way it conducts its business. That is the approach 
New Zealand will bring to the Security Council if we 
are elected next October. If successful, it will be 21 
years since New Zealand last served on the Council — a 
long time ago, but not so long that we have forgotten the 
lessons learned during our last term. At the top of that 
list is the imperative that members have to be engaged; 
they must listen to the concerns of others and have a 
view and a voice if they are to be relevant. There is 
no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 



numbers. Sometimes there is a need to speak up and 
shine a light on what is going on, or not going on, even 
when that may be inconvenient to others. That applies 
whether the issue was Rwanda, Somalia, Yemen or 
Yugoslavia in 1993-94, or is the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, the Sudan or Syria in 2013 to 2014.

My hope is that when Member States make their 
decision on whom to vote for in October 2014, they will 
look at New Zealand’s record and know that we will be 
a credible, positive influence on the Security Council 
and a voice for the interests of the wider Organization.
International relations are becoming increasingly 
complex and multidimensional, while developments 
in the world are even more rapid and less predictable. 
Under these circumstances as never before, there is an 
urgent need to agree upon collective responses to the 
key issues of today. It is solely within the power of such 
a truly universal Organization as the United Nations 
to do so. Moreover, such solidarity-based efforts will 
be productive only if they reflect the entire spectrum 
of views of the international community on global 
challenges and threats, a broad range of historical 
experiences and the full cultural and civilizational 
diversity of the modern world.

For most of the Members of the United Nations 
family, that approach is axiomatic. However, there is 
also another tendency whereby collective actions are 
understood primarily as agreement with the viewpoint 
of one group of countries. Such views manifest 
themselves in various areas: international security, the 
settlement of conflict situations, the functioning of the 
world economy, and the choice of development models 
and core values.

Many problems affecting today’s world are reflected 
in the tragic situation in Syria and in the uncertainty 
surrounding the development of events in the Middle 
East and North Africa overall. From the very onset of 
the turmoil in that region, Russia has consistently called 
for the development by the international community 
of a common approach combining support for the 
Arab peoples on their path to transformation with 
an understanding of the fact that, objectively, those 
processes will be lengthy and sometimes painful, and 
that it will be quite important not to undermine them 
through gross outside interference.

We have emphasized the need to act in a balanced 
way and to take account of the fact that current complex 
developments are associated with, among other things, 
a tireless quest for compromises among the various 
ethnic and religious groups that make up the mosaic 
of Arab societies. We have consistently supported the 
choice of the evolutionary way of development and the 
peaceful settlement of crises through national dialogue 
and reconciliation.

Another perspective has been reflected in the 
attempts made to determine who is and is not legitimate 
among the leaders of the Middle East and North Africa 
region, to impose a view as to which side should be 
supported in domestic national conflicts, and to dictate 
external, ready-made prescriptions for democratic 
transformation.

Attempts to portray, in a simplified way, the 
developments in the Arab world as the struggle of 
democracy against tyranny or of good against evil 
have long obscured the problems associated with the 
rising wave of extremism, which is spilling over into 
other regions today. The terrorist attacks in Kenya 
have demonstrated the full gravity of that threat. It is 
common knowledge that jihadist groups that include 
numerous radical elements from all parts of the world 
are the most combat-capable units of the opposition. 
The goals that they are pursuing have nothing to do with 
democracy but are based on intolerance and aimed at 
the destruction of secular States and the establishment 
of caliphates. It is difficult to qualify as far-sighted a 
policy that entails fighting in Mali the same extremist 
groups that are being supported in Syria.

The use of chemical weapons is inadmissible. That 
does not mean, however, that one can usurp the right 
to accuse and to render verdicts. All of the incidents 
associated with the use of chemical weapons in Syria, 
by whomsoever committed, must be investigated in a 
professional and unbiased manner and then considered 
by the Security Council exclusively on the basis of 
facts rather than of allegations or assumptions. In that 
respect, at the Group of 20 (G-20) summit held in June, 
an agreement was reached by leaders of the eight key 
States.



Recently a common argument has been 
increasingly made to the effect that the threat or use 
of force, directly prohibited by the Charter of the 
United Nations, is virtually the most effective method 
of addressing international problems, including the 
settlement of domestic conflicts. There have been 
attempts to extrapolate such an approach to the 
situation in Syria as well, despite the fact that recent 
experience with such interventions has proved that they 
are ineffective, meaningless and destructive. That is an 
extremely dangerous path leading to the erosion of the 
foundations of today’s world order and the subversion 
of the weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation 
regimes.

It is alarming to hear statements about the right 
to use military force to ensure one’s own interests in 
the Middle East region under the pretext of a persistent 
leadership gap in the international arena. Recent history 
shows that no State, no matter how big or powerful, 
can cope alone with challenges of the scope faced by 
humankind today.

There is no doubt that leadership is required. 
However, today it can only be collective leadership 
based on agreed actions of the leading members of 
the international community, with strict respect for 
the principles and norms of international law. It is 
the growing understanding of that reality that has 
opened the way towards achieving Russia-United 
States understandings relating to the placing under 
international control and subsequent elimination of the 
Syrian chemical arsenals. That became possible thanks 
to the decision by Damascus to join the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and fulfil the relevant obligations 
following the expedited procedure.

We expect that the decisions of the Organization 
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Executive 
Council and the Security Council will contribute to 
creating the framework required for the elimination of 
chemical arsenals in Syria.

Progress in the area of chemical disarmament in 
Syria should give impetus to the implementation of 
existing arrangements to convene a conference on 
establishing a zone free of weapons of mass destruction 
and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We know 
that there are a number of complicated issues related to 
ensuring full participation of the countries of the region 
in such a conference, but they cannot be discussed 
endlessly. That is exactly when true leadership and 
resolve must be demonstrated for the common benefit.

People are continuing to die and innocent civilians 
to suffer every day in Syria. Religious minorities, 
including Christian communities, are becoming 
victims of the conflict, which is increasingly acquiring 
a sectarian character. Virtually the only possibility 
remaining today to put an end to this turmoil is 
to break the deadlock regarding the process of a 
political settlement of the Syrian crisis. We continue 
to work tirelessly for the earliest convening of a peace 
conference to implement the Geneva communiqué 
of 30 July 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We hope that, 
following the example set by the Government of Syria, 
the opposition will also constructively respond to the 
Russia-United States initiative.

The Syrian crisis should not overshadow the need to 
address the Palestinian problem. We expect the Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders to shoulder their responsibility 
for the future of their people at this current critical 
stage, where the parties have resumed direct talks 
after a lengthy interruption. While duly recognizing 
the efforts made by the United States in the Middle 
East settlement process, we deem it necessary to 
intensify the activity of the Quartet, the internationally 
recognized mechanism for providing assistance to the 
peace process in the region on the basis of the relevant 
decisions of the United Nations, the Madrid principles 
and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is also important to 
ensure the close involvement of the Arab countries in 
the activities of the Quartet.

Approaches based on negotiation are also required 
with respect to other situations, including the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the nuclear problem in the 
Korean peninsula. As President Vladimir Putin noted 
in his recent article in the 11 September 2013 issue of 
The New York Times,

“We must stop using the language of force and 
return to the path of civilized diplomatic and 
political settlement.”
This would help to improve the international 
environment and contribute to stepping up collective 
efforts to counter global challenges, including terrorism 
and drug trafficking. Russia intends to attach priority 
attention to these challenges during its presidency of 
the Group of Eight, in 2014.

Today, when the rigid frame of the bipolar system 
has been long relegated to the past, a mark of the time 
is the strengthening of the democratic foundations both 
within States and in international relations. That means 



in particular that the recognition of the right of peoples 
to independently determine their destiny and to choose 
the optimal forms of social and political structure 
and social and economic systems should become an 
indisputable norm of conduct. In the same way, the 
complex of exclusiveness and supremacy regarding 
one’s own customs in the human rights area should be 
abandoned and instead the universal criteria enshrined 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights should 
be used as a guideline. Moreover, it is important to 
respect the traditional values that are common to all 
the religions.

It is obvious that a genuine partnership is hardly 
achievable without reliance on the foundations of 
economic cooperation. The prevailing majority of 
States are interacting within the framework of the 
World Trade Organization and in that sense they are 
already operating in a common economic space. 
This creates the prerequisites for working towards 
harmonization of integration processes in various 
regions of the world instead of trying to artificially pit 
them against each other by creating new division lines. 
Russia is proceeding from that exact understanding in 
its joint work with its partners in the establishment of 
the Eurasian Economic Union.

Russia attaches great importance to achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals and the drafting of the 
global development agenda for the post-2015 period 
on their basis. The main priorities are the eradication 
of poverty and support for economic growth through 
the expansion of investment opportunities and the 
creation of new jobs. Some of the most urgent issues 
are the strengthening of the energy and transport 
infrastructures, the fight against infectious diseases 
and road safety.

Cooperation among States should rely on efficient 
mechanisms and an adequate resource base. In that 
context, we support the further strengthening of the 
coordinating role and potential of the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council. During its chairmanship 
of the Group of 20, Russia has consistently pursued 
a policy of developing its interaction with the United 
Nations. We believe that the General Assembly, in 
cooperation with the G-20, will develop a realistic 
programme of long-term cooperation.

I firmly believe that, by joining forces on the basis 
of genuine respect and considering the interests of each 
and everyone, we will be able to achieve the lofty goals 
that are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Each year we come together to 
reaffirm the founding vision of this institution. For most 
of recorded history, individual aspirations were subject 
to the whims of tyrants and empires, and divisions of 
race, religion and tribe were settled through the sword 
and the clash of armies. 

The idea that nations and peoples could come 
together in peace to solve their disputes and advance a 
common prosperity seemed unimaginable. It took the 
awful carnage of two world wars to shift our thinking. 
The leaders who built the United Nations were not naive. 
They did not think that this body could eradicate all 
wars. But in the wake of millions dead and continents 
in rubble and with the development of nuclear weapons 
that could annihilate a planet, they understood that 
humanity could not survive the course it was on. They 
gave us this institution, believing that it could allow 
us to resolve conflicts, enforce rules of behaviour and 
build habits of cooperation that would grow stronger 
over time.

For decades, the United Nations has in fact made 
a difference, from helping to eradicate disease to 



educating children and brokering peace. But like 
every generation of leaders, we face new and profound 
challenges, and this body continues to be tested. The 
question is whether we possess the wisdom and the 
courage as nation States and members of an international 
community to squarely meet those challenges. Can the 
United Nations meet the test of our time?

And for much of my tenure as President, some of 
our most urgent challenges have revolved around an 
increasingly integrated global economy and our efforts 
to recover from the worst economic crisis of our lifetime. 
Now, five years after the global economy collapsed and 
thanks to coordinated efforts by the countries here 
today, jobs are being created, global financial systems 
have stabilized and people are once again being lifted 
out of poverty. But this progress is fragile and unequal, 
and we still have work to do together to assure that our 
citizens can access the opportunities that they need in 
order to thrive in the twenty-first century.

Together, we have also worked to end a decade of 
war. Five years ago nearly 180,000 Americans were 
serving in harm’s way, and the war in Iraq was the 
dominant issue in our relationship with the rest of the 
world. Today, all of our troops have left Iraq. Next year an 
international coalition will end its war in Afghanistan, 
having achieved its mission of dismantling the core of 
Al Qaida that attacked us on 9/11.

For the United States, those new circumstances 
have also meant shifting away from a perpetual war 
footing. Beyond bringing our troops home we have 
limited the use of drones so that they target only those 
who pose a continuing imminent threat to the United 
States, when capture is not feasible and when there 
is a near certainty of no civilian casualties. We are 
transferring detainees to other countries and trying 
terrorists in courts of law, while working diligently to 
close the prison at Guantanamo Bay. Just as we have 
reviewed how we deploy our extraordinary military 
capabilities in a way that lives up to our ideals, we have 
begun to review the way that we gather intelligence, 
so that we properly balance the legitimate security 
concerns of our citizens and allies with the privacy 
concerns that all people share.

As a result of such work and cooperation with 
allies and partners, the world is more stable than it was 
five years ago. But even a glance at today’s headlines 
indicates that dangers remain. In Kenya, we have 
seen terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded 
shopping mall. Our hearts go out to the families of 
those who have been affected. In Pakistan, nearly 100 
people were recently killed by suicide bombers outside 
a church. In Iraq, killings and car bombs continue to be 
a terrible part of life.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida has splintered into regional 
networks and militias, which does not give them the 
capacity at this point to carry out attacks like 9/11 
but does pose serious threats to Governments and 
diplomats, businesses and civilians all across the globe. 
Just as significantly, the convulsions in the Middle East 
and North Africa have laid bare deep divisions within 
societies, as an old order is upended and people grapple 
with what is coming next. Peaceful movements have too 
often been answered by violence from those resisting 
change and from extremists trying to hijack change. 
Sectarian conflict has re-emerged, and the potential 
spread of weapons of mass destruction continues to cast 
a shadow over the pursuit of peace.

Nowhere have we seen those trends converge 
more powerfully than in Syria. There, peaceful 
protests against an authoritarian regime were met with 
repression and slaughter. In the face of such carnage, 
many retreated to their sectarian identities — Alawite 
and Sunni, Christian and Kurd — and the situation 
spiralled into civil war.

The international community recognized the stakes 
early on, but our response has not matched the scale of 
the challenge. Aid cannot keep pace with the suffering 
of the wounded and displaced. A peace process is 
stillborn. America and others have worked to bolster 
the moderate opposition, but extremist groups have still 
taken root to exploit the crisis.

Al-Assad’s traditional allies have propped him up, 
citing principles of sovereignty to shield his regime. 
On 21 August, the regime used chemical weapons in 
an attack that killed more than 1,000 people, including 
hundreds of children. Today, the crisis in Syria and the 
destabilization of the region goes to the heart of broader 
challenges that the international community must now 
confront. How should we respond to conflicts in the 
Middle East and North Africa — conflicts between 
countries, but also conflicts within them? How do we 
address the choice between standing callously by while 
children are subjected to nerve gas and embroiling 
ourselves in someone else’s civil war? What is the role of 
force in resolving disputes that threaten the stability of 
a region and undermine all basic standards of civilized 
conduct? And what is the role of the United Nations and 
international law in meeting cries for justice?



Today, I want to outline where the United States of 
America stands on those issues.

With respect to Syria, we believe that, as a starting 
point, the international community must enforce the ban 
on chemical weapons. When I stated my willingness to 
order a limited strike against the Al-Assad regime in 
response to its brazen use of chemical weapons, I did 
not do so lightly. I did so because I believe that it is 
in the national security interests of the United States 
and in the interest of the world to meaningfully enforce 
a prohibition whose origins are older than the United 
Nations itself. The ban against the use of chemical 
weapons, even in war, has been agreed to by 98 percent 
of humanity. It is strengthened by the searing memories 
of soldiers suffocated in the trenches, Jews slaughtered 
in gas chambers, Iranians poisoned in the many tens of 
thousands.

The evidence is overwhelming that the Al-Assad 
regime used such weapons on 21 August. United 
Nations inspectors gave a clear accounting of their 
findings that advanced rockets had fired large 
quantities of sarin gas at civilians. Those rockets were 
fired from a regime-controlled neighbourhood and 
landed in opposition neighbourhoods. It is an insult to 
human reason and to the legitimacy of this institution 
to suggest that anyone other than the regime carried out 
this attack.

I know that in the immediate aftermath of the attack 
there were those who questioned the legitimacy of even 
a limited strike in the absence of a clear mandate from 
the Security Council. But without a credible military 
threat, the Security Council had demonstrated no 
inclination to act at all. However, as I have discussed 
with President Putin for over a year, most recently in 
St. Petersburg, my preference has always been to work 
for a diplomatic resolution to this issue, and in the past 
several weeks, the United States, Russia and our allies 
have reached an agreement to place Syria’s chemical 
weapons under international control and then destroy 
them.

The Syrian Government took a first step by giving 
an accounting of its stockpiles. Now, there must be a 
strong Security Council resolution to verify that the 
Al-Assad regime is keeping its commitments, and there 
must be consequences if they fail to do so. If we cannot 
agree even on that, then that will show that the United 
Nations is incapable of enforcing the most basic of 
international laws. On the other hand, if we succeed, it 
will send a powerful message that the use of chemical 
weapons has no place in the twenty-first century and 
that this Organization means what it says.

Our agreement on chemical weapons should 
energize a larger diplomatic effort to reach a political 
settlement within Syria. I do not believe that military 
action by those within Syria or by external Powers can 
achieve a lasting peace, nor do I believe that America 
or any nation should determine who will lead Syria. 
That is for the Syrian people to decide. Nevertheless, a 
leader who has slaughtered his own citizens and gassed 
children to death cannot regain the legitimacy to lead 
a badly fractured country. The notion that Syria can 
return to a pre-war status quo is a fantasy. 

It is time for Russia and Iran to realize that insisting 
on Al-Assad’s rule will lead directly to the outcome that 
they fear — an increasingly violent space for extremists 
to operate in. In turn, those of us who continue to 
support the moderate opposition must persuade them 
that the Syrian people cannot afford a collapse of State 
institutions and that a political settlement cannot be 
reached without addressing the legitimate fears and 
concerns of Alawites and other minorities. 

We are committed to working this political track, 
and as we pursue a settlement, let us remember that 
this is not a zero-sum endeavour. We are no longer in 
a cold war. There is no great game to be won, nor does 
America have any interest in Syria beyond the well-
being of its people, the stability of its neighbours, the 
elimination of chemical weapons and ensuring that it 
does not become a safe haven for terrorists. I welcome 
the influence of all nations that can help bring about a 
peaceful resolution of Syria’s civil war. 

As we move the Geneva process forward, I 
urge all nations represented here to step up to meet 
the humanitarian needs in Syria and surrounding 
countries. America has committed over a billion dollars 
to that effort, and today I can announce that we will be 
providing an additional $340 million. No aid can take 
the place of a political resolution that gives the Syrian 
people the chance to begin rebuilding their country, but 
it can help desperate people survive.

What broader conclusions can be drawn from 
America’s policy towards Syria? I know that there are 
those who have been frustrated by our unwillingness 
to use our military might to depose Al-Assad and 
believe that a failure to do so indicates a weakening of 
America’s resolve in the region. Others have suggested 
that my willingness to direct even limited military 



strikes to deter the further use of chemical weapons 
shows that we have learned nothing from Iraq, and that 
America continues to seek control over the Middle East 
for our own purposes. The situation in Syria mirrors 
a contradiction that has persisted in the region for 
decades. The United States is chastised for meddling in 
the region and accused of having a hand in all manner 
of conspiracies. At the same time, the United States is 
blamed for failing to do enough to solve the region’s 
problems and for showing indifference toward suffering 
Muslim populations.

I realize that some of that is inevitable, given 
America’s role in the world, but such contradictory 
attitudes have a practical impact on the American 
people’s support for our involvement in the region 
and allow leaders in the region, and the international 
community sometimes, to avoid addressing difficult 
problems themselves. So let me take this opportunity 
to outline what has been United States policy towards 
the Middle East and North Africa and what will be my 
policy during the remainder of my presidency.

The United States of America is prepared to use 
all elements of our power, including military force, 
to secure these core interests in the region. We will 
confront external aggression against our allies and 
partners, as we did in the Gulf War. We will ensure 
the free flow of energy from the region to the world. 
Although America is steadily reducing its own 
dependence on imported oil, the world still depends 
upon the region’s energy supply, and a severe disruption 
could destabilize the entire global economy. We will 
dismantle terrorist networks that threaten our people. 
Wherever possible, we will build the capacity of our 
partners, respect the sovereignty of nations and work 
to address the root causes of terror, but when it is 
necessary to defend the United States against terrorist 
attack, we will take direct action. Finally, we will not 
tolerate the development or use of weapons of mass 
destruction. Just as we consider the use of chemical 
weapons in Syria to be a threat to our own national 
security, we reject the development of nuclear weapons 
that could trigger a nuclear arms race in the region and 
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.

Now, to say that those are America’s core interests 
is not to say that they are our only interests. We deeply 
believe that it is in our interest to see a Middle East and 
North Africa that are peaceful and prosperous, and we 
will continue to promote democracy, human rights and 
open markets, because we believe that those practices 
help achieve peace and prosperity. But I also believe 
that we can rarely achieve those objectives through 
unilateral American action, particularly military 
action. Iraq has shown us that democracy cannot 
simply be imposed by force. Rather, such objectives are 
best achieved when we partner with the international 
community and with the countries and peoples of the 
region.

So what does that mean going forward? In the near 
term, America’s diplomatic efforts will focus on two 
particular issues: Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons 
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. While those issues are 
not the cause of all of the region’s problems, they have 
been a major source of instability for far too long, and 
resolving them can help serve as a foundation for a 
broader peace.

The United States and Iran have been isolated 
from one another since the Islamic revolution of 1979. 
That mistrust has deep roots. Iranians have long 
complained of a history of United States interference 
in their affairs and of America’s role in overthrowing 
an Iranian Government during the cold war. On the 
other hand, Americans see an Iranian Government that 
has declared the United States an enemy and directly 
or through proxies has taken Americans hostage, killed 
United States troops and civilians and threatened our 
ally Israel with destruction.

I do not believe such a difficult history can be 
overcome overnight. The suspicion runs too deep. But 
I do believe that, if we can resolve the issue of Iran’s 
nuclear programme, that can serve as a major step down 
a long road towards a different relationship, one based 
on mutual interests and mutual respect.

Since I took office, I have made it clear, in letters 
to the Supreme Leader in Iran and, more recently, to 
President Rouhani, that America prefers to resolve its 
concerns over Iran’s nuclear programme peacefully, 
although we are determined to prevent Iran from 
developing a nuclear weapon. We are not seeking regime 
change, and we respect the right of the Iranian people 
to access peaceful nuclear energy. Instead, we insist 
that the Iranian Government meet its responsibilities 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and Security Council resolutions. Meanwhile, 
the Supreme Leader has issued a fatwa against the 
development of nuclear weapons, and President 
Rouhani has just recently reiterated that the Islamic 
Republic will never develop a nuclear weapon.



Those statements made by our respective 
Governments should offer the basis for a meaningful 
agreement. We should be able to achieve a resolution 
that respects the rights of the Iranian people while 
giving the world confidence that the Iranian programme 
is peaceful. But to succeed, conciliatory words will 
have to be matched by actions that are transparent and 
verifiable. After all, it is the Iranian Government’s 
choices that have led to the comprehensive sanctions 
that are currently in place. That is not simply an issue 
between the United States and Iran. The world has 
seen Iran evade its responsibilities in the past and has 
an abiding interest in making sure that Iran meets its 
obligations in future.

But I want to be clear. We are encouraged by the 
fact that President Rouhani received from the Iranian 
people a mandate to pursue a more moderate course. 
Given President Rouhani’s stated commitment to reach 
an agreement, I am directing John Kerry to pursue this 
effort with the Iranian Government, in close cooperation 
with the European Union, the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Russia and China.

The roadblocks may prove to be too great, but I 
firmly believe that the diplomatic path must be tested. 
For while the status quo will only deepen Iran’s isolation, 
Iran’s genuine commitment to go down a different path 
will be good for the region and the world, and will help 
the Iranian people meet their extraordinary potential in 
commerce and culture, in science and education.

We are also determined to resolve a conflict that 
goes back even further than our differences with 
Iran: the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis. 
I have made it clear that the United States will never 
compromise our commitment to Israel’s security, nor 
our support for its existence as a Jewish State. Earlier 
this year, in Jerusalem, I was inspired by young Israelis 
who stood up for the belief that peace was necessary, 
just and possible, and I believe that there is a growing 
recognition within Israel that the occupation of the West 
Bank is tearing at the democratic fabric of the Jewish 
State. But the children of Israel have the right to live in 
a world where the nations assembled in this body fully 
recognize their country and where we unequivocally 
reject those who fire rockets at their homes or incite 
others to hate them.

Likewise, the United States remains committed to 
the belief that the Palestinian people have a right to live 
in security and dignity in their own sovereign State. On 
the same trip, I had the opportunity to meet with young 
Palestinians in Ramallah whose ambition and incredible 
potential are matched only by the pain they feel in 
having no firm place in the community of nations. They 
are understandably cynical as to whether real progress 
will ever be made, and they are frustrated by their 
families enduring the daily indignity of occupation. 
But they, too, recognize that two States is the only real 
path to peace, because, just as the Palestinian people 
must not be displaced, the State of Israel is here to stay.

The time is now ripe for the entire international 
community to get behind the pursuit of peace. Already 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated a 
willingness to take significant political risks. President 
Abbas has put aside efforts to short-cut the pursuit 
of peace and come to the negotiating table. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu has released Palestinian prisoners 
and reaffirmed his commitment to a Palestinian State. 
Current talks are focused on final status issues of 
borders and security, refugees and Jerusalem.

So now the rest of us must be willing to take risks 
as well. Friends of Israel, including the United States, 
must recognize that Israel’s security as a Jewish and 
democratic State depends upon the realization of a 
Palestinian State, and we should say so clearly. Arab 
States, and those who have supported the Palestinians, 
must recognize that stability will be served only through 
a two-State solution and a secure Israel. All of us must 
recognize that peace will be a powerful tool to defeat 
extremists throughout the region and embolden those 
who are prepared to build a better future. Moreover, 
ties of trade and commerce between Israelis and Arabs 
could be an engine of growth and opportunity at a 
time when too many young people in the region are 
languishing without work. So let us emerge from the 
familiar corners of blame and prejudice. Let us support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are prepared to walk 
the difficult road to peace.

Real breakthroughs on these two issues — Iran’s 
nuclear programme and Israeli-Palestinian peace — would 
have a profound and positive impact on the entire Middle 
East and North Africa. But the current convulsions 
arising out of the Arab Spring remind us that a just and 
lasting peace cannot be measured only by agreements 
between nations. It must also be measured by our ability 
to resolve conflict and promote justice within nations. 
And by that measure, it is clear that all of us have a lot 
more work to do. 

When peaceful transitions began in Tunisia and 
Egypt, the entire world was filled with hope. And 



although the United States, like others, was struck by 
the speed of transition, and although we did not — and 
in fact could not — dictate events, we chose to support 
those who called for change. We did so based on the 
belief that while these transitions will be hard and take 
time, societies based upon democracy and openness 
and the dignity of the individual will ultimately be 
more stable, more prosperous and more peaceful. 

Over the last few years, particularly in Egypt, 
we have seen just how hard this transition will be. 
Mohammed Morsi was democratically elected, but 
proved unwilling or unable to govern in a way that was 
fully inclusive. The interim Government that replaced 
him responded to the desires of millions of Egyptians 
who believed the revolution had taken a wrong turn, but 
it, too, has made decisions inconsistent with inclusive 
democracy, through an emergency law and restrictions 
on the press, civil society and opposition parties.

Of course, America has been attacked by all sides 
of this internal conflict, simultaneously accused of 
supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and engineering 
its removal from power. In fact, the United States has 
purposely avoided choosing sides. Our overriding 
interest throughout these past few years has been to 
encourage a Government that legitimately reflects 
the will of the Egyptian people and recognizes true 
democracy as requiring a respect for minority rights, 
the rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, and a 
strong civil society.

That remains our interest today. And so, going 
forward, the United States will maintain a constructive 
relationship with the interim Government that promotes 
core interests like the Camp David Accords and counter-
terrorism. We will continue support in areas such as 
education that directly benefit the Egyptian people. 
But we have not proceeded with the delivery of certain 
military systems, and our support will depend upon 
Egypt’s progress in pursuing a more democratic path. 

Our approach to Egypt reflects a larger point: the 
United States will at times work with Governments 
that do not meet — at least in our view — the highest 
international expectations, but who work with us on our 
core interests. Nevertheless, we will not stop asserting 
principles that are consistent with our ideals, whether 
that means opposing the use of violence as a means 
of suppressing dissent or supporting the principles 
embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. We will reject the notion that those principles 
are simply Western exports, incompatible with Islam or 
the Arab world. We believe that they are the birthright 
of every person. And while we recognize that our 
influence will at times be limited, although we will be 
wary of efforts to impose democracy through military 
force, and although we will at times be accused of 
hypocrisy and inconsistency, we will be engaged in the 
region for the long haul. For the hard work of forging 
freedom and democracy is the task of a generation. 
That includes efforts to resolve sectarian tensions that 
continue to surface in places like Iraq, Bahrain and 
Syria. 

We understand that such long-standing issues 
cannot be solved by outsiders; they must be addressed 
by Muslim communities themselves. But we have seen 
grinding conflicts come to an end before, most recently 
in Northern Ireland, where Catholics and Protestants 
finally recognized that an endless cycle of conflict was 
causing both communities to fall behind a fast-moving 
world. And so we believe that those same sectarian 
conflicts can be overcome in the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

To summarize, the United States has a hard-earned 
humility when it comes to our ability to determine 
events inside other countries. The notion of American 
empire may be useful propaganda, but it is not borne 
out by America’s current policy or public opinion. 
Indeed, as recent debates within the United States over 
Syria clearly showed, the danger for the world is not an 
America that is too eager to immerse itself in the affairs 
of other countries or to take on every problem in the 
region as its own. The danger for the world is that the 
United States, after a decade of war, rightly concerned 
about issues back home and aware of the hostility 
that our engagement in the region has engendered 
throughout the Muslim world, may disengage, creating 
a vacuum of leadership that no other nation is ready to 
fill.

I believe that such disengagement would be a 
mistake. I believe that America must remain engaged 
for our own security, but I also believe that the world 
is better for it. Some may disagree, but I believe that 
America is exceptional, in part because we have shown 
a willingness, through the sacrifice of blood and 
treasure, to stand up not only for our own narrow self-
interest, but for the interests of all. I must be honest, 
though; we are far more likely to invest our energy 
in those countries that want to work with us, that 
invest in their people instead of in a corrupt few, and 
that embrace a vision of society where everyone can 



contribute — men and women, Shia or Sunni, Muslim, 
Christian or Jew. Because from Europe to Asia, from 
Africa to the Americas, nations that have persevered on 
a democratic path have emerged more prosperous, more 
peaceful and more invested in upholding our common 
security and our common humanity. And I believe that 
the same will hold true for the Arab world.

That leads me to a final point. There will be 
times when the breakdown of societies is so great and 
the violence against civilians so substantial, that the 
international community will be called upon to act. 
That will require new thinking and some very tough 
choices. While the United Nations was designed to 
prevent wars between States, increasingly we face 
the challenge of preventing slaughter within States. 
And those challenges will grow more pronounced 
as we are confronted with States that are fragile or 
failing — places where horrendous violence can put 
innocent men, women and children at risk with no hope 
of protection from their national institutions.

I have made it clear that even when America’s core 
interests are not directly threatened, we stand ready to 
do our part to prevent mass atrocities and protect basic 
human rights. But we cannot and should not bear that 
burden alone. In Mali, we supported both the French 
intervention that successfully pushed back Al-Qaida 
and the African forces who are keeping the peace. In 
East Africa, we are working with partners to bring the 
Lord’s Resistance Army to an end. And in Libya, when 
the Security Council provided a mandate to protect 
civilians, America joined a coalition that took action. 
Because of what we did there, countless lives were 
saved and a tyrant could not kill his way back to power.

I know that some now criticize the action in 
Libya as an object lesson. They point to the problems 
that the country now confronts — a democratically 
elected Government struggling to provide security; 
armed groups, in some places extremists, ruling parts 
of a fractured land — and these critics argue that any 
intervention to protect civilians is doomed to fail. Look 
at Libya. No one is more mindful of those problems 
than I am, for they resulted in the death of four 
outstanding United States citizens who were committed 
to the Libyan people, including Ambassador Chris 
Stevens — a man whose courageous efforts helped save 
the city of Benghazi. But does anyone truly believe that 
the situation in Libya would be better if Al-Qadhafi had 
been allowed to kill, imprison or brutalize his people 
into submission? It is far more likely that without 
international action, Libya would now be engulfed in 
civil war and bloodshed.

We live in a world of imperfect choices. Different 
nations will not agree on the need for action in every 
instance, and the principle of sovereignty is at the centre 
of our international order. But sovereignty cannot be 
a shield for tyrants to commit wanton murder or an 
excuse for the international community to turn a blind 
eye. While we need to be modest in our belief that we 
can remedy every evil, and while we need to be mindful 
that the world is full of unintended consequences, 
should we really accept the notion that the world is 
powerless in the face of a Rwanda or a Srebrenica? If 
that is the world that people want to live in, they should 
say so and reckon with the cold logic of mass graves.

I believe that we can embrace a different future. If 
we do not want to choose between inaction and war, we 
must get better — all of us — at the policies that prevent 
the breakdown of basic order through respect for the 
responsibilities of nations and the rights of individuals, 
through meaningful sanctions for those who break 
the rules, through dogged diplomacy that resolves the 
root causes of conflict and not merely its aftermath, 
and through development assistance that brings hope 
to the marginalized. And yes sometimes, all this will 
not be enough and there will be moments when the 
international community will need to acknowledge that 
the multilateral use of military force may be required to 
prevent the very worst from occurring. 

Ultimately, that is the international community 
that America seeks — one where nations do not covet 
the land or resources of other nations, but one in which 
we carry out the founding purpose of this institution 
and where we all take responsibility; a world in which 
the rules established out of the horrors of war can help 
us resolve conflicts peacefully and prevent the kind of 
wars that our forefathers fought; a world where human 
beings can live with dignity and meet their basic needs, 
whether they live in New York or Nairobi, in Peshawar 
or Damascus.

These are extraordinary times with extraordinary 
opportunities. Thanks to human progress, a child 
born anywhere on Earth today can do things that 
60 years ago would have been out of reach for the mass 
of humankind. I saw this in Africa, where nations 
moving beyond conflict are now poised to take off. 
America is with them: partnering to feed the hungry 
and to care for the sick and to bring power to places 
off the grid. I see it across the Pacific region, where 



hundreds of millions have been lifted out of poverty in 
a single generation. I see it in the faces of young people 
everywhere who can access the entire world with the 
click of a button and who are eager to join the cause of 
eradicating extreme poverty, combating climate change, 
starting businesses, expanding freedom, and leaving 
behind the old ideological battles of the past. That is 
what is happening in Asia and Africa, it is happening 
in Europe and the Americas. That is the future that the 
people of the Middle East and North Africa deserve as 
well, one where they can focus on opportunity, instead 
of on whether they will be killed or repressed because 
of who they are or what they believe. 

Time and again, nations and people have shown 
a capacity to change, to live up to humanity’s highest 
ideals, to choose a better history. Last month, I stood 
where 50 years ago Martin Luther King Jr. told America 
about his dream, at a time when many people of my 
race could not even vote for President. Earlier this year, 
I stood in the small cell where Nelson Mandela endured 
for decades, cut off from his own people and the world. 
Who are we to believe that today’s challenges cannot be 
overcome, when we have seen what changes the human 
spirit can bring? Who in this Hall can argue that the 
future belongs to those who seek to repress that spirit, 
rather than to those who seek to liberate it? 

I know what side of history I want the United States 
of America to be on. We are ready to meet tomorrow’s 
challenges with you, firm in the belief that all men 
and women are in fact created equal, each individual 
possessed with a dignity and inalienable rights that 
cannot be denied. That is why we look to the future 
not with fear, but with hope. That is why we remain 
convinced that this community of nations can deliver 
a more peaceful, prosperous, and just world to the next 
generation. 
It is an honour and a privilege 
for me to once again address this body. South Africa 
attaches the utmost importance to the General Assembly 
as the most representative and democratic organ of the 
United Nations serving the international community.



We congratulate President Ashe and the Republic of 
Antigua and Barbuda on his election as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We also 
thank Mr. Vuk Jeremi. for the splendid way in which he 
presided over the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.

Let me begin by reiterating our condemnation of 
the horrific terrorist attack over the weekend in Kenya, 
in which a number of civilians, including a South 
African national, were killed. We express our deepest 
condolences to the Government and people of Kenya 
and to all those families who lost loved ones, and wish 
the wounded survivors a speedy recovery. We continue 
to support the efforts of Kenya and the international 
community aimed at peacekeeping, stability, democracy 
and nation-building in Somalia.

The theme for our debate this year, “The post-
2015 development agenda: setting the stage”, is most 
appropriate. In the year 2000, the commitment was 
made by world leaders in the Millennium Declaration 
to eradicate extreme poverty and adopt the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). The MDGs are measurable 
and achievable targets that were specifically crafted to 
address the most pressing development needs of the 
most vulnerable countries. The full implementation of 
the MDGs remains the key priority on the development 
agenda for the next two years.

A development agenda for beyond 2015 should 
allow individual regions and States the space to 
address the development needs peculiar to their 
circumstances and priorities. For Africa in particular, 
the future development agenda should address poverty 
eradication, income inequality and job creation. We 
furthermore believe that the new development agenda 
can be effective only if it is focused on all three 
dimensions of sustainable development, namely, the 
eradication of poverty through economic development, 
social development and environmental sustainability.

We also wish to emphasize that any development 
agenda beyond 2015 must be based on the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities in 
order to equalize the international playing field. We 
raise this point out of our concern that the global 
economic meltdown seems to have brought about new 
developments that are detrimental to the developing 
world, especially Africa. Some of the new developments 
include the tendency to renegotiate the rules of the 
game. New issues are being introduced as prerequisites 
for development and partnerships and have, in fact, 
become huge non-tariff barriers. They include the green 
economy and clean technology. While those issues are 
important for Africa and developing countries and need 
to be attended to, the manner in which they have been 
crafted restrains economic development, as they are 
used as obstacles.

We also wish to emphasize our expectations that the 
developed North and developing South will continue 
to engage in a genuine partnership. In that regard, 
the developed North countries should stand ready to 
meet their commitment to contribute 0.7 per cent of 
their gross national income to official development 
assistance.

We are aware of the challenges in the North caused 
by the economic meltdown, but we are of the view that 
investing in development in the South, especially in 
Africa, is of primary importance as a source of much-
needed sustainable development and stability in the 
world. Attempts to delegate some of those historical 
responsibilities to new emerging economies in the South 
are unacceptable and unworkable, as such emerging 
nations have their own historical challenges and 
backlogs to deal with. Furthermore, any commitment 
we make to the future beyond 2015 must build on 
existing agreements, which include Agenda 21, the 
MDGs, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and 
the outcome document of the Rio de Janeiro Conference 
on Sustainable Development. In the case of Africa, 
they must build on the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development.

Development and security are two sides of the 
same coin. The best way to ensure both is through good 
governance and the promotion of democratic values in 
all societies. Allow me, therefore, to register once again 
our serious concern that the Security Council, almost 
70 years since its establishment, remains undemocratic, 
unrepresentative and unfair to developing nations and 
small States, and disenfranchises the majority of the 
States Members of the United Nations, which form the 
majority in the General Assembly. We cannot remain 
beholden indefinitely to the will of an unrepresentative 
minority on the most important issues of international 
peace and security.

There has been too much talk about the need for 
reform, with too little action. We would like to challenge 
the Assembly today by saying “Let us set ourselves the 
target to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the 
United Nations in 2015 with a reformed, more inclusive, 
democratic and representative Security Council!”.



When discussing the Security Council, the matter 
of the Syrian Arab Republic comes into focus. We have 
expressed our dismay at the use of chemical weapons 
in Syria. There is no cause that could justify the use 
of weapons of mass destruction by anyone under any 
circumstances. It is, however, our strongly held view 
that any political transition in Syria must come about as 
a result of the will of the Syrian people and not through 
the force of arms.

We welcome the recent positive developments, 
such as the decision by Syria to accede to the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and the ongoing bilateral 
consultations between the Russian Federation and 
the United States. We support all of the diplomatic 
efforts aimed at finding a solution to this matter. The 
international community has an opportunity to use the 
Syrian experience to ensure that matters of this nature 
are handled correctly going forward, using existing 
instruments within the multilateral system of global 
governance.

Next year South Africa will celebrate its twentieth 
anniversary of freedom and democracy. We will forever 
be grateful to those in the international community, 
including the United Nations, who stood beside us in 
our long struggle for liberation. We look forward to 
celebrating our anniversary of freedom with the United 
Nations and to strengthening our partnership. A strong 
partnership with the United Nations is critical for the 
future we want for the people of South Africa. 

We also take this opportunity to thank the United 
Nations and the international community for their 
support during the recent hospitalization of our beloved 
founding President of the free and democratic South 
Africa, His Excellency Mr. Nelson Mandela. We thank 
them for all for their support and good wishes. The 
United Nations declared 18 July, his birthday, as Nelson 
Mandela International Day. That has become a catalyst 
promoting service to humankind worldwide. We 
thank the United Nations for that gesture. Our revered 
former President continues to respond to treatment 
at his home. His family and our people have warmly 
welcomed the support he continues to receive from the 
global community. We are humbled and very grateful 
for that support.

As we celebrate our freedom and democracy, we 
remain mindful that our struggle is not complete until 
the people of Palestine and Western Sahara enjoy 
their rights to self-determination. Just as the United 
Nations stood by South Africa, we would like to see the 
Organization be at the forefront of efforts towards self-
determination for the peoples of Palestine and Western 
Sahara.

We are deeply concerned about continued illegal 
settlement activities in the West Bank in violation of 
international law. Such illegal settlement activities 
jeopardize the realization of the two-State solution.

The Cuban people also hold a special place in our 
hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for African 
peoples in their quest for freedom. We will therefore 
continue to struggle with them for their economic 
liberation.

At its sixty-eighth session the General Assembly 
will undertake critical work for the future of our people. 
Let us tackle the work ahead in such a manner that when 
future generations look back on this moment, they will 
be able to say that the leaders of this generation laid the 
foundation for the eradication of poverty, for building a 
global society of equality, and for world peace.

Let me borrow from the words of our former 
President Nelson Mandela on his inauguration day in 
1994 when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation-building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
This 
year has been an unusual one in China’s development. 
China’s new central collective leadership has put 
forward the concept of the “Chinese dream”, a dream of 
the great renewal of the Chinese nation, and it is leading 
the 1.3 billion Chinese people in an endeavour to fulfil 
the two centennial goals, namely, to finish building a 
moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020 
and to turn China into a modern socialist country by 
the mid-twenty-first century. Having experienced 
profound changes in the past 5,000 years and especially 
the past century, China has reached a new historical 
starting point today.

What development path will China take in the 
future? What domestic and foreign policies will it 
pursue? And what kind of international role will it play? 
I understand that those questions are of great interest to 
the international community. As the Foreign Minister 
of the new Chinese Government, I wish to give an 
emphatic answer to each of them.

China will stay firmly on the path of peaceful 
development. China’s rapid development over the years 
has given rise to worries that China might follow the 
old pattern of wealth breeding arrogance and strength 
leading to hegemony, and various versions of the China 
threat theory have surfaced. However, what happened 
in the past should not be applied to today’s China.

The outdated Cold War mentality has no place 
in the new era of globalization. The Chinese nation 
loves peace and the Chinese culture values harmony. 
Throughout history, the Chinese people have always 
embraced international exchanges and trade, not 
foreign aggression and expansion, and have adhered to 
the patriotic resolve to defend the homeland rather than 
the colonialist doctrine of seizing new territories.

The culture of a country determines its values, 
and its history points the way to its future. Close to 40 
years ago, it was from this rsotrum that the Chinese 
leader Deng Xiaoping solemnly declared on behalf of 
the Chinese Government that China would never seek 
hegemony in the world. Today, his statement remains 
our unchanging commitment and conviction. China has 
honoured and will continue to honour its promise and 
remain a staunch force for upholding world peace.

China pursues peaceful development and calls 
on all other countries to follow the same path. Since 
the beginning of reform and opening up, China has 
become increasingly interdependent with the global 
economy and integrated into the international system. 
We are committed to working with others to establish 
a new type of international relations, based on win-win 
cooperation, and to seek the peaceful resolution of 
international and regional disputes. With regard to 
China’s disputes with some countries over territorial 
sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, we 
sincerely hope to resolve them in accordance with 
proper procedures, through negotiation and consultation 
with the countries directly involved. Those disputes 
that cannot be resolved now can be shelved for future 
resolution. That is our consistent position and practice. 
On the other hand, we will, whatever the circumstances, 
firmly safeguard China’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity and resolutely uphold China’s legitimate and 
lawful rights and interests.



China will remain committed to reform, to opening 
up and to sustainable development. It has been five 
years since the outbreak of the international financial 
crisis. The global economy is back on the right track 
to recovery, but the foundations of the recovery are not 
solid and the speed is not fast enough. The root causes 
of the financial crisis have yet to be removed, and the 
structural problems of developed countries remain 
unresolved. The adjustment of unconventional monetary 
policies from the outside, coupled with other factors, 
have posed new challenges and the risk of financial 
market volatility to emerging market countries.

Where the Chinese economy is heading engages 
both domestic and international attention. In that 
regard, I wish to inform the Assembly that both the 
fundamentals and the overall performance of China’s 
economy are sound, and China’s development prospects 
are bright. The leading indicators of the Chinese 
economy are generally good, and China leads the major 
economies in growth rate.

In pursuit of progress while maintaining stability, 
the Chinese Government has followed a macroeconomic 
policy that addresses both immediate and long-term 
needs and has adopted a series of innovative policy 
measures with a view to promoing steady growth, 
economic structural adjustment and reform. We are 
vigorously pursuing reform, opening up, deepening 
economic structural adjustment and accelerating 
the shift in our growth model. We are implementing 
the basic State policy of resource conservation and 
environmental protection and promoting green, 
circular and low-carbon development to build a sound 
ecological environment and a beautiful China.

With its increasing economic output and its 
changing growth model, China’s economy has entered 
a phase of high-to-medium growth rate. That is 
dictated by the law of economics, and it will ensure 
the sustained and healthy growth of the Chinese 
economy. The Chinese economy is being upgraded, 
and its future growth will deliver major dividends in 
four areas as a result of industrialization, information 
technology application, a new type of urbanization and 
agricultural modernization; reform and innovation; 
structural readjustment; and further opening up. It is 
projected that in the coming five years, China’s imports 
of commodities will exceed $10 trillion, its overseas 
investment will reach $500 billion, and Chinese 
tourists will make over 400 million outbound visits. 
That will give stronger impetus to the world economy 
and bring an increasing number of tangible benefits to 
other countries.

China will firmly promote reform of the global 
governance system with the United Nations at its core. 
The United Nations is a big stage for all countries to 
conduct consultation and cooperation with one another. 
It is also a big family where people of all countries are 
brought together. It is our consistent position that the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations form the cornerstone of current international 
relations and provide safeguards for world peace and 
stability. Respecting national sovereignty and opposing 
interference in internal affairs, safeguarding peace 
and opposing aggression, and promoting equality and 
opposing power politics; those are important principles 
that must be observed. China firmly upholds the role 
and authority of the United Nations, supports the United 
Nations in its renewal and self-improvement efforts, in 
keeping with a changing world, and looks forward to a 
United Nations that plays a larger role in international 
affairs. China is ready to deepen cooperation with 
the United Nations and get more actively involved in 
United Nations activities in various fields.

China is committed to promoting democracy 
in international relations and the trend toward a 
multipolar world. We call for a greater representation 
and voice for developing countries in the global 
governance system and support the Group of 20, the 
BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Africa — and other emerging mechanisms that are 
playing a key role in making the international order 
fairer and more equitable. We also call for the reform 
of the international monetary and financial systems and 
want the role of the World Trade Organization as the 
main forum in the area of trade to be maintained. We 
are opposed to trade protectionism and are working to 
make economic globalization more balanced, inclusive 
and beneficial to all. We call on countries to enhance 
macroeconomic policy coordination and be mindful 
of the spillover effects of their respective adjustment 
of economic policies. We call for the strengthening of 
North-South dialogue and South-South cooperation to 
make development benefits more accessible to people 
of all countries.

China will firmly fulfil its international 
responsibilities and obligations. The Chinese nation 
is responsible and ready to play its part. Although it 
remains a developing country facing the daunting task 
of development, China, as the second-largest economy 



and a permanent member of the Security Council, is 
fully aware of its responsibilities and the expectations 
placed on it by the international community. We will be 
fully and more actively engaged in international affairs 
and work closely with other countries to meet complex 
global challenges and tackle the difficult issues facing 
humankind. We will voice China’s views, offer China’s 
wisdom, propose China’s solutions, play China’s due 
role and provide more public goods to the international 
community.

We will vigorously advocate the right vision on 
justice versus special interests, and we will endeavour 
to build a community of common destiny with other 
developing countries. In our exchanges and cooperation 
with other developing countries, we will uphold justice 
and place it above special interests. We will provide 
assistance to other developing countries to the best 
of our ability, so as to enable developing countries to 
realize independent and sustainable development.

We will play a more proactive and constructive role 
in addressing international and regional hotspot issues 
to promote peace and dialogue, defuse conflicts and 
safeguard world peace and stability. We will maintain 
our escort missions and counter-piracy operations in the 
Gulf of Aden and increase our participation in United 
Nations peacekeeping operations so as to contribute 
more to peace and security in Africa and other relevant 
regions.

The turmoil in Syria has lasted for nearly three 
years, causing great suffering and trauma to both the 
Syrian people and Syria’s neighbours. The recent use of 
chemical weapons has met with universal condemnation. 
China firmly opposes the use of chemical weapons. 
We hope to see the early adoption of a Security 
Council resolution to support the Organization for the 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in launching 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons, 
and we stand ready to make financial contributions to 
the OPCW for the destruction of chemical weapons in 
Syria and to send experts to work there on the ground.

China calls for an immediate end to hostilities and 
violence in Syria so that the necessary conditions for 
the verification and destruction of chemical weapons 
can be created. We call for the early convening of 
the “Geneva II” conference and faster progress on a 
political resolution of the Syrian issue. China seeks 
no gains for itself in Syria. We respect the aspirations 
and choice of the Syrian people. China is following the 
humanitarian situation in Syria with great concern. We 
have provided and will continue to provide assistance 
within our means to the Syrian people, including Syrian 
refugees outside the country.

Recently, China has been providing emergency 
humanitarian aid to Jordan in the amount of ¥15 million, 
and has provided emergency humanitarian aid in cash 
worth ¥24 million to the World Food Programme and the 
World Health Organization for displaced people within 
Syria and Syrian refugees in Lebanon, respectively.

China has been working to promote a peaceful 
settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue through 
dialogue. We have played a constructive role in 
seeking a comprehensive, lasting and appropriate 
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue so as to uphold the 
international non-proliferation regime and peace and 
stability in the Middle East. The dialogue between Iran 
and the permanent members of the Security Council 
and Germany has created new opportunities. All the 
relevant parties should scale up diplomatic efforts and 
work for substantive progress in the dialogue at an early 
date.

The Palestinian issue is at the core of the Middle 
East conflict. Guided by President Xi Jinping’s four-
point proposal on resolving the Palestinian issue, China 
will continue to work for a comprehensive, just and 
durable solution to the issue.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of all the relevant 
parties, tensions on the Korean peninsula are easing. 
Achieving the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula 
and maintaining long-term peace and stability on the 
peninsula will respond to the common interests of all 
parties concerned. It is China’s consistent position that 
a negotiated solution through dialogue is the right way 
to resolve the nuclear issue on the peninsula, and the 
Six-Party Talks are an effective platform to promote 
denuclearization on the Korean peninsula. This year 
marks the tenth anniversary of the launch of the Six-
Party Talks. We hope that all parties will create 
conducive conditions, build consensus, work towards 
the same goal and resume the talks at an early date.

International development cooperation is at a crucial 
stage, where we must build on past achievements to 
make new progress. China supports the continued and 
full implementation of the Millennium Development 
Goals and the early launch of intergovernmental 
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda. The 
post-2015 development agenda should continue to focus 
on development and poverty elimination, give due 



consideration to national conditions and the various 
stages of development in the different countries, and 
respect their independent choice of development path. 
The agenda should give priority to strengthening global 
development partnerships; adhere to the principles of 
common but differentiated responsibilities, equity and 
respective capabilities; improve follow-up mechanisms; 
step up development financing; promote trade and 
investment liberalization and facilitation; and increase 
official development aid and technical support to 
developing countries.

China welcomes the positive outcomes of the 
United Nations Climate Change Conference held in 
Doha in late 2012. China hopes that the developed 
countries will demonstrate political will and honour 
their commitments by scaling up emissions-reduction 
efforts and providing capital, technology and capacity-
building support to developing countries. The Chinese 
Government takes climate change seriously, and the 
many forceful policy measures it has taken have resulted 
in notable progress. China will continue to play its due 
role in addressing global climate change.

Time flies. We will soon be celebrating the 
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United 
Nations. Born out of the ashes of the Second World War, 
the United Nations embodies the yearning of the peoples 
of all countries for world peace and global development. 
The Chinese dream is a dream of prosperity for the 
country and happiness for the people; it has much in 
common with the dream of people across the world. As 
a responsible Member of the United Nations, China is 
ready to work with all other Member States to faithfully 
adhere to the purposes of the Charter of the United 
Nations, faithfully carry out its historic mission and 
continue to make relentless efforts to advance the noble 
cause of peace and development for humankind.
Exactly 
40 years ago, the two German States joined the United 
Nations. For Germans, that marked our full return to the 
community of nations. Germany supports the United 
Nations as the beating heart of a global order rooted 
in cooperation, peaceful compromise and cooperative 
solutions.

The world has changed dramatically since then. 
New centres of economic and political power are 
emerging. In recent years, Germany has established 
new strategic partnerships with the new global players 
in Asia, Latin America and Africa.

The setting of our meeting today is different 
from the usual one. The United Nations is undergoing 
renovation, which must not be restricted merely to the 
buildings. The United Nations must reflect the world 
as it is, not as it used to be. Only then will it be fit for 
the challenges of our age. A Security Council without 
permanent seats for Africa and Latin America does 



not reflect the realities of today’s world. A Council in 
which the emerging and highly populous region of Asia 
is represented by only one permanent seat does not 
reflect the realities of today’s world. Nor does it reflect 
the reality of tomorrow. Germany, with its partners 
Japan, India and Brazil, is prepared to assume greater 
responsibility. In essence, it is a matter of strengthening 
the United Nations. The authority of the United Nations 
depends on its being representative.


We are seeking reform of the United Nations so that 
its power to build consensus, establish global rules and 
act effectively in response to crises and conflicts can 
be demonstrably strengthened. This is a call not only 
to the United Nations itself, but also to each and every 
individual Member State. Only if we are prepared to 
compromise and are willing to act together will we 
be able to make the United Nations strong. Germany 
remains committed to the United Nations. A strong 
United Nations is in Germany’s interests.

Our cultural differences and diverse traditions are 
not going to vanish in the age of globalization, but it 
is not only the world’s markets that are becoming ever 
more closely interconnected: people’s expectations, 
hopes and ideas are globalizing too. The developments 
in the Arab world have shown us that a country’s 
stability depends primarily not on the stability of 
the Government but on social stability. The best 
guarantees for a society’s internal cohesion are respect 
for individual human rights, the triumph of the rule 
of law over the arbitrary, and broad economic, social 
and political participation on the part of the people. 
Germany is committed to democratic change and to 
respect for human and civil rights, not because we want 
to take the moral high ground but because we have 
learned from experience — from the painful experience 
of our own history.

In Syria the people took to the streets to protest 
against a repressive regime. For more than two years 
now, the regime’s response has been brutal violence, 
which has brought countless deaths, immeasurable 
suffering and terrible destruction on the Syrian 
people and is now jeopardizing stability in the entire 
region. The use of chemical weapons, ascertained by 
the United Nations, is a crime against civilization. Its 
terrible dimensions have consequences that extend far 
beyond Syria. All the facts available to us show that the 
regime is responsible for the use of chemical weapons.

The use of chemical weapons cannot be allowed to 
go unpunished. That we owe not only to the victims in 
Syria, but also to future generations. Those responsible 
for using such weapons must be called to account 
before the International Criminal Court, which must at 
last be able to begin its independent investigations. We 
welcome the agreement reached in the Security Council 
yesterday. The chemical weapons in Syria must be 
completely destroyed in accordance with a firmly 
agreed timetable. Germany is prepared to provide 
financial and technical help to destroy those chemical 
weapons. A world without weapons of mass destruction 
would be a better world.

We must take advantage of the opportunity for a 
political process offered by the agreement on destroying 
the chemical weapons. After all, people in Syria are 
still being killed every day by conventional weapons. 
But there will be no military solution in Syria. Only a 
political solution can bring lasting peace to Syria. That 
would include an immediate ceasefire. I am pleased 
that there is at last a timetable for a possible peace 
conference, details of which still have to be clarified 
even after yesterday’s decision in the Security Council. 
Only with a substantive political process can we counter 
the destabilization of the entire region.

To date, Germany has made available more than 
€420 million to ease the worst of the suffering of the 
Syrian people. But despite all of the outside help, 
millions of Syrians are fleeing. Ever more people are 
at acute risk of starvation, and very soon they will also 
be at the mercy of the cold weather. They do not have 
even the most basic medical care. We must seize every 
opportunity to provide humanitarian access to the 
suffering population as quickly as possible. Amid all 
the devastation and hatred, the United Nations and its 
staff are the face of compassion and, for many Syrians, 
the only hope. I would like expressly to pay tribute to 
their work and commitment.

The tragedy in Syria underlines the extraordinary 
and growing importance attached to disarmament 
aimed at eliminating weapons of mass destruction and 
the strengthening of the non-proliferation regimes. 
Attaining a world free of weapons of mass destruction is 
our generation’s prime task for the future. Disarmament 
is a crucial issue for the future of humankind.



Iran must allay the international community’s 
doubts about the exclusively peaceful nature of its 
nuclear programme. We welcome Iran’s announcement 
this week that it is prepared to do so. The talks with the 
Iranian Government were encouraging. They open up 
a window of opportunity. Now it is imperative that we 
rebuild trust. Germany is ready to conduct negotiations 
in a constructive manner. However, the new words 
coming out of Tehran must be followed by deeds, and 
not at some unspecified time in the future, but right 
now. But, I repeat: a fresh start has been made.

We welcome the great commitment shown by 
President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry 
in giving fresh impetus to the negotiations between 
Israel and the Palestinian leadership. Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas deserve our respect 
for their courage in embarking together on that course. 
They have our full support as they pursue that course 
towards a negotiated agreement. Only a negotiated two-
State solution can reconcile the legitimate interests of 
the two sides.

This week in New York has been an encouraging 
one for the world. I am gratified that it was not military 
solutions but the struggle for political and diplomatic 
solutions that came to the fore. The international 
community must continue to follow such an approach.

Beyond crisis diplomacy, the United Nations is 
the central forum for setting binding objectives for 
the international community. Just a few days ago, the 
General Assembly agreed on the next steps for drawing 
up a new post-2015 sustainable development agenda. 
Germany wants to make a contribution in that regard 
with its experience of combining economic prosperity 
and promoting political participation and sustainable 
management.

Sustainability and combating poverty are not only 
key social issues; they are also key foreign policy issues.

In formulating the future agenda, greater attention 
needs to be paid to human rights protection and good 
governance than has been the case in the past. The 
new agenda must incorporate all three dimensions of 
sustainability and take account of economic, social and 
environmental aspects. With such a comprehensive 
approach we can also strengthen the fragile statehood 
in many countries and eradicate safe havens for 
terrorists. Social stability is the best protection against 
radicalization and extremism.

German foreign policy is a policy for peace. It 
focuses on crisis prevention. We Germans accept our 
responsibility for international peacekeeping. We 
focus on personal and social development. We focus on 
strengthening civil society. We want to contribute to 
a global process in which we — in the North, South, 
East and West learn from each other and develop joint 
solutions by working together. Germany will continue 
in future to use its economic clout and full political 
strength to promote peace and the balancing of interests.

The digital age brings with it entirely new 
opportunities and challenges. We need an Internet in 
which freedom, security and the protection of privacy 
are appropriately reconciled. Just as we have to regulate 
international financial flows in order to prevent global 
crises, so we need binding rules and standards for 
global data flows. That is why Germany has submitted 
to the Human Rights Council an initiative regarding 
the protection of the right to privacy in the digital 
age. Everyone using the Internet should be able to be 
sure that their rights are being respected worldwide 
vis-à-vis private companies as well as vis-à-vis States. 
Not everything that is technically possible must be 
allowed to happen, nor is everything technically 
possible legitimate.

Germany remains firmly anchored in Europe. 
Europe is a community of shared cultures, bound 
together by a common destiny. Close union among 
the nations of Europe is and will remain the response 
to our history and to our future in a world of change. 
German foreign policy is firmly embedded in European 
foreign policy. Europe will continue to use its clout, 
its influence and its resources to uphold peace and 
justice, to encourage development and cooperation 
and to promote climate protection and disarmament 
throughout the world.

That is Germany’s twin obligation: a strong united 
Europe in the world and a strong, effective United 
Nations for the world.
It is an 
honour for the United Nations to act everywhere where 
the freedom of peoples is denied. It is an honour for 
the United Nations to act where fundamental rights are 
compromised. It is an honour for the United Nations to 
intervene where extremism threatens the security of the 
world. It is an honour for the United Nations to act on 
behalf of peace.

In Syria, the situation is becoming urgent because 
120,000 people have died over the past two and a half 
years — 90,000 in the past year alone. One-fourth of 
the population is displaced. Millions of Syrians have 
become refugees and the country has been destroyed. 
The worst happened on 21 August in Damascus, 
when chemical weapons were used against civilians, 
including women and children. United Nations 
inspectors, sent officially on behalf of the Organization 
have, established unequivocally and with certainty the 
use of these weapons. 

In the face of this horrifying crime, France sought a 
strong reaction to punish this violation of international 
law and to dissuade Bashir Al-Assad’s regime from 
committing new massacres. This pressure exerted by 
my country, along with others, in particular the United 
States, has seen some initial results. Negotiations are 
under way as we speak to ensure the verification and 
destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons. 

However, if these negotiations are to attain their 
ultimate end, I have set out three requirements. The 
first is that any text must clearly make it possible for 
the Security Council to become seized of this issue of 



chemical weapons at any given moment. The second 
requirement is that the draft resolution we are preparing 
provides for coercive measures under Chapter VII in 
the event that the Syrian regime fails to respect its 
commitments. Since the agreement signed between the 
United States and Russia has the same provision, that is 
all the more reason to include it in the draft resolution. 
The third requirement is that those who have committed 
these crimes must be held accountable before justice. 

But we cannot limit ourselves to this draft 
resolution, which must be adopted soon. We must 
end this war, the deadliest since the beginning of the 
century. The solution is political. Too much time has 
been squandered, and I will not refer again to the 
blocking of action in the Security Council. During this 
period, not only has the regime increased its violence, 
but terrorist groups have also taken advantage of the 
international community’s inertia, to the detriment of 
the democratic forces found within the Syrian National 
Coalition. 

This is why the “Geneva II” conference must be 
held as soon as possible. For France, however, Geneva 
II is not just a talk shop. It must be a conference to 
define the objective for putting in place a transitional 
Government with full executive powers, mandated to 
re-establish civil peace, to protect all communities and 
to organize elections in due time. I am sometimes asked 
about participants in this conference. My response is 
simple. All countries — and I repeat, all countries — that 
accept the goal of installing a transitional Government 
and clearly acknowledge their commitment to a political 
solution will be welcome at the conference. 

Of equal urgency is the humanitarian situation. In 
Syria, the displaced are in the millions, and there are 
now more than 1.5 million refugees in Turkey, Jordan 
and Lebanon. The prolongation of the crisis poses 
a direct threat to the unity and security of Lebanon, 
nearly 20 per cent of whose population is now of Syrian 
origin. 

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon for having organized the first meeting of the 
International Support Group for Lebanon. France is 
committed to that country because we know how much 
it has suffered in recent years from disturbances in the 
Middle East and how much it needs to be supported 
today in its efforts to host refugees.

There are serious concerns in that part of the 
Middle East, but there are also glimmers of hope. 
The first is the resumption of negotiations between 
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Only that will enable 
peace to be achieved. It requires the coexistence of 
two States, both with safe and recognized borders. 
We must do everything to ensure that the opportunity 
that now exists for Israelis, Palestinians and the entire 
region is seized to finally bring an end to a conflict that 
whose regional and international repercussions are well 
known to us all. Negotiating peace between Israel and 
Palestine would be an historic act.

The second glimmer of hope is found in the 
statements of the new Iranian President, which reflect 
an evolution. I will not exaggerate them, but the question 
now is to know whether those words will be translated 
into actions, in particular concerning the nuclear 
issue. For the past 10 years, our discussions have not 
progressed, leading the the international community 
to adopt increasingly severe sanctions. The situation 
is dangerous, as we all know. Therefore, France 
expects from Iran concrete gestures reflecting that 
country’s renunciation its military nuclear programme, 
although it clearly retains the right to pursue its civilian 
programme. That is why I have chosen to engage in 
direct and open dialogue with President Rouhani. I will 
also say from this rostrum that while I am in favour of 
dialogue, I remain firm on the serious issue of nuclear 
proliferation.

The Middle East is not the only region of the 
world that is of concern to us. Africa has fallen prey to 
terrorism, and the barbaric attack in Nairobi confirms 
that to us once again, tragically. Victories are possible 
against terrorism. In Mali, with the clear mandate of 
the Security Council, African and French forces, with 
the support of Europe, intervened in response to the 
appeal of the authorities in Bamako and brought an end 
to a broad terrorist offensive. Today we see the results. 
Mali has regained its territorial integrity. It has ensured 
the security of its population, and it has even been able 
to hold, on the scheduled date, a presidential election 
that has been recognized as incontestable. I welcome 
the new President of Mali, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar .eita. 
His election is evidence of a great victory for West 
Africa against terrorism.

However, the threat continues to weigh heavily on 
the Sahel and in Libya, where weapons are uniquitous 
and where terrorist groups have found refuge. We must 
assist the Libyan authorities to ensure the security 
of their territory and of their population. France is 
prepared to do so.



I would like to sound an alarm, as I did last year 
with respect to Mali. The warning here is about the 
Central African Republic — a small country that has 
been ravaged by coups and conflicts for years. Today, 
chaos has taken root and civilians are yet again its 
victims. We must bring an end to the abuse, which is 
also sectarian in nature. That is why I would like the 
Security Council to issue a mandate and provide the 
logistical and financial means to create an African 
force, with its first mission to re-establish stability in 
the Central African Republic.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, women 
and children are victims of violence every day in the 
Kivu region. Again, it is essential that we continue 
to strengthen the United Nations Organization 
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, to implement the Addis Ababa agreement, and 
to reject all external interference.

We must learn from the experience of recent years. 
Everywhere chaos reigns, terrorism takes root and 
grows. That is the case in Somalia, and the horrific 
attack against Kenya reminds us that Al-Shaabab-
affiliated groups, while they have been defeated, have 
not yet been eradicated. That is why the international 
community must help African States to protect 
themselves.

France will convene, late this year, a meeting on 
peace and security in Africa. France has invited all 
African countries; Europe will be represented, as will 
the United Nations. The purpose of the meeting is to 
enable the establishment, training and equipping of 
African armies to ensure the security of the continent 
and combat all traffickers, particularly drug traffickers, 
and piracy. Africans themselves must ensure their 
security, but we cannot leave them to face the terrorist 
threat alone. 

The best weapons we have are our development 
policies, because poverty, unemployment and inequality 
provide fertile soil for violence and insecurity. Again, 
France calls for the mobilization of the international 
community through new funds that we must create to 
finance the necessary infrastructures and to enable 
access to essential public services.

France is fighting, along with Europe, for the 
introduction of innovative financing. My country’s tax 
on airline tickets, which helps finance the International 
Drug Purchase Facility (UNITAID), has brought in 
more than €1 billion since 2006. My country has decided 
to increase that tax by a further 10 per cent to enhance 
our fight against the great pandemics: HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria. With Europe, France has 
also established a tax on financial transactions. I have 
decided to allocate 10 per cent of that income towards 
such development-related actions as access to water 
and renewable energy, because with development 
assistance we can help the poorest countries to ensure 
their future, and thereby their security, and to respond 
to global warming, which concerns us all.

France is available to host the 2015 climate 
conference. This matter, too, respresents a threat to 
our own security, because one report after another 
states that if we do nothing, by the end of this century 
the temperature of the planet will have increased by 
three or four degrees Centigrade, with the well-known 
consequences of flooding in some places, droughts in 
others. Those direct threats would in turn endanger 
peace throughout the world. We must therefore seek an 
agreement at the 2015 climate conference.

The foundations of the commitment are well known. 
The agreement must be equitable. Each country must do 
its part. The developed countries obviously must make 
he greatest effort. Emerging countries must protect their 
development, but they must also understand that they 
are directly threatened by global warming. The least 
developed countries, those that are the most fragile and 
vulnerable, must be aided in the transition. That is the 
purpose of the fund that was created in Durbin. The 
agreement must also be binding; it cannot simply be a 
reiteration of principles. It cannot simply be wording in 
resolutions that are not translated into concrete actions. 
If there is no assessment and there are no sanctions, 
there will be no progress and global temperature will 
inexorably rise.

My message is simple. In any domain, whether 
international security, nuclear proliferation, 
development or climate change, the worst threat is 
inaction, the worst decision is to take no decision, 
and the worst danger is to not see any. And the United 
Nations bears the responsibility to act. Each time the 
Organization appears powerless, peace is the first 
victim. That is why I am proposing that the permanent 
members of the Security Council define a code of 
conduct such that in cases of mass crimes, they may 
collectively decide to renounce the right of veto.

It is also my hope to see the Secretary-General’s 
powers of inquiry strengthened to enable the United 
Nations to ensure — as it has done in Syria — that 



the truth is established in all instances, carry out 
investigations and act on the results. The Assembly has 
the sovereign right to take such a decision. Our credibility 
depends upon our capacity to intervene quickly and 
effectively in ensuring respect for international law, 
punishing violations and promoting development to 
preserve future generations. Our legitimacy flows 
from the Charter of the United Nations. We must be 
worthy of it. Within that framework, France will always 
assume its responsibilities in all domains.
In my lifetime, the 
world has been sliced up and labelled in many different 
ways: East and West; communism and capitalism; 
North and South; Christian and Muslim; developed 
and developing, and so on. But as we meet today, the 
most important fault line is not one of geography, or 
ideology, or religion, or wealth; it is the divide between 
those societies which are open and those which are 
closed. Open societies choose democracy and freedom 
at home, and engagement and responsibility abroad. 
Closed societies suppress the liberty of their citizens, 
draw a veil across their actions and withdraw from our 
shared international life.

We must be honest — the forces of insularity and 
isolationism have gained momentum in recent years. 
Discrediting democracy feels easier. Authoritarian 
States point enthusiastically at the ongoing fallout of 
the 2008 financial crisis — proof, they say, of a broken 



Western model. They feel vindicated; their citizens 
may be less free, but their growth rates outstrip those 
in the West. At the same time, in many of the States 
affected by the financial crash, austerity has given rise 
to a period of introspection. The impulse is to turn 
inwards rather than face outwards.

And so a crisis of confidence has threatened to take 
hold in parts of the developed world. It is not surprising 
to hear some argue that liberal democracy has had 
its day and that our multilateral system is becoming 
obsolete. But those who make these claims are wrong. 
They are drawing the wrong conclusions from recent 
events.

The real lesson of the past five years has been 
the remarkable resilience of open societies and the 
acute need for international cooperation in today’s 
world. Liberal democracies in Europe and across the 
Atlantic have weathered profound economic difficulty. 
The eurozone did not fall over, as many said it would. 
By working together, disaster was averted and the 
sovereign debt crisis is being managed.

In Europe we have maintained stability at a time of 
great upheaval because, for the most part, our citizens 
have expressed their frustration peacefully and through 
the ballot box. And where there has been unrest, mature 
democracies have managed it with relative success. And 
so, just as the events of recent years have revealed the 
weaknesses of some Western economies, they have also 
underscored the great strength of open societies — the 
ability to evolve and adapt. Open societies do not fear 
change, and in the twenty-first century such openness 
to reform is critical to lasting stability and success.

Democracy, free speech, participation, equality 
before the law, the right to peaceful protest, the right 
to be educated, the chance to work — these are not 
Western values; they are the political and economic 
freedoms sought by citizens everywhere, and they 
are gaining force in every country around the globe. 
Governments that ignore them are fighting a losing 
battle. Democracy did not fail in Egypt; a single set of 
elections failed. Egypt now needs to return to the path 
of inclusive democracy. The democratic urge remains 
as strong among the people as it was when they first 
rejoiced in Tahrir Square.

In other parts of the region, while the picture is 
mixed, important progress has been made. In Libya, the 
General National Congress is working towards elections 
in early 2014. Morocco has a new Constitution and, for 
the first time, a Prime Minister elected by Parliament. 
Although difficult challenges remain, Yemen has chosen 
reconciliation, dialogue and democracy over violence. 
Tunisia is also focused on building a new democracy 
and economic growth, with progress towards a new 
Constitution, and further elections expected in 2014.

Yes, these nations will undergo more turbulence. 
That is certain. Well-functioning democracy cannot 
emerge overnight, be exported from the West or 
dropped on a country from 8,000 feet — that much we 
have learnt from the failures of the past. Developing 
the culture and institutions needed — the rule of law, 
plural politics, human rights — is a painstaking process 
for every country involved, and it requires strategic 
patience from the rest of the world.

But while the road to democracy is difficult, the 
direction of travel is set. Everywhere we look, people 
are standing together against discrimination and for 
equality; against oppression and for liberty. A wave 
of openness has emerged, transcending borders and 
cultures. Men and women of every creed, faith and 
colour are calling for fair opportunities and demanding 
to be heard.

The United Kingdom is clear. We are on the side of 
all those who support political freedom and economic 
empowerment. There will be no pulling up of the 
drawbridge from us; no heading into retreat. We will 
resist any impulse to turn our back on the world.

In North Africa and the Middle East, we are 
helping States put in place the building blocks for their 
democracies. Whether by training Libyan officials to 
supervise fair elections, or supporting a free media by 
training journalists in Morocco, these are the nuts and 
bolts of successful democratic transition.

We are also supporting these countries’ economies 
through our stewardship of the Group of Eight 
Deauville Partnership this year, leading efforts to boost 
trade and investment in the region, helping small- and 
medium-sized enterprises and, crucially, promoting 
greater participation by women. And we have kept the 
political spotlight on the need to return assets stolen by 
the former regimes in those countries.

In Syria, our priority is to help bring about a 
political settlement. The foundations for a settlement 
were agreed in Geneva last year — establishing, on 
the basis of mutual consent, a transitional governing 
body with full executive powers. We are in close touch 
with our partners about convening a second Geneva 



conference as soon as possible. No meaningful political 
solution can occur without the moderate Syrian 
opposition. We recognize the Syrian National Coalition 
as the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people, 
and we recognize their commitments to the Geneva 
process and to building a secular, democratic and 
pluralist Syria that ensures equal rights for all.

On the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, on 
21 August the Al-Assad regime committed a war 
crime under international humanitarian law, launching 
a large-scale chemical-weapon attack on its own 
people — the first attack on this scale for 25 years and 
88 years after such weapons were universally banned. 
As President Obama said here on Tuesday (see A/68/
PV.5), it is an insult to human reason to suggest that 
the regime was not responsible for that war crime. 
The international community must react, and react 
in unison. That is why we hope to adopt later today a 
Security Council resolution establishing binding legal 
obligations on the Syrian regime for the removal and 
destruction of Syria’s vast chemical-weapons arsenal.

On Wednesday, I announced that the United Kingdom 
would provide a further $160 million of humanitarian 
support for the Syrian people, bringing total United 
Kingdom funding to $800 million — £500 million — our 
biggest-ever response to a humanitarian crisis, much of 
which is aimed at helping the many children caught up 
in this tragic conflict.

The world has raised close to $1 billion of 
humanitarian support this month, and I hope that others 
will step up and contribute. Most importantly, I call on 
all parties inside Syria to allow humanitarian agencies 
to operate without hindrance or the threat of violence. 
Unless that urgent humanitarian access is given, no 
amount of money can alleviate the scale of the Syrian 
people’s suffering.

I welcome President Rouhani’s comments on 
Tuesday that he wants a constructive engagement 
between Iran and the rest of the world and that he 
wants to engage immediately in time-bound talks on 
the nuclear issue. Those are encouraging words which I 
very much hope are matched with genuine action. I am 
pleased that negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme 
will restart in October. If Iran’s words are followed by 
concrete steps, then there is a real opportunity to make 
progress in resolving the serious international concerns 
about Iran’s nuclear programme. We also look to a more 
constructive approach from Iran in helping resolve the 
crisis in Syria, and we have made clear to Iran that we are 
ready, as the United Kingdom Government, to improve 
our relationship on a step-by-step and reciprocal basis.

One thing that would fundamentally transform the 
Middle East is a conclusive two-State agreement to end 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — an agreement based 
on 1967 borders with agreed land swaps that leads 
to a sovereign and viable Palestinian State living in 
peace alongside a safe and secure Israel, a universally 
recognized Palestine alongside a universally recognized 
Israel.

I commend the dedicated efforts of Secretary 
Kerry and the courageous leadership of Prime Minister 
Netanyahu and President Abbas, which have enabled 
direct peace talks to resume. I sincerely hope that both 
parties will make every effort to keep talks going, 
including a halt in the building of new settlements. The 
international community must fully support the parties 
as they make the difficult decisions that are necessary 
for achieving a lasting peace. Britain stands ready to 
play its part.

As we wind up our military operations in 
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom continues to work 
with the Afghan Government to ensure a successful 
transition. The Afghan National Security Forces are now 
leading on security and continue to grow in confidence 
and capability. That is a significant achievement. In the 
United Kingdom, we recognize the serious challenges 
still ahead for Afghanistan, but we strongly believe that 
there is room for optimism about the country’s long-
term future. This is a crucial time for Afghan men, 
women and children, as they prepare for elections in 
2014, which must be credible, transparent and inclusive.

Poverty is as great a threat to stability and freedom 
as are conflict and oppression. Thus, despite the strain 
on our finances, the United Kingdom has met its target 
to spend 0.7 per cent of its gross national income on 
development assistance. We are the only country in 
the Group of 20 (G-20) to have done so. Following the 
global economic crisis, we said we would not balance 
our books on the backs of the world’s poorest and we 
have held true to our word.

On Monday, we announced that we would provide 
$1.6 billion to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria. That is 10 per cent of the 
Fund’s replenishment, so long as others join.

Women and girls remain at the heart of our 
development agenda. They are the key to economic 
growth, so investing in girls’ education is the single 



most effective thing we can do to break the cycle of 
poverty. We must end gender inequality, which is the 
root of violence against women. That ambition is at 
the heart of the United Kingdom’s initiative to end 
sexual violence in conflict, and I would encourage all 
States that have yet to do so to endorse the Declaration 
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. 
Over 115 States are already committed; we are sending 
a message to the victims of those devastating crimes 
that they are not alone and that their attackers will be 
punished.

We have also used our presidency of the Group 
of Eight (G-8) to focus on three areas where we can 
support global prosperity — boosting trade, ensuring 
better transparency to help developing nations benefit 
from resources that are rightfully theirs, and cracking 
down on tax evasion and closing tax loopholes. That 
was just the start of our work on that agenda, and we 
are pleased that the United Kingdom’s trade, tax and 
transparency priorities have been fully reflected in 
agreements reached by the G-20, including extending 
the commitment to resist protectionist measures by 
a further two years to the end of 2016, so that trade 
remains as free and open as possible.

Whether it be in the G-8, the G-20, the European 
Union, NATO or the Commonwealth, or as one of the 
five permanent members of the Security Council, the 
United Kingdom will continue to be an active and 
engaged player in the world. The biggest problems we 
face are problems we share.

Take climate change, for example — the report issued 
this morning by the United Nations Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change confirms that sea levels are 
already rising and that ice is melting faster than we had 
expected. The report is an authoritative rebuke to all 
those who persist in claiming that man-made climate 
change does not exist. The United Kingdom will 
continue to cut our emissions and give over $6 billion 
to assist developing countries to do the same and adapt 
to environmental changes.

But if we are to halt the devastating effects of 
climate change, we must listen to the science, act now 
and act together. We thus welcome the Secretary-
General’s announcement of a leaders’ summit next year 
as a key step towards all nations agreeing to a deal in 
2015 to take action to avert the crisis.

We are all affected by the scourge of terrorism. 
Whether it is a soldier brutally murdered on a quiet 
London street or innocent shoppers gunned down in a 
busy Nairobi mall, we are all vulnerable. Following the 
recent horrific events in Nairobi, the United Kingdom 
is working closely with the Governments of Kenya, 
Somalia and countries across the region to tackle the 
issue. Our global response to terrorism must be robust, 
intelligent and cover all those areas where our work 
together can make a genuine difference. Alone we can 
take small steps forward, but together we can take giant 
leaps.

That much was clear earlier this year when we 
signed the world’s first Arms Trade Treaty (resolution 
67/234 B) to better regulate the global sale of weapons. 
The United Kingdom is proud of the role we played in 
delivering it, and we urge any countries that have not 
signed it to do so. The Treaty reminds us that, with 
enough political will, we can come together and do the 
previously unthinkable, and that should embolden us to 
do still more.

The United Nations has many virtues, but it also has 
serious shortcomings that must be faced. The United 
Nations has no greater friend than the United Kingdom, 
but it does not adequately reflect the world we live in 
today. The Security Council must be reformed. Unless 
more room is made at the top table, it will fast become 
an anachronism, a relic of a different time. That is why 
the United Kingdom continues to support permanent 
seats for Brazil, India, Germany and Japan, and 
permanent African representation, too. We call on all 
States to play their part in this forum, and in our other 
international institutions, just as we will play ours.

We are at our best when we engage constructively 
with one another and when we are ambitious in 
pursuing our shared goals. That is as important for 
those countries whose economies and influence have 
grown and transformed over more recent years as it 
is for the old, established Powers. Greater influence 
means greater responsibility. The world is a better place 
because Brazil is taking a lead in tackling deforestation, 
because Mexico has enshrined climate-change targets 
into law, because the Republic of Korea is leading the 
way on nuclear security.

But there is much more to do; there are many more 
areas where we need to take the lead. A global trade deal 
to cut bureaucracy at borders — the subject of a World 
Trade Organization meeting that will take place in 
Bali in early December — would mean a trillion-dollar 
boost for the global economy.



In the next two years, the United Kingdom wants 
to do as much as it can to drive progress on the United 
Nations Millennium Development Goals, and we are 
also working in the United Nations and with civil 
society to set out a post-2015 agenda that is even 
more ambitious. There can be no greater goal than to 
eradicate extreme poverty, leaving no one behind.

On these and all other issues facing our nations, we 
are quite simply stronger together than we are apart. 
Now more than ever, we must fend off the forces of 
insularity and isolationism, stand up for our values and 
look out to the world. That is what the United Kingdom 
will do. We stand ready to work with all others who will 
do the same.
Let me first of all congratulate 
you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We 
wish you every success and assure you of our fullest 
cooperation.

At a time when the world is facing multiple 
challenges, there is renewed attention to the role of 
the United Nations in advancing international peace, 
security and prosperity. However, never has scepticism 
about the capacity of the United Nations to do so been 
higher, or the external environment less propitious for 
multilateralism.

The nearly seven decades of work of the United 
Nations hold one simple lesson: that we are most 
successful when we adhere to the letter and spirit of 
the United Nations Charter, basing our decisions on the 
widest possible consensus and balancing equitably the 
needs and responsibilities of nations at different stages 
and levels of development.

In those seven decades, the world has changed in 
fundamental ways. Asia and Africa are independent 
and resurgent. Countries are now not only more 
interdependent, but also face new, increasingly complex 
challenges. For multilateralism to remain relevant and 
effective in the future, multilateral institutions need to 
be reformed urgently. The place to begin is right here.

The Security Council must be reformed and 
restructured to reflect current political realities. 
More developing countries should be included as both 
permanent and non-permanent members.

The multilateral financial institutions should also 
enable an enhanced voice for developing countries in 
their decision-making structures. Multilateral efforts 
must guide our quest for peace and security, wherever 
they are threatened, and the centrality and contribution 
of the United Nations system to development must be 
restored.

Those objectives require the building of a new 
international consensus suited to our time and rooted 
in today’s realities. It is only such a plan of action that 
will enable the United Nations to meet the twin tests of 
legitimacy, and effectiveness and efficiency.

We commend your choice of the theme of this 
session. Setting the stage for the post-2015 development 
agenda is especially important as we deal with a 
lingering global economic slowdown and continuing 
volatility in financial markets. These have imposed 
disproportionately heavy costs on developing countries 
and the vulnerable groups within them.

Growth and inclusive development are naturally 
important for all our countries. They require a 
supportive international economic environment, 
enhanced investment flows, including from multilateral 
development banks, the transfer of technology, and an 
open multilateral trading regime.

But the problems of the more than 1 billion people 
living in abject poverty around the world need to be 
attacked more directly. Poverty remains a major 
political and economic challenge, and its eradication 
requires special attention and a new collective thrust. 
That priority should anchor the post-2015 development 
agenda, which should be shaped by the Member States 
so that it enjoys the broadest possible support and 
acceptance.

Issues of peace, security, human rights and 
governance are important and need to be addressed. But 
we will fall short of realizing an ambitious post-2015 
development agenda if we focus merely on governance 
issues at the cost of robust economic growth. This 
agenda should not be merely about reprioritizing 
domestic spending, but also about fostering genuine 
international partnerships between developing and 
developed countries to bring about change. All of us 
need the policy space necessary to set our own domestic 
priorities. 

No one knows the condition of developing countries 
better than the developing countries themselves. It is 
therefore important that the United Nations set clear and 
concise goals and provide practical and well-defined 
means of implementation, including an adequate flow 
of resources and the transfer of technology, taking the 
views of developing countries fully into account.



A meaningful post-2015 agenda must place equally 
high priority on food and nutrition, health, education, 
infrastructure, water, sanitation, energy and combating 
discrimination against women. Especially critical is 
women’s equal access to economic opportunities and 
ensuring that they do not become victims of violence or 
the targets of prejudice.

In India, we have sought to promote inclusive 
development in multiple ways. Legislation has broadened 
access to education and secured rural livelihoods. We 
are now building the world’s largest programme for 
food security. Digital technology is being harnessed to 
improve the delivery of public services and benefits to 
the people.

India is proud of its partnerships with developing 
countries. Using modest resources, we have built strong 
ties with Africa and the least developed countries. We 
are committed to building 100 institutions in Africa 
and have offered capacity-building support, including 
thousands of scholarships, and made available over 
$9.5 billion of concessional assistance. India and Africa 
are engaging through the India-Africa Forum Summit 
process. We also look forward to participating actively 
in the third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, to be held in Samoa in 2014, and to 
contributing to its outcome.

Climate change is one of the defining challenges of 
our times. We must summon the political will necessary 
to craft a robust global response to climate change on 
the basis of equity and the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities.

We are deeply concerned about the future of West 
Asia, a region with which India shares deep bonds of 
history and one that is critical for our energy security 
as well as the livelihoods of the nearly 7 million 
Indians who work and live in the region. Not only is 
the increasingly lethal conflict in Syria a tragedy for 
the people of Syria, but it also threatens stability and 
security in the region and beyond. It has been made worse 
by the use of chemical weapons. The use of chemical 
weapons, whosoever may have deployed them, must 
be condemned in the strongest possible terms. India 
strongly supports the elimination of chemical-weapons 
material and equipment in Syria.There is no military 
solution to that conflict. We must intensify efforts to 
end the conflict and seek a political settlement. It is 
essential that the “Geneva II” conference be convened 
at the earliest opportunity.

We are encouraged that direct talks have resumed 
between Israel and Palestine. India supports the early 
realization of a sovereign, independent, viable and 
united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its 
capital, living within secure and recognized borders, 
side by side and at peace with Israel. We also remain 
committed to the Palestinian quest for full membership 
in the United Nations.

In our own region, Afghanistan prepares for a 
historic political, security and economic transition. 
The international community must support the people 
of Afghanistan through this transition and beyond in 
combating terrorism, preserving the progress of the 
past decade and creating a stable, united and prosperous 
Afghanistan.

Terrorism remains a grave threat to security and 
stability everywhere and exacts a heavy toll of innocent 
lives around the world. From Africa to Asia, we have 
seen several manifestations of this menace in the last 
few days alone. State-sponsored, cross-border terrorism 
is of particular concern to India, also on account of 
the fact that the epicentre of terrorism in our region is 
located in our neighbourhood, in Pakistan.

From this rostrum yesterday, Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif of Pakistan spoke of making a new beginning 
(see A/68/PV.15). I reciprocate his sentiments and 
am looking forward to meeting him tomorrow. India 
is sincerely committed to resolving all issues with 
Pakistan, including the issue of Jammu and Kashmir, 
through bilateral dialogue on the basis of the Simla 
Agreement. However, for progress to be made, it is 
imperative that the territory of Pakistan and the areas 
under its control not be utilized for aiding and abetting 
terrorism directed against India. It is equally important 
that the terrorist machinery that draws its sustenance 
from Pakistan be shut down. There must be a clear 
understanding of the fact that Jammu and Kashmir is 
an integral part of India and that there can never, ever, 
be a compromise with the unity and territorial integrity 
of India.

We need to renew our commitment, especially 
here at the United Nations, to concerted, cohesive and 
continuing global action against terrorism. There can 
be no tolerance for States sheltering, arming, training or 
financing terrorists. Nor can States absolve themselves 
of the responsibility to prevent their territories from 
being used to launch acts of terrorism.



The increasingly complex challenges to 
international peace and security require a new 
international consensus to be built, whether it is in the 
field of cybersecurity, non-proliferation or terrorism. 
This year, 25 years after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi 
put forward a comprehensive action plan for a nuclear-
weapon-free and non-violent world order, we must 
strengthen efforts against nuclear proliferation and 
pursue time-bound, universal, non-discriminatory, 
phased and verifiable nuclear disarmament. We must 
also guard against terrorists and non-State actors 
gaining access to sensitive materials and technologies.

Two years from now, the United Nations will be 
70 years old. Every new State born during that period 
of 70 years has taken its place in the Assembly not just 
with pride but also with hope. The year 2015 will be 
a time to celebrate our successes and ensure that the 
United Nations is ready for this century, by completing 
much-needed reforms of the Organization and its 
Security Council, developing an ambitious and balanced 
post-2015 development agenda and demonstrating our 
capacity to cooperate effectively for durable peace and 
security in the world we live in.
I feel deeply honoured and 
privileged to stand here before the General Assembly 
today representing the citizens of the State of Israel. 
We are an ancient people. We date back nearly 4,000 
years to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We have journeyed 
through time. We have overcome the greatest of 
adversities. And we re-established our sovereign State 
in our ancestral homeland, the land of Israel. The Jewish 
people’s odyssey through time has taught us two things: 
never give up hope and always remain vigilant. Hope 
charts the future, vigilance protects it.

Today our hope for the future is challenged by a 
nuclear-armed Iran that seeks our destruction. But I 
want members to know that that was not always the case. 
Some 2,500 years ago, the great Persian King Cyrus 
ended the Babylonian exile of the Jewish people. He 
issued a famous edict in which he proclaimed the right 
of the Jews to return to the land of Israel and rebuild the 
Jewish Temple in Jerusalem. That is a Persian decree, 
and thus began a historic friendship between the Jews 
and the Persians that lasted until modern times.

But, in 1979, a radical regime in Tehran tried to 
stamp out that friendship. As it was busy crushing 
the Iranian people’s hopes for democracy, it also led 
wild chants of “Death to the Jews!” Since that time, 
presidents of Iran have come and gone. Some presidents 
were considered moderates, others hard-liners. But 
they have all served that same unforgiving creed, that 
same unforgiving regime — that creed that is espoused 
and enforced by the real power in Iran, the dictator 
known in Iran as the Supreme Leader, first Ayatollah 
Khomeini and now Ayatollah Khamenei.

President Rouhani, like the presidents who came 
before him, is a loyal servant of the regime. He was 
one of only six candidates the regime permitted to run 
for office. Nearly 700 other candidates were rejected. 
What made him acceptable? Rouhani headed Iran’s 
Supreme National Security Council from 1989 through 
2003. During that time, Iran’s henchmen gunned 
down opposition leaders in a Berlin restaurant. They 
murdered 85 people at the Jewish community centre 
in Buenos Aires. They killed 19 American soldiers by 
blowing up the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia. Are we 
to believe that Rouhani, the national security adviser 
of Iran at the time, knew nothing about those attacks? 
Of course he did — just as 30 years ago Iran’s security 
chiefs knew about the bombings in Beirut that killed 
241 American marines and 58 French paratroopers.

Rouhani was also Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator 
between 2003 and 2005. He masterminded the strategy 
that enabled Iran to advance its nuclear-weapons 
programme behind a smokescreen of diplomatic 
engagement and very soothing rhetoric. I know that 
Rouhani does not sound like Ahmadinejad. But when it 
comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme, the only 
difference between them is this: Ahmadinejad was a 
wolf in wolf’s clothing, Rouhani is a wolf in sheep’s 
clothing — a wolf who thinks he can pull the wool over 
the eyes of the international community.

Like everyone else, I wish we could believe 
Rouhani’s words, but we must focus on Iran’s actions. 
And it is the brazen contrast — that extraordinary 
contradiction between Rouhani’s words and Iran’s 
actions — that is so startling. Rouhani stood at this very 
rostrum last week and praised Iranian democracy (see 
A/68/PV.6). Iranian democracy, he said. But the regime 
that he represents executes political dissidents by the 
hundreds and jails them by the thousands. Rouhani 
spoke of “the human tragedy in Syria”. Yet Iran directly 
participates in Al-Assad’s murder and massacre of tens 
of thousands of innocent men, women and children in 
Syria, and that regime is propping up a Syrian regime 
that just used chemical weapons against its own people. 
Rouhani condemned the “violent scourge” of terrorism. 
Yet in the past three years alone Iran has ordered, 
planned or perpetrated terrorist attacks in 25 cities 
on five continents. Rouhani denounced “attempts to 
change the regional balance through proxies”. Yet Iran 
is actively destabilizing Lebanon, Yemen, Bahrain and 
many other Middle Eastern countries. Rouhani promises 
“constructive engagement with other countries”. Yet 
two years ago, Iranian agents tried to assassinate Saudi 
Arabia’s Ambassador in Washington, D.C. Just three 
weeks ago, an Iranian agent was arrested while trying 
to collect information for possible attacks against the 
American Embassy in Tel Aviv. Some constructive 
engagement!

I wish I could be moved by Rouhani’s invitation 
to join his “WAVE” — a world against violence and 
extremism. Yet the only waves Iran has generated in the 
past 30 years are waves of violence and terrorism that 
it has unleashed on the region and across the world. I 
wish I could believe Rouhani, but I do not because facts 
are stubborn things. The facts are that Iran’s savage 



record flatly contradicts Rouhani’s soothing rhetoric. 
Last Friday, Rouhani assured us that in pursuit of its 
nuclear programme, Iran had “never chosen deceit and 
secrecy.” Never chosen deceit and secrecy?

In 2002, Iran was caught red-handed secretly 
building an underground centrifuge facility at Natanz. 
In 2009, Iran was again caught red-handed secretly 
building a huge underground nuclear facility for 
uranium enrichment in a mountain near Qom. Rouhani 
tells us not to worry. He assures us that all that is not 
intended for nuclear weapons. Does any here believe 
that? If so, here are a few questions to ask.

Why would a country that claims to only want 
peaceful nuclear energy build hidden underground 
enrichment facilities? Why would a country with vast 
natural energy reserves invest billions in developing 
nuclear energy? Why would a country intent on merely 
having civilian nuclear programmes continue to defy 
multiple Security Council resolutions and incur the costs 
of crippling sanctions on its economy? And why would 
a country with a peaceful nuclear programme develop 
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) whose sole 
purpose is to deliver nuclear warheads? You do not build 
ICBMs to carry TNT thousands of miles away. You 
build them for one purpose: to carry nuclear warheads. 
Iran is now building ICBMs that the United States says 
could reach this city in three or four years.

Why would they do all that? The answer is simple. 
Iran is not building a peaceful nuclear programme. 
Iran is developing nuclear weapons. Last year alone, 
Iran enriched three tons of uranium to 3.5 per cent, 
doubled its stockpile of 20 per cent-enriched uranium 
and added thousands of new centrifuges, including 
advanced centrifuges. It also continued work on the 
heavy-water reactor in Arak in order to have another 
route to the bomb — a plutonium path. Since Rouhani’s 
election — and I stress this — that vast and feverish 
effort has continued unabated.

Underground nuclear facilities? Heavy water 
reactors? Advanced centrifuges? ICBMs? It is not that it 
is hard to find evidence that Iran has a nuclear-weapons 
programme; it is hard to find evidence that Iran does not 
have a nuclear-weapons programme. Last year, when 
I spoke here at the United Nations (see A/67/PV.12), I 
drew a red line. Iran has been very careful not to cross 
that line. But Iran is positioning itself to race across that 
line in future, at a time of its choosing. Iran wants to 
be in a position to rush forward to build nuclear bombs 
before the international community can detect it, much 
less prevent it. Yet Iran faces one big problem, and that 
problem is summed up in one word: sanctions.

I have argued for many years, including from 
this rostrum, that the only way to peacefully prevent 
Iran from developing nuclear weapons is to combine 
tough sanctions with a credible military threat. That 
policy is today bearing fruit. Thanks to the efforts of 
many countries, many represented here, and under the 
leadership of the United States, tough sanctions have 
taken a big bite out of Iran’s economy. Oil revenues 
have fallen. The currency has plummeted. Banks are 
hard pressed to transfer money. As a result, the regime 
is under intense pressure from the Iranian people to get 
the sanctions removed. That is why Rouhani got elected 
in the first place. That is why he launched his charm 
offensive. He definitely wants to get the sanctions 
lifted — I guarantee the Assembly that — but he does 
not want to give up Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme 
in return.

Here is the strategy to achieve that: first, smile a lot. 
Smiling never hurts. Secondly, pay lip service to peace, 
democracy and tolerance. Thirdly, offer meaningless 
concessions in exchange for lifting sanctions. Fourthly, 
and most important, ensure that Iran retains sufficient 
nuclear material and sufficient nuclear infrastructure 
to race to the bomb at a time that it chooses to do so. 
Why does Rouhani think he can get away with that? 
This is a ruse, a ploy. Why does Rouhani think he can 
get away with that? Because he has gotten away with it 
before. Because his strategy of talking a lot and doing 
little has worked for him in the past. He even brags 
about it. Here is what he said in his 2011 book about 
his time as Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator: “While 
we were talking to the Europeans in Tehran, we were 
installing equipment in Isfahan”. For those here who 
do not know, the Isfahan facility is an indispensable 
part of Iran’s nuclear-weapons programme. That is 
where uranium ore called yellowcake is converted into 
an enrichable form. Rouhani boasted: “By creating a 
calm environment, we were able to complete the work 
in Isfahan”. He fooled the world once; now he thinks 
he can fool it again. Rouhani thinks he can have his 
yellowcake and eat it too.

He has another reason to believe that he can get 
away with that, and that reason is called North Korea. 
Like Iran, North Korea also said its nuclear programme 
was for peaceful purposes. Like Iran, North Korea also 
offered meaningless concessions and empty promises 



in return for sanctions relief. In 2005, North Korea 
agreed to a deal that was celebrated the world over by 
many well-meaning people. Here is what a New York 
Times editorial had to say about it:

“For years now, foreign policy insiders have 
pointed to North Korea as the ultimate nightmare ... a 
closed, hostile and paranoid dictatorship with an 
aggressive nuclear-weapons programme. Very few 
could envision a successful outcome. And yet North 
Korea agreed in principle this week to dismantle its 
nuclear-weapons programme, return to the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, abide by the Treaty’s 
safeguards and admit international inspectors.
“Diplomacy, it seems, does work after all.” 
(New York Times, 20 September 2005)
A year later, North Korea exploded its first nuclear-
weapon device.
Yet as dangerous as a nuclear-armed North Korea 
is, it pales in comparison to the danger of a nuclear-
armed Iran. A nuclear-armed Iran would have a 
chokehold on the world’s main energy supplies. It would 
trigger nuclear proliferation throughout the Middle 
East, turning the most unstable part of the planet into 
a nuclear tinderbox. And for the first time in history, it 
would make the spectre of nuclear terrorism a clear and 
present danger.

A nuclear-armed Iran in the Middle East would 
not be another North Korea. It would be another 
50 North Koreas. I know that some in the international 
community think that I am exaggerating that threat. 
Sure, they know that Iran’s regime leads these chants: 
“Death to America!”, “Death to Israel!”. Then it 
pledges to wipe Israel off the map. But they think that 
wild rhetoric is just bluster for domestic consumption. 
Have those people learned nothing from history? The 
last century has taught us that, when a radical regime 
with global ambitions gets awesome power, sooner or 
later its appetite for aggression knows no bounds. That 
is the central lesson of the twentieth century. And we 
cannot forget it.

The world may have forgotten that lesson; the 
Jewish people have not. Iran’s fanaticism is not bluster. 
It is real. That fanatic regime must never be allowed to 
arm itself with nuclear weapons. I know that the world 
is weary of war. We in Israel know all too well the cost 
of war. But history has taught us that to prevent war 
tomorrow, we must be firm today.

That raises the question: Can diplomacy stop 
that threat? The only diplomatic solution that would 
work is one that fully dismantles Iran’s nuclear-
weapons programme and prevents it from having one 
in the future. President Obama rightly said that Iran’s 
conciliatory words must be matched by transparent, 
verifiable and meaningful action; and to be meaningful, 
a diplomatic solution would require Iran to do four 
things; first, cease all uranium enrichment, as called 
for by several Security Council resolutions; secondly, 
remove from Iran’s territory the stockpiles of enriched 
uranium; thirdly, dismantle the infrastructure for a 
nuclear-breakout capability, including the underground 
facility near Qom and the advanced centrifuges in 
Natanz; and, fourthly, stop all work at the heavy water-
reactor in Arak aimed at the production of plutonium. 
Those steps would put an end to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme and eliminate its breakout capability.

There are those who would readily agree to leave 
Iran with a residual capability to enrich uranium. I 
advise them to pay close attention to what Rouhani said 
in a speech to Iran’s Supreme Cultural Revolutionary 
Council published in 2005. This is what he said:

“A country that can enrich uranium to about 3.5 per 
cent will also have the capability to enrich it to 
about 90 per cent. Having fuel-cycle capability 
virtually means that a country that possesses this 
capability is able to produce nuclear weapons.”
Precisely: that is why Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme must be fully and verifiably dismantled. 
That is why the pressure on Iran must continue. Here 
is what the international community must do. First, 
keep up the sanctions. If Iran advances its nuclear-
weapons programme during negotiations, strengthen 
the sanctions. Secondly, do not agree to a partial deal. 
A partial deal would lift the international sanctions 
that have taken years to put in place, in exchange for 
cosmetic concessions that will take only weeks for Iran 
to reverse. Thirdly, lift the sanctions only when Iran 
fully dismantles its nuclear-weapons programme.

The international community has Iran on the 
ropes. If it wants to knock out Iran’s nuclear-weapons 
programme peacefully, do not let up on the pressure. 
Keep it up. We all want to give diplomacy with Iran a 
chance to succeed. But when it comes to Iran, the greater 
the pressure, the greater the chance. Three decades 
ago, President Ronald Reagan famously advised “trust 
but verify”. When it comes to Iran’s nuclear-weapons 



programme, here is my advice: distrust, dismantle and 
verify.

Israel will never acquiesce to nuclear arms in the 
hands of a rogue regime that repeatedly promises to 
wipe us off the map. Against such a threat, Israel will 
have no choice but to defend itself. I want there to be 
no confusion on this point: Israel will not allow Iran to 
get nuclear weapons. If Israel is forced to stand alone, 
Israel will stand alone. Yet in standing alone, Israel will 
know that we will be defending many others.

The dangers of a nuclear-armed Iran and the 
emergence of other threats in our region have led many 
of our Arab neighbours to finally recognize that Israel 
is not their enemy. That affords us the opportunity 
to overcome historic animosities and build new 
relationships, new friendships and new hopes. Israel 
welcomes engagement with the wider Arab world. We 
hope that our common interests and common challenges 
will help us forge a more peaceful future.

And Israel continues to seek a historic compromise 
with our Palestinian neighbours, one that ends our 
conflict once and for all. We want peace based on 
security and mutual recognition in which a demilitarized 
Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State of Israel.

I remain committed to achieving a historic 
reconciliation and building a better future for Israelis 
and Palestinians alike. I have no illusions about how 
difficult it will be to achieve. Twenty years ago, the 
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians began. 
Six Israeli Prime Ministers — myself included — have 
not succeeded in achieving peace with the Palestinians. 
My predecessors were prepared to make painful 
concessions. So am I.

But so far, Palestinian leaders have not been 
prepared to offer the painful concessions they must 
make in order to end the conflict. For peace to be 
achieved, the Palestinians must finally recognize 
the Jewish State and Israel’s security needs must be 
met. I am prepared to make a historic compromise 
for a genuine and enduring peace. But I will never 
compromise on the security of my people and of my 
country — the one and only Jewish State.

One cold day in the late nineteenth century, my 
grandfather, Nathan, and his younger brother, Judah, 
were standing in a railway station in the heart of Europe. 
They were seen by a group of anti-Semitic hoodlums, 
who ran towards them waving clubs, screaming, “Death 
to the Jews!” My grandfather shouted to his younger 
brother to flee and save himself. And he then stood 
alone against the raging mob to slow it down. They beat 
him senseless. They left him for dead. Before he passed 
out, covered in his own blood, he said to himself: 
“What a disgrace! What a disgrace! The descendants 
of the Maccabees lie in the mud, powerless to defend 
themselves.” He promised himself then that if he lived, 
he would take his family to the Jewish homeland and 
help to build a future for the Jewish people.

I stand here today as Israel’s Prime Minister because 
my grandfather kept that promise. So many other Israelis 
have a similar story: a parent or a grandparent who fled 
every conceivable oppression and went to Israel to start 
a new life in our ancient homeland. Together we have 
transformed a bludgeoned Jewish people, left for dead, 
into a vibrant, thriving nation, defending itself with the 
courage of modern Maccabees, developing limitless 
possibilities for the future.

In our time, the Biblical prophecies are being 
realized. As the prophet Amos said,

“They shall rebuild ruined cities and inhabit 
them. They shall plant vineyards and drink their 
wine. They shall till gardens and eat their fruit. 
And I will plant them upon their soil never to be 
uprooted again.”
The people of Israel have come home, never to be 
uprooted again.
Greetings! Let me begin 
by congratulating President Ashe on his election to the 
presidency of the General Assembly. He is taking the 
reins at an important time. We wish him every success, 
and he has New Zealand’s support.

The recent events in Kenya, Iraq and Pakistan show 
how troubled the world can be. We commiserate with 
the Governments and peoples of those countries and 
extend our deepest sympathies to those who lost family 
and friends in those tragic incidents.

For most of us, born after the Second World War, the 
United Nations has been at the centre of our conception 
of how the world organizes itself. But the reality of the 
United Nations can be quite challenging. It is the one 
place where the countries of the world meet, talk and 
try to find solutions to global and regional issues.

Sadly, some of those discussions can become so 
arcane that they are sometimes quite removed from the 
issues they claim to be addressing. That is a concern in 
particular for small States, to which the Organization is 
so vitally important. 

Even more sadly, the United Nations has too often 
failed to provide solutions to the problems the world 
expects it to resolve. The gap between aspiration and 
delivery is all too apparent, as the situation in Syria 
has again so brutally reminded us. But any failures of 
this institution are less failures of the Organization 
than they are failures on our part, as its Member States, 
and on the part of those who have the responsibility of 
leading those States.

There would be no dreadful humanitarian situation 
in Syria if Syria’s leaders had upheld the commitments 
made to the international community and to the Syrian 
people when Syria joined the Organization and ratified 
the human rights covenants.

The Organization would not also have been a 
powerless bystander to the Syrian tragedy for over 
two years if the lack of agreement among the Security 
Council’s permanent members had not shielded the 
Al-Assad regime, thereby reconfirming the fears of 
New Zealand and others that had opposed the veto at 
the original San Francisco Conference, in 1945.

New Zealand is pleased that the Security Council 
has at last met on the situation in Syria. The Secretary-
General has advised the Council and the General 
Assembly that the United Nations Mission has now 
confirmed, unequivocally and objectively, that 
chemical weapons have been used in Syria. The report 
(see A/67/997) found clear and convincing evidence 
that surface-to-surface rockets containing the nerve 
agent Sarin were used on 21 August.

The information in the report also makes it very 
clear that those rockets must have been fired by the 
Syrian regime. As the Secretary-General has said, these 
are war crimes, and those responsible must be brought 
to account.

Those that try to cast doubt on the report’s 
conclusions make themselves look foolish and do a 
disservice to the United Nations.

It is imperative now that the Council act. It must 
adopt a resolution that responds to the use of chemical 
weapons. It must find a means to hold those responsible 
to account and establish an effective mechanism 
for the destruction of those weapons in line with the 
proposal developed by the United States and Russia. 
The resolution must also provide for the protection of 
the civilian population. 

While Syria necessarily commands our attention, 
I also want to spend some time on some more positive 
developments for both the Organization and its Member 
States. I want to begin with my own country, New 
Zealand, whose emergence as a fully independent State 
has proceeded in parallel with the development of the 
United Nations.



New Zealand was present at the founding in San 
Francisco. We take pride in the fact that we were able 
to influence the drafting of the Charter, particularly the 
section on the Trusteeship Council, which paved the 
way for a number of States to become full Members of 
the Organization.

New Zealand has come a long way since the Charter 
was adopted. Then, we were emerging from our status 
as a dominion of the United Kingdom. Today we proudly 
assert ourselves as a small but independent and diverse 
country that has a wide network of friends and trading 
relationships in all the major regions and markets of 
the world. We value our traditional relationships with 
Australia and the Pacific, and in Europe and North 
America as we build new links with partners in Asia, 
the rest of the Americas and the Caribbean, and Africa.

Building and sustaining political and commercial 
links across the regions of the world is no small matter 
for a country like New Zealand. We are surrounded by 
the Pacific Ocean and located over three hours’ flying 
time from our nearest neighbour, Australia, in one of 
the least populated parts of the world. We share with 
our Pacific island neighbours the challenges of distance 
and isolation, and of having to hold our own against 
much larger countries whose economies of scale 
and proximity to markets give them a considerable 
competitive advantage. These factors have reinforced 
New Zealand’s approach to the United Nations and to 
the other international organizations that have shaped 
the post-Second World War environment.

We have a strong preference for a rules-based, 
multilateralist approach, whether in the United 
Nations, the World Trade Organization (WTO) or the 
World Bank. We know that rules and standards set 
internationally provide us the greatest certainty and 
the greatest protection. We draw strength from global 
agreements and from the collective commitment they 
represent.

That is why we attach such importance to the 
completion of the Doha Round. While New Zealand 
continues to actively negotiate bilateral and regional 
trade agreements, we acknowledge that free trade 
agreements often leave least developed countries on the 
sidelines. The benefit of the WTO, as with the United 
Nations, is that the rules negotiated there apply across 
the globe, irrespective of a country’s size or wealth.

Our preference for international rules reflects New 
Zealand’s national approach to governance. We have 
a robust and transparent system of Government and 
sound financial institutions that have helped us ride out 
the worst effects of the global financial crisis. That was 
despite the significant economic and social challenges 
we faced after the destructive earthquake that struck 
Christchurch, our second largest city, in 2011.

As we work to restore the built environment in 
Christchurch, New Zealanders are also conscious 
of our dependence on and our responsibility towards 
the natural environment. In policy terms, climate 
change has been a challenge for New Zealand and 
for the international community more broadly, but 
New Zealanders know we must play our part, and we 
have taken action. We have introduced an extensive 
emissions-trading scheme. We are investing in the 
Global Research Alliance to find new ways to manage 
agricultural greenhouse gases, and we have committed 
to reducing emissions to 5 per cent below 1990 levels 
by 2020.

We made that commitment under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
rather than the Kyoto Protocol. We did that because, 
while the Kyoto Protocol once seemed to provide a path 
forward, things have changed. The Protocol now covers 
only a small percentage of global emissions. We need a 
single legal framework that commits all major emitters. 

While climate change is an important issue, it pales 
in comparison to the problems faced by many Member 
States. One of the most intractable is that of Israel and 
Palestine. As long as that problem is left unresolved, 
there can be no assured peace in the Middle East and no 
security for the wider region. There can be no resolution 
without the Israeli and Palestinian peoples both being 
assured of viable homelands within secure borders. 
New Zealand pays tribute to the tenacity of United 
States Secretary of State Kerry and to the courage of 
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu in 
agreeing to resume the Middle East peace process.

In our own region, we have celebrated the successful 
conclusion of the United Nations Mission in Timor-Leste 
and the transition of the Regional Assistance Mission 
to the Solomon Islands from a military to a police-led 
operation. We look forward with intense interest and 
cautious hope to the reinstatement of democracy in 
Fiji. We acknowledge the positive developments there, 
including with regard to election preparations and voter 
registration. The countries of the Pacific, including 
New Zealand, want and need Fiji to be successful, 
democratic and well-governed.


Earlier this year, New Zealand withdrew the bulk 
of its forces from Afghanistan, following the closure of 
the New Zealand-led provincial reconstruction team in 
Bamian province, which provided security and helped 
bring about a significant improvement in governance 
and development. Schools and hospitals were rebuilt and 
health centres re-opened. Mortality rates for children 
under 5 were halved. Maternal deaths are now a quarter 
of the Taliban-era levels. Girls now make up half the 
number of primary-school-age children. New Zealand 
expertise also helped substantially improve agricultural 
yields through the implementation of modern farming 
techniques. We are building the largest solar energy 
system in Afghanistan, which will bring a renewable 
source of electricity to much of Bamian township. That 
was a big commitment by a small country situated far 
away. It also came at a considerable cost: 10 of our 
servicemen and women lost their lives while on duty 
there. Even so, we are proud of what we achieved in 
partnership with the people of Bamian and hope that 
those gains can be sustained in the years ahead.

In Africa we see a continent where many countries 
have faced real challenges. However, as the President of 
Nigeria reminded us earlier this week (see A/68/PV.5), 
the new story of Africa is the growing number of 
countries in the region that are enjoying the benefits 
of good governance, sound economic growth and 
development, driving positive change throughout the 
continent. All of that is good news for Africa and for 
the world. New Zealand will do what it can to help 
with targeted assistance in areas where we have real 
expertise to offer, namely, in the fields of agriculture, 
renewable energy and good governance. New Zealand 
also recognizes and supports the critical roles of the 
African Union and Africa’s subregional bodies in 
ensuring Africa’s security and future prosperity.

New Zealand recognizes the importance to Africa, 
the Caribbean and our own region of the Arms Trade 
Treaty, adopted in April and signed by New Zealand 
and many others on 3 June The Treaty should curb the 
flows of small arms and other weapons, especially to 
conflict regions, and help arrest the deaths and human 
misery that they cause.

I want to also applaud the progress made in 
implementing the Millennium Development Goals, 
while at the same time acknowledging the fact that 
much work remains to be done. We now need to work 
together on a post-2015 development agenda focused on 
creating economic opportunities and the eradication of 
poverty.

Many of the same issues will be addressed at 
the Third International Conference on Small Island 
Developing States, which Samoa is to host in 2014. 
New Zealand is pleased to be a major supporter of that 
important United Nations effort and, with the rest of 
the Pacific, looks forward to welcoming the world to 
our region.

We need to remind ourselves that sound governance 
arrangements and transparency of process are also 
vital virtues for international organizations, including 
the United Nations. By any objective assessment, the 
Organization has not been equipped with the structures 
and rules it needs to operate as it should. Yet there has 
been deep resistance to efforts to make things better. 
That needs to change. The rationale for United Nations 
reform is clear. Membership has quadrupled since 1945, 
yet over the same period its key organs — particularly 
the Security Council — have become hostage to their 
own traditions and to the interests of the most powerful. 

From the 1950s to the 1990s, we could blame the 
Cold War when the Security Council did not act. That 
does not wash today. The problems are more systemic 
and relate both to the composition and the formal and 
informal processes of the Council. We now seem to have 
a practice whereby the permanent members not only 
can block Council actions through the use of the veto, 
but also appear to have privileged access to information 
and can stop the Council from meeting if it does not 
suit their collective purposes. Such behaviour damages 
the reputation and credibility of the wider Organization 
and must be challenged. Such issues are not necessarily 
matters of Charter reform, which we know is difficult, 
but have to do with the effective functioning of the 
Organization — an issue in which we all have a stake.

New Zealand is not advocating revolution, but we 
are asserting that the Council can and must do better in 
the way it conducts its business. That is the approach 
New Zealand will bring to the Security Council if we 
are elected next October. If successful, it will be 21 
years since New Zealand last served on the Council — a 
long time ago, but not so long that we have forgotten the 
lessons learned during our last term. At the top of that 
list is the imperative that members have to be engaged; 
they must listen to the concerns of others and have a 
view and a voice if they are to be relevant. There is 
no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 



numbers. Sometimes there is a need to speak up and 
shine a light on what is going on, or not going on, even 
when that may be inconvenient to others. That applies 
whether the issue was Rwanda, Somalia, Yemen or 
Yugoslavia in 1993-94, or is the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, the Sudan or Syria in 2013 to 2014.

My hope is that when Member States make their 
decision on whom to vote for in October 2014, they will 
look at New Zealand’s record and know that we will be 
a credible, positive influence on the Security Council 
and a voice for the interests of the wider Organization.
International relations are becoming increasingly 
complex and multidimensional, while developments 
in the world are even more rapid and less predictable. 
Under these circumstances as never before, there is an 
urgent need to agree upon collective responses to the 
key issues of today. It is solely within the power of such 
a truly universal Organization as the United Nations 
to do so. Moreover, such solidarity-based efforts will 
be productive only if they reflect the entire spectrum 
of views of the international community on global 
challenges and threats, a broad range of historical 
experiences and the full cultural and civilizational 
diversity of the modern world.

For most of the Members of the United Nations 
family, that approach is axiomatic. However, there is 
also another tendency whereby collective actions are 
understood primarily as agreement with the viewpoint 
of one group of countries. Such views manifest 
themselves in various areas: international security, the 
settlement of conflict situations, the functioning of the 
world economy, and the choice of development models 
and core values.

Many problems affecting today’s world are reflected 
in the tragic situation in Syria and in the uncertainty 
surrounding the development of events in the Middle 
East and North Africa overall. From the very onset of 
the turmoil in that region, Russia has consistently called 
for the development by the international community 
of a common approach combining support for the 
Arab peoples on their path to transformation with 
an understanding of the fact that, objectively, those 
processes will be lengthy and sometimes painful, and 
that it will be quite important not to undermine them 
through gross outside interference.

We have emphasized the need to act in a balanced 
way and to take account of the fact that current complex 
developments are associated with, among other things, 
a tireless quest for compromises among the various 
ethnic and religious groups that make up the mosaic 
of Arab societies. We have consistently supported the 
choice of the evolutionary way of development and the 
peaceful settlement of crises through national dialogue 
and reconciliation.

Another perspective has been reflected in the 
attempts made to determine who is and is not legitimate 
among the leaders of the Middle East and North Africa 
region, to impose a view as to which side should be 
supported in domestic national conflicts, and to dictate 
external, ready-made prescriptions for democratic 
transformation.

Attempts to portray, in a simplified way, the 
developments in the Arab world as the struggle of 
democracy against tyranny or of good against evil 
have long obscured the problems associated with the 
rising wave of extremism, which is spilling over into 
other regions today. The terrorist attacks in Kenya 
have demonstrated the full gravity of that threat. It is 
common knowledge that jihadist groups that include 
numerous radical elements from all parts of the world 
are the most combat-capable units of the opposition. 
The goals that they are pursuing have nothing to do with 
democracy but are based on intolerance and aimed at 
the destruction of secular States and the establishment 
of caliphates. It is difficult to qualify as far-sighted a 
policy that entails fighting in Mali the same extremist 
groups that are being supported in Syria.

The use of chemical weapons is inadmissible. That 
does not mean, however, that one can usurp the right 
to accuse and to render verdicts. All of the incidents 
associated with the use of chemical weapons in Syria, 
by whomsoever committed, must be investigated in a 
professional and unbiased manner and then considered 
by the Security Council exclusively on the basis of 
facts rather than of allegations or assumptions. In that 
respect, at the Group of 20 (G-20) summit held in June, 
an agreement was reached by leaders of the eight key 
States.



Recently a common argument has been 
increasingly made to the effect that the threat or use 
of force, directly prohibited by the Charter of the 
United Nations, is virtually the most effective method 
of addressing international problems, including the 
settlement of domestic conflicts. There have been 
attempts to extrapolate such an approach to the 
situation in Syria as well, despite the fact that recent 
experience with such interventions has proved that they 
are ineffective, meaningless and destructive. That is an 
extremely dangerous path leading to the erosion of the 
foundations of today’s world order and the subversion 
of the weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation 
regimes.

It is alarming to hear statements about the right 
to use military force to ensure one’s own interests in 
the Middle East region under the pretext of a persistent 
leadership gap in the international arena. Recent history 
shows that no State, no matter how big or powerful, 
can cope alone with challenges of the scope faced by 
humankind today.

There is no doubt that leadership is required. 
However, today it can only be collective leadership 
based on agreed actions of the leading members of 
the international community, with strict respect for 
the principles and norms of international law. It is 
the growing understanding of that reality that has 
opened the way towards achieving Russia-United 
States understandings relating to the placing under 
international control and subsequent elimination of the 
Syrian chemical arsenals. That became possible thanks 
to the decision by Damascus to join the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and fulfil the relevant obligations 
following the expedited procedure.

We expect that the decisions of the Organization 
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Executive 
Council and the Security Council will contribute to 
creating the framework required for the elimination of 
chemical arsenals in Syria.

Progress in the area of chemical disarmament in 
Syria should give impetus to the implementation of 
existing arrangements to convene a conference on 
establishing a zone free of weapons of mass destruction 
and their means of delivery in the Middle East. We know 
that there are a number of complicated issues related to 
ensuring full participation of the countries of the region 
in such a conference, but they cannot be discussed 
endlessly. That is exactly when true leadership and 
resolve must be demonstrated for the common benefit.

People are continuing to die and innocent civilians 
to suffer every day in Syria. Religious minorities, 
including Christian communities, are becoming 
victims of the conflict, which is increasingly acquiring 
a sectarian character. Virtually the only possibility 
remaining today to put an end to this turmoil is 
to break the deadlock regarding the process of a 
political settlement of the Syrian crisis. We continue 
to work tirelessly for the earliest convening of a peace 
conference to implement the Geneva communiqué 
of 30 July 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We hope that, 
following the example set by the Government of Syria, 
the opposition will also constructively respond to the 
Russia-United States initiative.

The Syrian crisis should not overshadow the need to 
address the Palestinian problem. We expect the Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders to shoulder their responsibility 
for the future of their people at this current critical 
stage, where the parties have resumed direct talks 
after a lengthy interruption. While duly recognizing 
the efforts made by the United States in the Middle 
East settlement process, we deem it necessary to 
intensify the activity of the Quartet, the internationally 
recognized mechanism for providing assistance to the 
peace process in the region on the basis of the relevant 
decisions of the United Nations, the Madrid principles 
and the Arab Peace Initiative. It is also important to 
ensure the close involvement of the Arab countries in 
the activities of the Quartet.

Approaches based on negotiation are also required 
with respect to other situations, including the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the nuclear problem in the 
Korean peninsula. As President Vladimir Putin noted 
in his recent article in the 11 September 2013 issue of 
The New York Times,

“We must stop using the language of force and 
return to the path of civilized diplomatic and 
political settlement.”
This would help to improve the international 
environment and contribute to stepping up collective 
efforts to counter global challenges, including terrorism 
and drug trafficking. Russia intends to attach priority 
attention to these challenges during its presidency of 
the Group of Eight, in 2014.

Today, when the rigid frame of the bipolar system 
has been long relegated to the past, a mark of the time 
is the strengthening of the democratic foundations both 
within States and in international relations. That means 



in particular that the recognition of the right of peoples 
to independently determine their destiny and to choose 
the optimal forms of social and political structure 
and social and economic systems should become an 
indisputable norm of conduct. In the same way, the 
complex of exclusiveness and supremacy regarding 
one’s own customs in the human rights area should be 
abandoned and instead the universal criteria enshrined 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights should 
be used as a guideline. Moreover, it is important to 
respect the traditional values that are common to all 
the religions.

It is obvious that a genuine partnership is hardly 
achievable without reliance on the foundations of 
economic cooperation. The prevailing majority of 
States are interacting within the framework of the 
World Trade Organization and in that sense they are 
already operating in a common economic space. 
This creates the prerequisites for working towards 
harmonization of integration processes in various 
regions of the world instead of trying to artificially pit 
them against each other by creating new division lines. 
Russia is proceeding from that exact understanding in 
its joint work with its partners in the establishment of 
the Eurasian Economic Union.

Russia attaches great importance to achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals and the drafting of the 
global development agenda for the post-2015 period 
on their basis. The main priorities are the eradication 
of poverty and support for economic growth through 
the expansion of investment opportunities and the 
creation of new jobs. Some of the most urgent issues 
are the strengthening of the energy and transport 
infrastructures, the fight against infectious diseases 
and road safety.

Cooperation among States should rely on efficient 
mechanisms and an adequate resource base. In that 
context, we support the further strengthening of the 
coordinating role and potential of the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council. During its chairmanship 
of the Group of 20, Russia has consistently pursued 
a policy of developing its interaction with the United 
Nations. We believe that the General Assembly, in 
cooperation with the G-20, will develop a realistic 
programme of long-term cooperation.

I firmly believe that, by joining forces on the basis 
of genuine respect and considering the interests of each 
and everyone, we will be able to achieve the lofty goals 
that are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Each year we come together to 
reaffirm the founding vision of this institution. For most 
of recorded history, individual aspirations were subject 
to the whims of tyrants and empires, and divisions of 
race, religion and tribe were settled through the sword 
and the clash of armies. 

The idea that nations and peoples could come 
together in peace to solve their disputes and advance a 
common prosperity seemed unimaginable. It took the 
awful carnage of two world wars to shift our thinking. 
The leaders who built the United Nations were not naive. 
They did not think that this body could eradicate all 
wars. But in the wake of millions dead and continents 
in rubble and with the development of nuclear weapons 
that could annihilate a planet, they understood that 
humanity could not survive the course it was on. They 
gave us this institution, believing that it could allow 
us to resolve conflicts, enforce rules of behaviour and 
build habits of cooperation that would grow stronger 
over time.

For decades, the United Nations has in fact made 
a difference, from helping to eradicate disease to 



educating children and brokering peace. But like 
every generation of leaders, we face new and profound 
challenges, and this body continues to be tested. The 
question is whether we possess the wisdom and the 
courage as nation States and members of an international 
community to squarely meet those challenges. Can the 
United Nations meet the test of our time?

And for much of my tenure as President, some of 
our most urgent challenges have revolved around an 
increasingly integrated global economy and our efforts 
to recover from the worst economic crisis of our lifetime. 
Now, five years after the global economy collapsed and 
thanks to coordinated efforts by the countries here 
today, jobs are being created, global financial systems 
have stabilized and people are once again being lifted 
out of poverty. But this progress is fragile and unequal, 
and we still have work to do together to assure that our 
citizens can access the opportunities that they need in 
order to thrive in the twenty-first century.

Together, we have also worked to end a decade of 
war. Five years ago nearly 180,000 Americans were 
serving in harm’s way, and the war in Iraq was the 
dominant issue in our relationship with the rest of the 
world. Today, all of our troops have left Iraq. Next year an 
international coalition will end its war in Afghanistan, 
having achieved its mission of dismantling the core of 
Al Qaida that attacked us on 9/11.

For the United States, those new circumstances 
have also meant shifting away from a perpetual war 
footing. Beyond bringing our troops home we have 
limited the use of drones so that they target only those 
who pose a continuing imminent threat to the United 
States, when capture is not feasible and when there 
is a near certainty of no civilian casualties. We are 
transferring detainees to other countries and trying 
terrorists in courts of law, while working diligently to 
close the prison at Guantanamo Bay. Just as we have 
reviewed how we deploy our extraordinary military 
capabilities in a way that lives up to our ideals, we have 
begun to review the way that we gather intelligence, 
so that we properly balance the legitimate security 
concerns of our citizens and allies with the privacy 
concerns that all people share.

As a result of such work and cooperation with 
allies and partners, the world is more stable than it was 
five years ago. But even a glance at today’s headlines 
indicates that dangers remain. In Kenya, we have 
seen terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded 
shopping mall. Our hearts go out to the families of 
those who have been affected. In Pakistan, nearly 100 
people were recently killed by suicide bombers outside 
a church. In Iraq, killings and car bombs continue to be 
a terrible part of life.

Meanwhile, Al-Qaida has splintered into regional 
networks and militias, which does not give them the 
capacity at this point to carry out attacks like 9/11 
but does pose serious threats to Governments and 
diplomats, businesses and civilians all across the globe. 
Just as significantly, the convulsions in the Middle East 
and North Africa have laid bare deep divisions within 
societies, as an old order is upended and people grapple 
with what is coming next. Peaceful movements have too 
often been answered by violence from those resisting 
change and from extremists trying to hijack change. 
Sectarian conflict has re-emerged, and the potential 
spread of weapons of mass destruction continues to cast 
a shadow over the pursuit of peace.

Nowhere have we seen those trends converge 
more powerfully than in Syria. There, peaceful 
protests against an authoritarian regime were met with 
repression and slaughter. In the face of such carnage, 
many retreated to their sectarian identities — Alawite 
and Sunni, Christian and Kurd — and the situation 
spiralled into civil war.

The international community recognized the stakes 
early on, but our response has not matched the scale of 
the challenge. Aid cannot keep pace with the suffering 
of the wounded and displaced. A peace process is 
stillborn. America and others have worked to bolster 
the moderate opposition, but extremist groups have still 
taken root to exploit the crisis.

Al-Assad’s traditional allies have propped him up, 
citing principles of sovereignty to shield his regime. 
On 21 August, the regime used chemical weapons in 
an attack that killed more than 1,000 people, including 
hundreds of children. Today, the crisis in Syria and the 
destabilization of the region goes to the heart of broader 
challenges that the international community must now 
confront. How should we respond to conflicts in the 
Middle East and North Africa — conflicts between 
countries, but also conflicts within them? How do we 
address the choice between standing callously by while 
children are subjected to nerve gas and embroiling 
ourselves in someone else’s civil war? What is the role of 
force in resolving disputes that threaten the stability of 
a region and undermine all basic standards of civilized 
conduct? And what is the role of the United Nations and 
international law in meeting cries for justice?



Today, I want to outline where the United States of 
America stands on those issues.

With respect to Syria, we believe that, as a starting 
point, the international community must enforce the ban 
on chemical weapons. When I stated my willingness to 
order a limited strike against the Al-Assad regime in 
response to its brazen use of chemical weapons, I did 
not do so lightly. I did so because I believe that it is 
in the national security interests of the United States 
and in the interest of the world to meaningfully enforce 
a prohibition whose origins are older than the United 
Nations itself. The ban against the use of chemical 
weapons, even in war, has been agreed to by 98 percent 
of humanity. It is strengthened by the searing memories 
of soldiers suffocated in the trenches, Jews slaughtered 
in gas chambers, Iranians poisoned in the many tens of 
thousands.

The evidence is overwhelming that the Al-Assad 
regime used such weapons on 21 August. United 
Nations inspectors gave a clear accounting of their 
findings that advanced rockets had fired large 
quantities of sarin gas at civilians. Those rockets were 
fired from a regime-controlled neighbourhood and 
landed in opposition neighbourhoods. It is an insult to 
human reason and to the legitimacy of this institution 
to suggest that anyone other than the regime carried out 
this attack.

I know that in the immediate aftermath of the attack 
there were those who questioned the legitimacy of even 
a limited strike in the absence of a clear mandate from 
the Security Council. But without a credible military 
threat, the Security Council had demonstrated no 
inclination to act at all. However, as I have discussed 
with President Putin for over a year, most recently in 
St. Petersburg, my preference has always been to work 
for a diplomatic resolution to this issue, and in the past 
several weeks, the United States, Russia and our allies 
have reached an agreement to place Syria’s chemical 
weapons under international control and then destroy 
them.

The Syrian Government took a first step by giving 
an accounting of its stockpiles. Now, there must be a 
strong Security Council resolution to verify that the 
Al-Assad regime is keeping its commitments, and there 
must be consequences if they fail to do so. If we cannot 
agree even on that, then that will show that the United 
Nations is incapable of enforcing the most basic of 
international laws. On the other hand, if we succeed, it 
will send a powerful message that the use of chemical 
weapons has no place in the twenty-first century and 
that this Organization means what it says.

Our agreement on chemical weapons should 
energize a larger diplomatic effort to reach a political 
settlement within Syria. I do not believe that military 
action by those within Syria or by external Powers can 
achieve a lasting peace, nor do I believe that America 
or any nation should determine who will lead Syria. 
That is for the Syrian people to decide. Nevertheless, a 
leader who has slaughtered his own citizens and gassed 
children to death cannot regain the legitimacy to lead 
a badly fractured country. The notion that Syria can 
return to a pre-war status quo is a fantasy. 

It is time for Russia and Iran to realize that insisting 
on Al-Assad’s rule will lead directly to the outcome that 
they fear — an increasingly violent space for extremists 
to operate in. In turn, those of us who continue to 
support the moderate opposition must persuade them 
that the Syrian people cannot afford a collapse of State 
institutions and that a political settlement cannot be 
reached without addressing the legitimate fears and 
concerns of Alawites and other minorities. 

We are committed to working this political track, 
and as we pursue a settlement, let us remember that 
this is not a zero-sum endeavour. We are no longer in 
a cold war. There is no great game to be won, nor does 
America have any interest in Syria beyond the well-
being of its people, the stability of its neighbours, the 
elimination of chemical weapons and ensuring that it 
does not become a safe haven for terrorists. I welcome 
the influence of all nations that can help bring about a 
peaceful resolution of Syria’s civil war. 

As we move the Geneva process forward, I 
urge all nations represented here to step up to meet 
the humanitarian needs in Syria and surrounding 
countries. America has committed over a billion dollars 
to that effort, and today I can announce that we will be 
providing an additional $340 million. No aid can take 
the place of a political resolution that gives the Syrian 
people the chance to begin rebuilding their country, but 
it can help desperate people survive.

What broader conclusions can be drawn from 
America’s policy towards Syria? I know that there are 
those who have been frustrated by our unwillingness 
to use our military might to depose Al-Assad and 
believe that a failure to do so indicates a weakening of 
America’s resolve in the region. Others have suggested 
that my willingness to direct even limited military 



strikes to deter the further use of chemical weapons 
shows that we have learned nothing from Iraq, and that 
America continues to seek control over the Middle East 
for our own purposes. The situation in Syria mirrors 
a contradiction that has persisted in the region for 
decades. The United States is chastised for meddling in 
the region and accused of having a hand in all manner 
of conspiracies. At the same time, the United States is 
blamed for failing to do enough to solve the region’s 
problems and for showing indifference toward suffering 
Muslim populations.

I realize that some of that is inevitable, given 
America’s role in the world, but such contradictory 
attitudes have a practical impact on the American 
people’s support for our involvement in the region 
and allow leaders in the region, and the international 
community sometimes, to avoid addressing difficult 
problems themselves. So let me take this opportunity 
to outline what has been United States policy towards 
the Middle East and North Africa and what will be my 
policy during the remainder of my presidency.

The United States of America is prepared to use 
all elements of our power, including military force, 
to secure these core interests in the region. We will 
confront external aggression against our allies and 
partners, as we did in the Gulf War. We will ensure 
the free flow of energy from the region to the world. 
Although America is steadily reducing its own 
dependence on imported oil, the world still depends 
upon the region’s energy supply, and a severe disruption 
could destabilize the entire global economy. We will 
dismantle terrorist networks that threaten our people. 
Wherever possible, we will build the capacity of our 
partners, respect the sovereignty of nations and work 
to address the root causes of terror, but when it is 
necessary to defend the United States against terrorist 
attack, we will take direct action. Finally, we will not 
tolerate the development or use of weapons of mass 
destruction. Just as we consider the use of chemical 
weapons in Syria to be a threat to our own national 
security, we reject the development of nuclear weapons 
that could trigger a nuclear arms race in the region and 
undermine the global non-proliferation regime.

Now, to say that those are America’s core interests 
is not to say that they are our only interests. We deeply 
believe that it is in our interest to see a Middle East and 
North Africa that are peaceful and prosperous, and we 
will continue to promote democracy, human rights and 
open markets, because we believe that those practices 
help achieve peace and prosperity. But I also believe 
that we can rarely achieve those objectives through 
unilateral American action, particularly military 
action. Iraq has shown us that democracy cannot 
simply be imposed by force. Rather, such objectives are 
best achieved when we partner with the international 
community and with the countries and peoples of the 
region.

So what does that mean going forward? In the near 
term, America’s diplomatic efforts will focus on two 
particular issues: Iran’s pursuit of nuclear weapons 
and the Arab-Israeli conflict. While those issues are 
not the cause of all of the region’s problems, they have 
been a major source of instability for far too long, and 
resolving them can help serve as a foundation for a 
broader peace.

The United States and Iran have been isolated 
from one another since the Islamic revolution of 1979. 
That mistrust has deep roots. Iranians have long 
complained of a history of United States interference 
in their affairs and of America’s role in overthrowing 
an Iranian Government during the cold war. On the 
other hand, Americans see an Iranian Government that 
has declared the United States an enemy and directly 
or through proxies has taken Americans hostage, killed 
United States troops and civilians and threatened our 
ally Israel with destruction.

I do not believe such a difficult history can be 
overcome overnight. The suspicion runs too deep. But 
I do believe that, if we can resolve the issue of Iran’s 
nuclear programme, that can serve as a major step down 
a long road towards a different relationship, one based 
on mutual interests and mutual respect.

Since I took office, I have made it clear, in letters 
to the Supreme Leader in Iran and, more recently, to 
President Rouhani, that America prefers to resolve its 
concerns over Iran’s nuclear programme peacefully, 
although we are determined to prevent Iran from 
developing a nuclear weapon. We are not seeking regime 
change, and we respect the right of the Iranian people 
to access peaceful nuclear energy. Instead, we insist 
that the Iranian Government meet its responsibilities 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and Security Council resolutions. Meanwhile, 
the Supreme Leader has issued a fatwa against the 
development of nuclear weapons, and President 
Rouhani has just recently reiterated that the Islamic 
Republic will never develop a nuclear weapon.



Those statements made by our respective 
Governments should offer the basis for a meaningful 
agreement. We should be able to achieve a resolution 
that respects the rights of the Iranian people while 
giving the world confidence that the Iranian programme 
is peaceful. But to succeed, conciliatory words will 
have to be matched by actions that are transparent and 
verifiable. After all, it is the Iranian Government’s 
choices that have led to the comprehensive sanctions 
that are currently in place. That is not simply an issue 
between the United States and Iran. The world has 
seen Iran evade its responsibilities in the past and has 
an abiding interest in making sure that Iran meets its 
obligations in future.

But I want to be clear. We are encouraged by the 
fact that President Rouhani received from the Iranian 
people a mandate to pursue a more moderate course. 
Given President Rouhani’s stated commitment to reach 
an agreement, I am directing John Kerry to pursue this 
effort with the Iranian Government, in close cooperation 
with the European Union, the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, Russia and China.

The roadblocks may prove to be too great, but I 
firmly believe that the diplomatic path must be tested. 
For while the status quo will only deepen Iran’s isolation, 
Iran’s genuine commitment to go down a different path 
will be good for the region and the world, and will help 
the Iranian people meet their extraordinary potential in 
commerce and culture, in science and education.

We are also determined to resolve a conflict that 
goes back even further than our differences with 
Iran: the conflict between Palestinians and Israelis. 
I have made it clear that the United States will never 
compromise our commitment to Israel’s security, nor 
our support for its existence as a Jewish State. Earlier 
this year, in Jerusalem, I was inspired by young Israelis 
who stood up for the belief that peace was necessary, 
just and possible, and I believe that there is a growing 
recognition within Israel that the occupation of the West 
Bank is tearing at the democratic fabric of the Jewish 
State. But the children of Israel have the right to live in 
a world where the nations assembled in this body fully 
recognize their country and where we unequivocally 
reject those who fire rockets at their homes or incite 
others to hate them.

Likewise, the United States remains committed to 
the belief that the Palestinian people have a right to live 
in security and dignity in their own sovereign State. On 
the same trip, I had the opportunity to meet with young 
Palestinians in Ramallah whose ambition and incredible 
potential are matched only by the pain they feel in 
having no firm place in the community of nations. They 
are understandably cynical as to whether real progress 
will ever be made, and they are frustrated by their 
families enduring the daily indignity of occupation. 
But they, too, recognize that two States is the only real 
path to peace, because, just as the Palestinian people 
must not be displaced, the State of Israel is here to stay.

The time is now ripe for the entire international 
community to get behind the pursuit of peace. Already 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated a 
willingness to take significant political risks. President 
Abbas has put aside efforts to short-cut the pursuit 
of peace and come to the negotiating table. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu has released Palestinian prisoners 
and reaffirmed his commitment to a Palestinian State. 
Current talks are focused on final status issues of 
borders and security, refugees and Jerusalem.

So now the rest of us must be willing to take risks 
as well. Friends of Israel, including the United States, 
must recognize that Israel’s security as a Jewish and 
democratic State depends upon the realization of a 
Palestinian State, and we should say so clearly. Arab 
States, and those who have supported the Palestinians, 
must recognize that stability will be served only through 
a two-State solution and a secure Israel. All of us must 
recognize that peace will be a powerful tool to defeat 
extremists throughout the region and embolden those 
who are prepared to build a better future. Moreover, 
ties of trade and commerce between Israelis and Arabs 
could be an engine of growth and opportunity at a 
time when too many young people in the region are 
languishing without work. So let us emerge from the 
familiar corners of blame and prejudice. Let us support 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are prepared to walk 
the difficult road to peace.

Real breakthroughs on these two issues — Iran’s 
nuclear programme and Israeli-Palestinian peace — would 
have a profound and positive impact on the entire Middle 
East and North Africa. But the current convulsions 
arising out of the Arab Spring remind us that a just and 
lasting peace cannot be measured only by agreements 
between nations. It must also be measured by our ability 
to resolve conflict and promote justice within nations. 
And by that measure, it is clear that all of us have a lot 
more work to do. 

When peaceful transitions began in Tunisia and 
Egypt, the entire world was filled with hope. And 



although the United States, like others, was struck by 
the speed of transition, and although we did not — and 
in fact could not — dictate events, we chose to support 
those who called for change. We did so based on the 
belief that while these transitions will be hard and take 
time, societies based upon democracy and openness 
and the dignity of the individual will ultimately be 
more stable, more prosperous and more peaceful. 

Over the last few years, particularly in Egypt, 
we have seen just how hard this transition will be. 
Mohammed Morsi was democratically elected, but 
proved unwilling or unable to govern in a way that was 
fully inclusive. The interim Government that replaced 
him responded to the desires of millions of Egyptians 
who believed the revolution had taken a wrong turn, but 
it, too, has made decisions inconsistent with inclusive 
democracy, through an emergency law and restrictions 
on the press, civil society and opposition parties.

Of course, America has been attacked by all sides 
of this internal conflict, simultaneously accused of 
supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and engineering 
its removal from power. In fact, the United States has 
purposely avoided choosing sides. Our overriding 
interest throughout these past few years has been to 
encourage a Government that legitimately reflects 
the will of the Egyptian people and recognizes true 
democracy as requiring a respect for minority rights, 
the rule of law, freedom of speech and assembly, and a 
strong civil society.

That remains our interest today. And so, going 
forward, the United States will maintain a constructive 
relationship with the interim Government that promotes 
core interests like the Camp David Accords and counter-
terrorism. We will continue support in areas such as 
education that directly benefit the Egyptian people. 
But we have not proceeded with the delivery of certain 
military systems, and our support will depend upon 
Egypt’s progress in pursuing a more democratic path. 

Our approach to Egypt reflects a larger point: the 
United States will at times work with Governments 
that do not meet — at least in our view — the highest 
international expectations, but who work with us on our 
core interests. Nevertheless, we will not stop asserting 
principles that are consistent with our ideals, whether 
that means opposing the use of violence as a means 
of suppressing dissent or supporting the principles 
embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. We will reject the notion that those principles 
are simply Western exports, incompatible with Islam or 
the Arab world. We believe that they are the birthright 
of every person. And while we recognize that our 
influence will at times be limited, although we will be 
wary of efforts to impose democracy through military 
force, and although we will at times be accused of 
hypocrisy and inconsistency, we will be engaged in the 
region for the long haul. For the hard work of forging 
freedom and democracy is the task of a generation. 
That includes efforts to resolve sectarian tensions that 
continue to surface in places like Iraq, Bahrain and 
Syria. 

We understand that such long-standing issues 
cannot be solved by outsiders; they must be addressed 
by Muslim communities themselves. But we have seen 
grinding conflicts come to an end before, most recently 
in Northern Ireland, where Catholics and Protestants 
finally recognized that an endless cycle of conflict was 
causing both communities to fall behind a fast-moving 
world. And so we believe that those same sectarian 
conflicts can be overcome in the Middle East and North 
Africa. 

To summarize, the United States has a hard-earned 
humility when it comes to our ability to determine 
events inside other countries. The notion of American 
empire may be useful propaganda, but it is not borne 
out by America’s current policy or public opinion. 
Indeed, as recent debates within the United States over 
Syria clearly showed, the danger for the world is not an 
America that is too eager to immerse itself in the affairs 
of other countries or to take on every problem in the 
region as its own. The danger for the world is that the 
United States, after a decade of war, rightly concerned 
about issues back home and aware of the hostility 
that our engagement in the region has engendered 
throughout the Muslim world, may disengage, creating 
a vacuum of leadership that no other nation is ready to 
fill.

I believe that such disengagement would be a 
mistake. I believe that America must remain engaged 
for our own security, but I also believe that the world 
is better for it. Some may disagree, but I believe that 
America is exceptional, in part because we have shown 
a willingness, through the sacrifice of blood and 
treasure, to stand up not only for our own narrow self-
interest, but for the interests of all. I must be honest, 
though; we are far more likely to invest our energy 
in those countries that want to work with us, that 
invest in their people instead of in a corrupt few, and 
that embrace a vision of society where everyone can 



contribute — men and women, Shia or Sunni, Muslim, 
Christian or Jew. Because from Europe to Asia, from 
Africa to the Americas, nations that have persevered on 
a democratic path have emerged more prosperous, more 
peaceful and more invested in upholding our common 
security and our common humanity. And I believe that 
the same will hold true for the Arab world.

That leads me to a final point. There will be 
times when the breakdown of societies is so great and 
the violence against civilians so substantial, that the 
international community will be called upon to act. 
That will require new thinking and some very tough 
choices. While the United Nations was designed to 
prevent wars between States, increasingly we face 
the challenge of preventing slaughter within States. 
And those challenges will grow more pronounced 
as we are confronted with States that are fragile or 
failing — places where horrendous violence can put 
innocent men, women and children at risk with no hope 
of protection from their national institutions.

I have made it clear that even when America’s core 
interests are not directly threatened, we stand ready to 
do our part to prevent mass atrocities and protect basic 
human rights. But we cannot and should not bear that 
burden alone. In Mali, we supported both the French 
intervention that successfully pushed back Al-Qaida 
and the African forces who are keeping the peace. In 
East Africa, we are working with partners to bring the 
Lord’s Resistance Army to an end. And in Libya, when 
the Security Council provided a mandate to protect 
civilians, America joined a coalition that took action. 
Because of what we did there, countless lives were 
saved and a tyrant could not kill his way back to power.

I know that some now criticize the action in 
Libya as an object lesson. They point to the problems 
that the country now confronts — a democratically 
elected Government struggling to provide security; 
armed groups, in some places extremists, ruling parts 
of a fractured land — and these critics argue that any 
intervention to protect civilians is doomed to fail. Look 
at Libya. No one is more mindful of those problems 
than I am, for they resulted in the death of four 
outstanding United States citizens who were committed 
to the Libyan people, including Ambassador Chris 
Stevens — a man whose courageous efforts helped save 
the city of Benghazi. But does anyone truly believe that 
the situation in Libya would be better if Al-Qadhafi had 
been allowed to kill, imprison or brutalize his people 
into submission? It is far more likely that without 
international action, Libya would now be engulfed in 
civil war and bloodshed.

We live in a world of imperfect choices. Different 
nations will not agree on the need for action in every 
instance, and the principle of sovereignty is at the centre 
of our international order. But sovereignty cannot be 
a shield for tyrants to commit wanton murder or an 
excuse for the international community to turn a blind 
eye. While we need to be modest in our belief that we 
can remedy every evil, and while we need to be mindful 
that the world is full of unintended consequences, 
should we really accept the notion that the world is 
powerless in the face of a Rwanda or a Srebrenica? If 
that is the world that people want to live in, they should 
say so and reckon with the cold logic of mass graves.

I believe that we can embrace a different future. If 
we do not want to choose between inaction and war, we 
must get better — all of us — at the policies that prevent 
the breakdown of basic order through respect for the 
responsibilities of nations and the rights of individuals, 
through meaningful sanctions for those who break 
the rules, through dogged diplomacy that resolves the 
root causes of conflict and not merely its aftermath, 
and through development assistance that brings hope 
to the marginalized. And yes sometimes, all this will 
not be enough and there will be moments when the 
international community will need to acknowledge that 
the multilateral use of military force may be required to 
prevent the very worst from occurring. 

Ultimately, that is the international community 
that America seeks — one where nations do not covet 
the land or resources of other nations, but one in which 
we carry out the founding purpose of this institution 
and where we all take responsibility; a world in which 
the rules established out of the horrors of war can help 
us resolve conflicts peacefully and prevent the kind of 
wars that our forefathers fought; a world where human 
beings can live with dignity and meet their basic needs, 
whether they live in New York or Nairobi, in Peshawar 
or Damascus.

These are extraordinary times with extraordinary 
opportunities. Thanks to human progress, a child 
born anywhere on Earth today can do things that 
60 years ago would have been out of reach for the mass 
of humankind. I saw this in Africa, where nations 
moving beyond conflict are now poised to take off. 
America is with them: partnering to feed the hungry 
and to care for the sick and to bring power to places 
off the grid. I see it across the Pacific region, where 



hundreds of millions have been lifted out of poverty in 
a single generation. I see it in the faces of young people 
everywhere who can access the entire world with the 
click of a button and who are eager to join the cause of 
eradicating extreme poverty, combating climate change, 
starting businesses, expanding freedom, and leaving 
behind the old ideological battles of the past. That is 
what is happening in Asia and Africa, it is happening 
in Europe and the Americas. That is the future that the 
people of the Middle East and North Africa deserve as 
well, one where they can focus on opportunity, instead 
of on whether they will be killed or repressed because 
of who they are or what they believe. 

Time and again, nations and people have shown 
a capacity to change, to live up to humanity’s highest 
ideals, to choose a better history. Last month, I stood 
where 50 years ago Martin Luther King Jr. told America 
about his dream, at a time when many people of my 
race could not even vote for President. Earlier this year, 
I stood in the small cell where Nelson Mandela endured 
for decades, cut off from his own people and the world. 
Who are we to believe that today’s challenges cannot be 
overcome, when we have seen what changes the human 
spirit can bring? Who in this Hall can argue that the 
future belongs to those who seek to repress that spirit, 
rather than to those who seek to liberate it? 

I know what side of history I want the United States 
of America to be on. We are ready to meet tomorrow’s 
challenges with you, firm in the belief that all men 
and women are in fact created equal, each individual 
possessed with a dignity and inalienable rights that 
cannot be denied. That is why we look to the future 
not with fear, but with hope. That is why we remain 
convinced that this community of nations can deliver 
a more peaceful, prosperous, and just world to the next 
generation. 
It is an honour and a privilege 
for me to once again address this body. South Africa 
attaches the utmost importance to the General Assembly 
as the most representative and democratic organ of the 
United Nations serving the international community.



We congratulate President Ashe and the Republic of 
Antigua and Barbuda on his election as President of the 
General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We also 
thank Mr. Vuk Jeremi. for the splendid way in which he 
presided over the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.

Let me begin by reiterating our condemnation of 
the horrific terrorist attack over the weekend in Kenya, 
in which a number of civilians, including a South 
African national, were killed. We express our deepest 
condolences to the Government and people of Kenya 
and to all those families who lost loved ones, and wish 
the wounded survivors a speedy recovery. We continue 
to support the efforts of Kenya and the international 
community aimed at peacekeeping, stability, democracy 
and nation-building in Somalia.

The theme for our debate this year, “The post-
2015 development agenda: setting the stage”, is most 
appropriate. In the year 2000, the commitment was 
made by world leaders in the Millennium Declaration 
to eradicate extreme poverty and adopt the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). The MDGs are measurable 
and achievable targets that were specifically crafted to 
address the most pressing development needs of the 
most vulnerable countries. The full implementation of 
the MDGs remains the key priority on the development 
agenda for the next two years.

A development agenda for beyond 2015 should 
allow individual regions and States the space to 
address the development needs peculiar to their 
circumstances and priorities. For Africa in particular, 
the future development agenda should address poverty 
eradication, income inequality and job creation. We 
furthermore believe that the new development agenda 
can be effective only if it is focused on all three 
dimensions of sustainable development, namely, the 
eradication of poverty through economic development, 
social development and environmental sustainability.

We also wish to emphasize that any development 
agenda beyond 2015 must be based on the principle 
of common but differentiated responsibilities in 
order to equalize the international playing field. We 
raise this point out of our concern that the global 
economic meltdown seems to have brought about new 
developments that are detrimental to the developing 
world, especially Africa. Some of the new developments 
include the tendency to renegotiate the rules of the 
game. New issues are being introduced as prerequisites 
for development and partnerships and have, in fact, 
become huge non-tariff barriers. They include the green 
economy and clean technology. While those issues are 
important for Africa and developing countries and need 
to be attended to, the manner in which they have been 
crafted restrains economic development, as they are 
used as obstacles.

We also wish to emphasize our expectations that the 
developed North and developing South will continue 
to engage in a genuine partnership. In that regard, 
the developed North countries should stand ready to 
meet their commitment to contribute 0.7 per cent of 
their gross national income to official development 
assistance.

We are aware of the challenges in the North caused 
by the economic meltdown, but we are of the view that 
investing in development in the South, especially in 
Africa, is of primary importance as a source of much-
needed sustainable development and stability in the 
world. Attempts to delegate some of those historical 
responsibilities to new emerging economies in the South 
are unacceptable and unworkable, as such emerging 
nations have their own historical challenges and 
backlogs to deal with. Furthermore, any commitment 
we make to the future beyond 2015 must build on 
existing agreements, which include Agenda 21, the 
MDGs, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and 
the outcome document of the Rio de Janeiro Conference 
on Sustainable Development. In the case of Africa, 
they must build on the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development.

Development and security are two sides of the 
same coin. The best way to ensure both is through good 
governance and the promotion of democratic values in 
all societies. Allow me, therefore, to register once again 
our serious concern that the Security Council, almost 
70 years since its establishment, remains undemocratic, 
unrepresentative and unfair to developing nations and 
small States, and disenfranchises the majority of the 
States Members of the United Nations, which form the 
majority in the General Assembly. We cannot remain 
beholden indefinitely to the will of an unrepresentative 
minority on the most important issues of international 
peace and security.

There has been too much talk about the need for 
reform, with too little action. We would like to challenge 
the Assembly today by saying “Let us set ourselves the 
target to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the 
United Nations in 2015 with a reformed, more inclusive, 
democratic and representative Security Council!”.



When discussing the Security Council, the matter 
of the Syrian Arab Republic comes into focus. We have 
expressed our dismay at the use of chemical weapons 
in Syria. There is no cause that could justify the use 
of weapons of mass destruction by anyone under any 
circumstances. It is, however, our strongly held view 
that any political transition in Syria must come about as 
a result of the will of the Syrian people and not through 
the force of arms.

We welcome the recent positive developments, 
such as the decision by Syria to accede to the Chemical 
Weapons Convention and the ongoing bilateral 
consultations between the Russian Federation and 
the United States. We support all of the diplomatic 
efforts aimed at finding a solution to this matter. The 
international community has an opportunity to use the 
Syrian experience to ensure that matters of this nature 
are handled correctly going forward, using existing 
instruments within the multilateral system of global 
governance.

Next year South Africa will celebrate its twentieth 
anniversary of freedom and democracy. We will forever 
be grateful to those in the international community, 
including the United Nations, who stood beside us in 
our long struggle for liberation. We look forward to 
celebrating our anniversary of freedom with the United 
Nations and to strengthening our partnership. A strong 
partnership with the United Nations is critical for the 
future we want for the people of South Africa. 

We also take this opportunity to thank the United 
Nations and the international community for their 
support during the recent hospitalization of our beloved 
founding President of the free and democratic South 
Africa, His Excellency Mr. Nelson Mandela. We thank 
them for all for their support and good wishes. The 
United Nations declared 18 July, his birthday, as Nelson 
Mandela International Day. That has become a catalyst 
promoting service to humankind worldwide. We 
thank the United Nations for that gesture. Our revered 
former President continues to respond to treatment 
at his home. His family and our people have warmly 
welcomed the support he continues to receive from the 
global community. We are humbled and very grateful 
for that support.

As we celebrate our freedom and democracy, we 
remain mindful that our struggle is not complete until 
the people of Palestine and Western Sahara enjoy 
their rights to self-determination. Just as the United 
Nations stood by South Africa, we would like to see the 
Organization be at the forefront of efforts towards self-
determination for the peoples of Palestine and Western 
Sahara.

We are deeply concerned about continued illegal 
settlement activities in the West Bank in violation of 
international law. Such illegal settlement activities 
jeopardize the realization of the two-State solution.

The Cuban people also hold a special place in our 
hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for African 
peoples in their quest for freedom. We will therefore 
continue to struggle with them for their economic 
liberation.

At its sixty-eighth session the General Assembly 
will undertake critical work for the future of our people. 
Let us tackle the work ahead in such a manner that when 
future generations look back on this moment, they will 
be able to say that the leaders of this generation laid the 
foundation for the eradication of poverty, for building a 
global society of equality, and for world peace.

Let me borrow from the words of our former 
President Nelson Mandela on his inauguration day in 
1994 when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation-building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
