This year 
marks the centenary of the outbreak of the First World 
War. A distinguished thinker in modern China, Yan Fu, 
described the devastation caused by the war: “How sad 
that the air is heavy with the stench of war”.

Next year will be the seventieth anniversary of the 
end of the Second World War. Over 2 billion people 
across the world were affected by that calamity. In 
China alone, the aggression committed by Japanese 
militarists left more than 35 million Chinese soldiers 
and civilians dead or injured.

The United Nations was established to keep the 
scourge of the two World Wars from occurring again, 
and it embodies the fervent hope of all countries for 
peace and stability. To achieve that goal, the Charter 
of the United Nations presented a grand vision of joint 
efforts to build a better world.

In this world, we should treat each other as equals. 
The principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity 
must be upheld. The pursuit by different countries of 
economic and social development must be respected. 
Their right to independently choose their own social 
systems and development paths must be safeguarded. 
We should be open and inclusive. Only in that way 
can we open the door of dialogue and exchange and 
achieve harmony among countries with different social 
systems, religions and cultural traditions. We should 
pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. Each country 
should align its own interests with those of others and 
work to maximize areas where their interests converge.

Only by helping one another can countries prosper. 
We should jointly initiate a new thinking for win-win 
and all-win progress and reject the old notion of a zero-
sum game, or the winner takes all. We should uphold 
justice. It is imperative to promote greater democracy 
and the rule of law in international relations, to apply 
fair and just rules to tell right from wrong and settle 
disputes, and to pursue peace and development within 
the framework of international law. All parties should 
jointly uphold the authority and effectiveness of the 
United Nations and reform and improve the global 
governance structure.

As we have seen in Gaza, Iraq, the Central African 
Republic and South Sudan, our world is far from 
peaceful. In the face of all those who have been killed 
in war, we must ask ourselves how we can keep the 
tragedies from recurring. In the face of women and 
children displaced by fighting, we must ask ourselves 
when they can return home. In the face of incessant 
conflicts, we must ask ourselves how we can open the 
door to lasting peace. To address those problems, China 
believes that we should do the following.

First, we should seek political solutions. To beat 
swords into ploughshares may take time and effort, but 
history and reality have repeatedly demonstrated that 
to meet violence with violence will not lead to enduring 
peace, and the use of force will only create more 
problems than solutions. Coercive action should be 
authorized by the Security Council. If a country places 
its domestic law above international law and interferes 
in other countries’ internal affairs at will, or even seeks 
regime change, the international community cannot but 
question the legitimacy of its actions.

Secondly, we should accommodate the interests 
of all parties. Parties to a conflict should reject the 
zero-sum approach, address each other’s concerns in 
negotiations and endeavour to meet each other half 
way. They should seek to meet their legitimate concerns 
through consultations in a mutually accommodating 
way. When conducting mediation, the international 
community should uphold justice and take an objective 
and balanced position. Countries should not be partial 
to any party in the conflict. Still less should they avail 
themselves of the opportunity to pursue their own 
agenda.

Thirdly, we should promote national reconciliation. 
The ongoing armed conflicts are largely caused by 
ethnic and sectarian tensions. The process of national 
reconciliation and the process of political settlement 
should be advanced in tandem with each other. All 
parties should uphold the Charter of the United 
Nations, develop and practice a culture of inclusion and 
tolerance and uproot the seeds of hatred and retaliation, 
so that the fruit of inclusion and amity will grow on 
post-conflict land.

Fourthly, we should uphold multilateralism. We 
should give full play to the role of the United Nations 
and observe international law and the basic norms 
governing international relations. Chapter VII of the 
Charter is not the only means for the Security Council 
to maintain international peace and security. We should 
make better and full use of the means of prevention, 
mediation and conciliation stipulated in Chapter VI.

Given their familiarity with local developments, we 
should leverage the strengths of regional organizations 
and countries and support them in addressing regional 
issues in ways suited to their regions.

The conflicts in Ukraine remain a cause of 
concern. We welcome and support the Minsk ceasefire 
agreement and urge all parties in Ukraine to strictly 

implement it and seek a comprehensive, sustained 
and balanced political solution through political 
dialogue and negotiation. China hopes that the various 
ethnic groups in Ukraine will live in harmony and 
that Ukraine will live in peace with other countries. 
That is the fundamental way for Ukraine to achieve 
long-term stability and security. China hopes that 
the United Nations will play its due role in finding a 
proper solution to the Ukrainian crisis and supports the 
international community’s constructive efforts to ease 
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

China supports Iraq in upholding its sovereignty, 
independence and territorial integrity. The formation of 
the new Iraqi Government has provided an important 
opportunity. We hope that the Iraqi Government will 
lead its people in a joint endeavour to develop their 
country in the spirit of inclusion and reconciliation. 
China calls for providing more humanitarian assistance 
to support Iraq. To help the Iraqi people overcome 
difficulties and to achieve peace and stability in their 
country is the shared responsibility of the international 
community.

China firmly opposes all terrorist acts and supports 
the international community in responding to the 
threat posed by terrorist forces in a coordinated and 
concerted way in accordance with the relevant Security 
Council resolutions. China believes that in conducting 
international counter-terrorism cooperation, we should 
take a multipronged approach and address both the 
symptoms and root causes of terrorism, and that the 
United Nations and the Security Council should fully 
play leading roles. There should be no double standard 
when it comes to fighting terrorism; still less should 
terrorism be identified with any particular ethnic group 
or religion.

As new developments emerge in the global fight 
against terrorism, the international community should 
take new measures to address them. In particular, it 
should focus on combating religious extremism and 
cyberterrorism, resolutely eliminate the root causes of 
terrorism and extremism, block channels that spread 
them and crack down hard and effectively on the use of 
the Internet and other new means of communication by 
terrorists to instigate, recruit, finance or plot terrorist 
attacks.

The Syrian crisis has continued for nearly four 
years. It is negotiation, not fighting, that offers 
solutions. China urges all parties in Syria to end the 
fighting and violence immediately, cooperate fully with 
United Nations humanitarian assistance operations and 
help bring an end to the suffering of innocent civilians 
as soon as possible. We urge all the parties to act in the 
overall interests of the future and fate of their country 
and people, demonstrate the necessary political will, 
actively support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, and follow a middle 
way that draws on workable practices from other 
countries and regions, suits Syria’s national conditions 
and accommodates the interests of various parties, in 
order to give peace a chance.

The Palestinian issue is an open wound on the 
conscience of humankind. China calls on Israel 
and Palestine to agree on a durable ceasefire, and it 
urges Israel to lift its blockade of the Gaza Strip and 
stop building settlements. At the same time, Israel’s 
legitimate security concerns should be respected. We 
hope that Israel and Palestine will choose the way of 
peace and resume and advance the peace talks as soon 
as possible. The aspirations and legitimate demands of 
the Palestinian people for an independent nation must 
not remain unmet indefinitely. Advancing peace in the 
Middle East calls for the concerted efforts of many, not 
of one or two countries alone. The Security Council 
should play its rightful role, and we support its efforts 
to take action in response to the demands of Palestine 
and the League of Arab States.

Negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue have 
entered a crucial stage. All the parties should display 
good faith, continue their efforts in a spirit of mutual 
respect, equality, collaboration and accommodation, 
and work hard on the most difficult issues, so that a 
win-win agreement that is comprehensive, fair and 
balanced is arrived at as soon as possible.

The two sides of the conflict in South Sudan 
should establish a ceasefire immediately, organize an 
active political dialogue that addresses the interests 
of the people in South Sudan in general and, through 
the mediation of the Intergovernmental Authority 
on Development, work with all the country’s ethnic 
groups and parties to speedily reach a fair and balanced 
solution and achieve national reconciliation and ethnic 
unity. South Sudan is the youngest Member of the 
United Nations. The South Sudanese people deserve a 
life of hope and vitality, not the devastation caused by 
conflicts and wars.


China welcomes the election of Mr. Ashraf Ghani 
as the new President of Afghanistan and Mr. Abdullah 
Abdullah as its Chief Executive, and will continue to 
support the Afghan people in their work to achieve a 
smooth political, security and economic transition and 
to build jointly with them an Afghanistan that enjoys 
unity, stability, development and amity. We support 
an Afghan-led and -owned peace process, with the 
international community fulfilling its commitment and 
responsibility to Afghanistan and its people. China will 
host the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul 
Process so that we can give Afghanistan fresh support 
as it stands on the threshold of a new era.

On the issue of the Korean peninsula, China calls 
on all the parties to act objectively and impartially, 
remain committed to the goal of denuclearizing the 
peninsula, firmly uphold its peace and stability, and 
endeavour to resolve the issues through dialogue and 
consultation. The Six-Party Talks remain the only 
viable and effective way to resolve the nuclear issue on 
the Korean peninsula, and we now have the pressing 
task of restarting the talks as soon as possible. The issue 
should be tackled through a sustainable, irreversible 
and effective dialogue process that addresses all the 
parties’ concerns in a comprehensive and balanced 
way. Since there are still many uncertainties on the 
peninsula today, all the parties concerned should 
exercise restraint, refrain from provocative acts, work 
harder to help ease tensions and jointly uphold peace 
and stability.

While the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) established by the United Nations in 2000 
have contributed greatly to improving human survival 
and development, global development is still a task for 
the long term. The international community is not only 
dealing with the formidable challenges of reducing 
poverty, eradicating hunger and improving education 
and the health of women and children, it is also facing 
new challenges in the form of the environment, climate 
change and energy and resource security.

Next year is the deadline for meeting the MDGs, 
and the post-2015 development agenda will take 
over this historic mission. Building on past progress 
and also breaking new ground, the international 
community should formulate more effective plans 
and take more robust action to advance humankind’s 
shared development. As we see it, the development 
agenda should have three goals. First, it should advance 
people’s well-being, with a focus on eradicating 
poverty and encouraging development. Secondly, 
it should promote inclusiveness, in the interests of 
supporting social equity and justice. Thirdly, it should 
ensure the implementation of all these things. Based 
on the principles of diversity in development models 
and shared but differentiated responsibilities, the 
agenda should aim to enhance global partnerships for 
development and improve implementation tools and 
mechanisms.

Climate change is a challenge that all humankind 
is facing. Mr. Zhang Gaoli, Vice Premier of the State 
Council, led the Chinese delegation to this year’s 
Climate Summit at the United Nations as a special 
envoy of China’s President. We congratulate the 
United Nations on the Summit’s success and hope that 
the political momentum it generated will translate 
into effective actions for improving international 
cooperation on climate change. All parties should 
work to conclude negotiations on a new post-2020 
climate-change regime as scheduled, by the end of 
2015, in accordance with the principles of shared but 
differentiated responsibilities, equity and respective 
capabilities, with the aim of creating fairer and more 
equitable and effective arrangements for international 
cooperation on climate change.

The Ebola epidemic, which is raging in some 
African countries, has once again sounded the alarm 
on global health security. As a good brother and partner 
of Africa, with whom it shares the good and the bad, 
China will continue to stand firmly with the African 
people and to support and assist them to the best of its 
ability. We will also take an active part in the relevant 
international assistance efforts. China calls on the 
World Health Organization, the United Nations and 
other international agencies to work closely with the 
international community, come up with new initiatives 
for strengthening global health security and provide 
more assistance to developing countries, particularly in 
Africa.

Next year is one of special historic significance, 
as it marks the seventieth anniversary of victory in 
the anti-fascist world war, the founding of the United 
Nations and victory in the Chinese people’s war against 
Japanese aggression. Remembering the past makes us 
cherish peace, and recalling history will help to guide 
us as we embrace the future. China welcomes the 
inclusion of the seventieth anniversary of the end of the 
Second World War on the agenda of this session of the 
General Assembly as an important opportunity.

When we look back on what happened 70 years 
ago, the historical facts are clear, and a final verdict 
has been pronounced on what was right and what was 
wrong. History should not be falsified or truth distorted. 
Today, 70 years later, let us jointly uphold human 
justice and conscience so that those who attempt to 
deny aggression and distort history will have nowhere 
to hide. Let us jointly defend the Charter of the United 
Nations and the outcomes of the Second World War, 
so that that vision of a world free of war, with lasting 
peace, will take deep root in our hearts and pass from 
one generation to the next.
The year 
2014 is a special one for Europeans — a special year 
of commemoration. In the summer 100 years ago, 
European diplomacy failed and the world slid into the 
First World War. Seventy-five years ago, Germany 
attacked its neighbour Poland, plunging the world into 
the Second World War. Twenty-five years ago, the 
Berlin Wall fell, bringing an end to the world’s decades-
long division into East and West.

However, merely to look back and remember would 
not be enough in this year of commemoration. On the 
contrary, we must ask ourselves: what have we learned 
for the future? The most important lesson learned 
from that history was the establishment of the United 
Nations, for the United Nations embodies the world’s 
hope for peace. That hope derives from an idea which 
is as simple as it is revolutionary: there is peace when 
the world sets rules for itself and replaces the law of 
force with the force of law, when conflicts are resolved 
at the negotiating table and not on the battlefield, when 
the world renounces, step by step, the cynical logic of 
violence.

To date, the United Nations has provided a universal 
foundation for the hope for peace. But that universality 
is under threat from the ghosts of the past and from new 
demons.

In 2014 our world seems to be unraveling. Crises are 
coming at us thick and fast. That is why it is not enough 
simply to call upon the United Nations. No, we need to 
breathe life into that call. Hope will remain but a hope, 
an unattainable goal, unless States are prepared to take 
on responsibility. The United Nations is not a forum 
onto which we can shrug off responsibility. The United 
Nations is a forum whereby we assume responsibility.

Germany, embedded in a united Europe, is prepared 
to take on responsibility in and with the United Nations. 
First and foremost we have a responsibility to the people 
bearing the brunt of the suffering in the crises.

Next month Germany will host a conference in 
Berlin to mobilize urgently needed humanitarian 
assistance for the millions of Syrian refugees. My 
country will play its part, and I sincerely hope that 
many others will follow suit. Support is needed above 
all by Syria’s neighbours. They are doing a tremendous 
job but are also under tremendous strain due to the huge 
influx of displaced persons and refugees from Syria.

The Ebola epidemic is raging in West Africa. 
It is bringing suffering and death into the homes of 
individual families. It is endangering the cohesion 
of entire societies. That is why we are sending 
humanitarian and medical assistance and setting up an 
airlift to the region. I am delighted that many volunteers 
in my country have responded to the call, saying, “I 
want to go there to help on the spot”.

Above and beyond the immediate solidarity, 
however, we need a long-term commitment. We need 
the expertise of the World Health Organization and 
the coordinating umbrella of the United Nations, 
particularly in the long term as we try to strengthen 
States and health-care systems. Germany will contribute 
to both of those goals. We cannot bring the dead back to 
life, but we may be able to prevent far too many more 
people dying of Ebola who ought not to be dying if they 
were treated. And we must certainly make sure that the 
next epidemic does not have consequences as deadly as 
the one we are still fighting.

If we are to move towards the hope of peace, we need 
many small steps — the commitment of individuals, 
bilateral diplomacy and regional initiatives. But none 
of that can replace the United Nations. Only the United 
Nations can provide a universal foundation for the hope 
of peace. That foundation is international law, to which 
everyone who belongs to the community of nations in 
the United Nations, and those who want to belong, has 
subscribed. That is what must be preserved; that is the 
core of our hope for peace.

That is why I must here mention the conflict 
in Ukraine. Some people in the Hall may regard it 
as nothing more than a regional conflict in Eastern 
Europe. But I am convinced that that view is incorrect. 
I believe that that conflict affects each and every one of 
us. Not just any State, but a permanent member of the 
Security Council — Russia — has, with its annexation 
of Crimea, unilaterally altered existing borders in 
Europe and has thus violated international law. We 
must counter that dangerous sign, because we must not 
allow the power of international law to be eroded from 
the inside. We must not allow the old divisions between 
East and West to re-emerge in the United Nations.

Because so much is at stake in that conflict, not 
only for the people of Ukraine but also for the future of 
international law, Germany and its partners have taken 
on responsibility and committed themselves vigorously 
to defusing the conflict. I am under no illusion: a 
political solution is still a long way off. However, just a 
few weeks ago we were on the brink of a direct military 
confrontation between Russian and Ukrainian armed 
forces. I am happy to say that diplomacy prevented the 
worst. Now the priority must be to bring about a lasting 
ceasefire and achieve a political solution, one based on 
the principles of the United Nations and preserving the 
unity of Ukraine.

I am not discussing only Ukraine. As long as that 
conflict is simmering and as long as Russia and the 
West are in a dispute over Ukraine, there is a threat 
of paralysing the United Nations. We therefore need a 
Security Council that is able and willing to act to tackle 
the new and, in the long term, far more important tasks 
we are facing. The world of 2014 is plagued not only by 
the old ghost of division, but also by new demons.

We are all shocked by the unspeakable brutality of 
the terrorists who misuse the name of God in carrying 
out their evil deeds. My question is, ought we not to 
be particularly worried that the preachers of hate are 
drawing in young people who have grown up in the 
midst of our own societies?

That is why that, too, is not exclusively a regional 
conflict — a problem in Iraq or in Syria or in Africa, 

where terrorists are stamping on the fundamental rights 
of women and girls in particular. That barbarity is 
directed against every one of us, and against everything 
for which the United Nations stands.

Precisely for that reason, our response needs 
to go much further than the immediately necessary 
humanitarian and military response. Germany is 
making substantial contributions to both, including 
militarily. But all that must be part of a political alliance 
against the terror of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. 
My country is strongly committed to that alliance, and 
I very much hope in particular that the societies of the 
Middle East, realizing that far more is at stake than just 
their security, will also join.

In a world haunted both by old ghosts and new 
demons, we have to be able to pursue both paths. On the 
one hand, we must steadfastly continue to work towards 
political solutions in Ukraine, in the Middle East, in 
Syria, but at the same time we must tackle the huge 
tasks of the twenty-first century.

I am referring to the fight against climate change. 
Germany is contributing $1 billion dollars to the Green 
Climate Fund. And we will support our closest partner, 
France, on the road to a successful Paris climate summit 
in 2015 and to a universal and legally binding climate 
convention, which we urgently need.

I am also referring to the digital age. Yes, the 
Internet should be a global, free, open and safe space. 
But that is not a matter solely for Government agencies 
or big companies. That global, free, open and safe space 
must be shaped by society as a whole. If we fail to act, 
the vast technological possibilities will sweep aside the 
human dimension. We need an international law for the 
digital world. Resolution 68/167, which we introduced 
together with Brazil, has made a start in that direction, 
I hope, at the United Nations.

I am also referring to the post-2015 agenda, because 
the fight against poverty begins with asking how we 
actually create value. How do we create prosperity? 
That question is not only directed at a few countries 
in need of help. Rather, it is a call to the whole world 
for more sustainable economic activity. With its shift to 
renewable energies, Germany has set out on a path that, 
although not easy, is one the world must take if we want 
to preserve our natural resources and if the fight for 
scarce resources, water and arable land is not to become 
the major conflict of the twenty-first century.

Our children will judge us by those huge tasks. 
They will look back, just as we are looking back at 
our forebears in this year of commemoration. Having 
learned from two World Wars, our forebears established 
the United Nations as their lesson to us. If we want to 
continue that lesson, if we want to master the tasks 
facing us, then we must further develop this institution. 
The United Nations is not a finished product. Perhaps it 
will never be a finished product. It must evolve further, 
so that in all its parts, including the Security Council, it 
reflects today’s world.

I believe that the United Nations is worth every 
effort, for in it lives the world’s hope for peace and a 
legal order. I assure the Assembly that my country will 
play its part in making that hope a reality, step by step.
The 
Assembly will understand that I am speaking today 
with particular emotion, because one of my compatriots 
has just been the subject of a cowardly assassination in 
Algeria by a terrorist group linked to Daesh. His name 
was Hervé Gourdel. He was a man full of enthusiasm 
who loved mountains and thought that he would be able 
to pursue his passion by going to the Djurdjura area in 
Algeria. He was captured, and he was decapitated. That 
is what terrorism does. And it does not do that only to 
France. Several days ago it was American and British 
individuals subjected to the same barbarity.

That group — Daesh — does not strike only those 
who think differently from themselves; they also strike 
Muslims, they strike civilian populations, and they 
strike minorities. They rape, they kill. That is why 
the battle that the international community must wage 
against terrorism knows no borders. The same flag must 
be carried, that of the United Nations, that of the values 
for which this Organization was founded — human 
dignity, freedom, the vision we must have of a world of 
tomorrow, a world of justice.

France is fully engaged in this battle. That was 
the case in Africa when it was called to Mali, where, 
fortunately, it was joined by many African and European 
countries and now by the United Nations. France has 
been engaged whenever there is a risk. But today it is 
in Iraq and Syria where that threat exists. But it does 
not concern that region alone, because the Daesh group 
has decided not only to conquer territory, imagining 
that it will found a State; it threatens the entire world 
by provoking attacks, organizing kidnappings and 
recruiting fighters from around the world to train them 
and show them the barbarity of which the group is 
capable, so they may reproduce that horrific terrorist 
movement in our own countries.

It is because this threat exists not only for the 
region but for the world that France responded to the 
Iraqi authorities’ appeal to provide them first with 
military aid through the delivery of weapons this past 
August and also with aerial support to keep the Daesh 
group from being able to continue its advance. We want 
to weaken it. We want to quash it.

But we also know that as long as there is no 
settlement of the Syrian crisis, all our efforts risk being 
undermined. So the challenge is not only to act against 
Daesh, but also to achieve a political solution. We in 
France support the democratic Syrian opposition. We 
consider it the sole legitimate representative of the 
Syrian people. In that case, too, we will not back down; 
we will not compromise because of threats. The Bashar 
Al-Assad regime deserves to be condemned because 
they are complicit in what has been going on for the 
past three years in Syria — 200,000 deaths and so 
many displaced persons.

This is a sad time for France, with the death — the 
murder — of one of our citizens, but France will never 
give in to blackmail, pressure or barbarous acts. On the 
contrary, France knows what is expected of it. France 
knows that it upholds values, France knows it has a role 
to play and will never abandon that role, and that the 
fight against terrorism will be continued and expanded 
as much as necessary within respect for the rule of law 
and the sovereignty of States, for we make no mistake 
when we act. We will always act with respect for the 
principles of the United Nations.

I also wanted to talk to about other things, but 
it must be understood that a great question is being 
asked of my country and also of the Assembly. When 
faced with barbarism, with terrorism, will we remain 
spectators, or will we be actors together in what should 
be a just international order? The question, if we do 
not respond to it, or if we respond too weakly, then 
terrorists will continue their business of recruitment 
and indoctrination. It is not weakness that will be the 
response to terrorism; it is force — the force of law, 
the force of the United Nations. At a certain point also, 
it will be the force of military action when it becomes 
necessary.

I also wanted to talk about other regions of the 
world that are facing threats that also affect our own 
security. I want to talk to the Assembly about the Ebola 
epidemic, because I know just how much it is affecting 
our African friends. But again, let us look beyond those 
who are affected. Who can imagine that the epidemic 
will remain confined to just a few countries if we do 
not intervene? It is also a global threat. Again, the 
response must be a global. Therefore, France, Europe 


and the world must provide to the countries affected by 
the epidemic the necessary medical care, indispensable 
protection and economic assistance that is expected. 
Because again, if there is the slightest weakness, the 
slightest failure to show solidarity, all of our countries 
will be affected.

I have also come here before the General Assembly 
to speak about what is happening in Europe and next to 
Europe, to speak about what occurred in Ukraine and 
the failures there to uphold principles of international 
law. But what is at stake today, even in Europe, is peace 
and ensuring that the ceasefire that was agreed can be 
transformed into a lasting solution to the conflict.

No continent has been spared from any threat. 
Everything is fragile, everything is precarious, 
everything is vulnerable. We have to have the same 
awareness of the risks, the dangers and the perils that 
we had right after the Second World War. We must not 
think that all we have to do is remember; we have to 
think of the future, of the world we want. The world 
that we want is the final subject I wish to address here.

The world that we want has to be one of profound 
change. The present disorder also threatens not only 
our generation but naturally those that will follow 
us. It threatens our very security, as there are more 
displaced persons resulting from climate imbalance 
than from wars, which are sadly so intense and deadly 
on our planet. France has lived up to its responsibilities 
in that area too. We decided to organize the climate 
conference in December 2015. I am pleased that thanks 
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, there was a summit 
here that mobilized awareness, States, financial 
institutions, businesses and civil society. Many events 
took place. We have to succeed at the Paris conference, 
not because it will take place in Paris, but because it is 
the world’s appointment with itself.

There are periods in history when we have the 
power to decide, and decide not just for ourselves but 
for humankind. This is one of those moments. Therefore 
in Paris, we have to do everything can be done to reach 
a comprehensive, binding agreement that differentiates 
according to levels of development, everything so that 
there can be that Green Climate Fund, to which France 
has contributed $1 billion for the coming years. I hope 
that other countries follow our example, because we 
need that Green Fund to allow less developed countries 
to grow and to succeed in their energy transition at the 
same time.

This is a sad moment that I am living today on 
behalf of France, that the French are experiencing, but 
it is also a moment of awakening and responsibility. For 
the world, for the planet, we must fight terrorism, we 
must act in favour of peace, we must reduce inequalities, 
we must also do our duty for future generations. We 
must ensure that the Paris conference is successful 
for the sake of the climate. We must make certain that 
the United Nations can remain faithful to the mandate 
given to it after a war — a terrible war. We are still 
facing challenges, but we are certain to meet them if we 
are united and come together to claim victory.This year we 
face extraordinary tests of our values and our resolve. 
In responding to the aggression against one of our 
Member States, Ukraine; in seeking peace in the Middle 
East; in dealing with the terrifying spread of the Ebola 
virus in West Africa; and in overcoming what I want to 
focus on today, which is the mortal threat we all face 

from the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) in Syria and Iraq. Deir ez-Zor is a province in 
eastern Syria. Home to the Al-Sheitaat tribe it was 
captured by ISIL last month. Seven hundred tribesmen 
were executed; many were beheaded. The vast majority 
were civilians, Muslims who refused to take an oath of 
allegiance to ISIL’s sick extremist world view and who 
paid for this with their lives. They are not alone. Across 
Syria and northern Iraq thousands have suffered the 
same fate — Muslims, both Sunni and Shia; Christians; 
Yazidis; people of every faith and none.

ISIL is not a problem restricted to just one region. It 
has murderous plans to expand its borders well beyond 
Iraq and Syria and to carry out terrorist atrocities right 
across the world. It is recruiting new fighters from all 
over the world. Five hundred have gone there from 
my country, Britain, and one of them almost certainly 
brutally murdered two American journalists and a 
British aid worker. This is a problem that affects us all 
and we must tackle it together.

There is not one person in this Hall who will view 
this challenge without reference to the past, whether in 
Iraq or in Afghanistan. Of course it is absolutely right 
that we should learn the lessons of the past, especially 
what happened in Iraq a decade ago. But we have to 
learn the right lessons — yes to careful preparation; 
no to rushing to join a conflict without a clear plan. 
But we must not be so frozen with fear that we do not 
do anything at all. Isolation and withdrawing from a 
problem like ISIL will only make matters worse.

We must not allow past mistakes to become an 
excuse for indifference or inaction. The right lesson is 
that we should act, but act differently. We should be 
comprehensive, defeating the ideology of extremism 
that is the root cause of this terrorism, so that we win the 
battle of ideas and not just the battle of military might. 
We should be intelligent, supporting representative and 
accountable Governments and working with them at 
their request, not going in over their heads. We should 
be inclusive, working with partners in the region who 
are prepared to be part of the solution, potentially 
including Iran. We should be uncompromising, using 
all the means at our disposal, including military force, 
to hunt down these extremists. Let me take each of 
these in turn.

The root cause of this terrorist threat is a poisonous 
ideology of Islamist extremism. This has nothing 
to do with Islam, which is a peaceful religion that 
inspires countless acts of generosity every day. Islamist 
extremism on the other hand believes in using the most 
brutal forms of terrorism to force people to accept a 
warped world view and to live in a quasi-mediaeval 
state. To defeat ISIL, and organizations like it, we must 
defeat this ideology in all its forms.

As evidence emerges about the backgrounds of 
those convicted of terrorist offences, it is clear that 
many of them were initially influenced by preachers 
who claim not to encourage violence but whose world 
view can be used as a justification for it. We know 
this world view. The peddling of lies — that 9/11 was 
somehow a Jewish plot, or that the 7/7 London attacks 
were staged; the idea that Muslims are persecuted all 
over the world as a deliberate act of Western policy; and 
the concept of an inevitable clash of civilizations.

We must be clear. To defeat the ideology of 
extremism we need to deal with all forms of extremism, 
not just violent extremism. For governments there 
are some obvious ways we can do this. We must ban 
preachers of hate from coming to our countries. We must 
proscribe organizations that incite terrorism against 
people at home and abroad. We must work together 
to take down illegal online material like the recent 
videos of ISIL murdering hostages. We must stop the 
so-called non-violent extremists from inciting hatred 
and intolerance in our schools, universities and even 
our prisons. Of course, some will argue that this is not 
compatible with free speech and intellectual inquiry. 
But I ask “Would we sit back and allow right-wing 
extremists, Nazis or Ku Klux Klansmen to recruit on 
our university campuses?” No, so we should not stand 
by and just allow any form of non-violent extremism.

We need to argue that prophecies of a global war 
of religion pitting Muslims against the rest of the world 
are nonsense. We need Muslims and their Governments 
throughout the world to reclaim their religion from 
these sick terrorists as so many are doing, and quite 
rightly doing, today. We all need to help them with 
programmes that channel young people away from 
these poisonous ideologues, and we need the strongest 
possible international focus on tackling this ideology, 
which is why here at the United Nations the United 
Kingdom is calling for a new Special Representative 
on extremism.

But fighting extremism will never be enough. 
Communism was defeated not simply by pointing out its 
flaws, but by showing that the alternative of economic 
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law could build a 
better society and a better world. Young people need 


to see the power of a different, better, more open, 
more democratic path. The twentieth century taught 
us the vital role of representative and accountable 
Governments in offering their people opportunity, hope 
and dignity.

Of course we should not be naïve. Not every 
country can move at the same speed or even reach the 
same destination. We should respect different cultures, 
traditions and histories. But let us be clear — the failure 
to meet people’s aspirations can create a breeding 
ground where extremist and even terrorist insurgency 
can take root. Governments that only govern for some 
of their people cause deep resentment. In Iraq, the 
failure of the Al-Maliki Government to represent all of 
the people has driven some of them into the arms of the 
extremists.

Too often, people have been faced with a false choice 
between an autocratic and unrepresentative government 
on the one hand and a brutal insurgency, with religion 
misused as its rallying call, on the other. To combat this 
we must support the building blocks of free and open 
societies. In Iraq this means supporting the creation of 
a new and genuinely inclusive Government capable of 
uniting all Iraqis — Sunnis, Shia, Kurd, Christians and 
others. In Syria, it must mean a political transition and 
an end to Al-Assad’s brutality.

I know there are some who think that we should 
do a deal with Al-Assad in order to defeat ISIL. But I 
think this view is dangerously misguided. Our enemies’ 
enemy is not our friend; it is another enemy. Doing a 
deal with Al-Assad will not defeat ISIL because the 
bias and the brutality of the Al-Assad regime were and 
are one of the most powerful recruiting tools for the 
extremists. Syria needs what Iraq needs — an inclusive, 
representative, democratic Government that can look 
after the interests of all its peoples.

To those who have backed Al-Assad or who have 
stood on the sidelines, I would say this: “We are ready 
to join with you in a new political effort to secure 
a representative and accountable Government in 
Damascus that can take the fight to ISIL”. It is simply 
not credible for Al-Assad to lead such a government 
although we are prepared to look at every practical 
option to find a way forward.

We must be inclusive, engaging the widest possible 
coalition of countries in this international effort. ISIL is 
a threat to us all, but the greatest threat is to the region. 
It is very welcome that a number of Arab countries 
have already taken part in the action to degrade ISIL. 
They have shown courage and leadership. Iran should 
also be given the chance to show it can be part of the 
solution, not part of the problem. Earlier today I met 
with President Rouhani. We have severe disagreements. 
Iran’s support for terrorist organizations, its nuclear 
programme, and its treatment of its people all need to 
change. But Iran’s leaders could help in defeating the 
threat from ISIL. They could help to secure a more 
stable, inclusive Iraq, and a more stable and inclusive 
Syria. If they are prepared to do this, we should 
welcome their engagement.

Finally, when the safety and security of our 
people are at stake, we must be uncompromising in 
our response. That starts at home. For our part, in 
the United Kingdom we are introducing new powers 
to strengthen our ability to seize passports and stop 
suspects from travelling; to allow us to strip British 
identity from dual nationals and temporarily prevent 
some British nationals getting back into our country; 
to ensure that airlines comply with our no fly lists 
and security screening requirements; and to enable 
our police and security services to apply for stronger 
locational constraints on those in the United Kingdom 
who pose a risk. Here at the United Nations we have 
led in the adoption of a Security Council resolution to 
disrupt the flows of finance to ISIL, to sanction those 
who are seeking to recruit to ISIL and to encourage 
countries to do all they can to prevent foreign fighters 
joining the extremist cause.

What about the role of our military? I do not believe 
that the treat of Islamist extremism will best be solved 
by Western ground troops directly trying to pacify or 
reconstruct Middle Eastern or African countries. But, 
pursuing an intelligent and comprehensive approach 
should include a place for our military. Our military 
can support the enormous humanitarian efforts that 
are necessary, as our Royal Air Force did in helping 
the millions of people who fled from ISIL. We should, 
together, do more to build the capability of the legitimate 
authorities that are fighting the extremists. That can 
mean training, equipping and advising, and providing 
technology and the other assets necessary for success. 
Whether it is supporting action against Boko Haram in 
Nigeria, against Al-Shabaab in Somalia, against Ansar 
al-Sharia in Libya, or against Al-Qaida in Yemen, it is 
right to help those who are fighting on the front line for 
their societies, their countries and their freedom.


Along with our European partners, we have already 
been supplying equipment directly to Kurdish forces. 
We are strengthening the resilience of the military 
forces in neighbouring Lebanon and Jordan, and 
British Tornado and surveillance aircraft have already 
been helping with intelligence gathering and logistics 
support to help those taking on ISIL in Iraq.

We now have a substantial international coalition in 
place, including Arab nations, committed to confronting 
and defeating ISIL. We have a comprehensive strategy 
to do that, with the political, diplomatic, humanitarian 
and military components that are needed to succeed 
over time. The Security Council has now received a 
clear request from the Iraqi Government to support it 
in its military action against ISIL. So we have a clear 
basis in international law for action, and we have a need 
to act in our own national interest to protect our people 
and our society. It is right that Britain should now move 
to a new phase of action. I am therefore recalling the 
British Parliament on Friday to secure approval for the 
United Kingdom to take part in international air strikes 
against ISIL in Iraq.

My message today is simple. We are facing an evil 
against which the whole world should unite. As ever, in 
the cause of freedom, democracy and justice, Britain 
will play its part.

At the outset, I would like 
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.

It is a truly a great honour for me to address the 
Assembly for the first time as Prime Minister of India. 
I am humbled by the hopes and expectations of the 
people of India. I am also mindful of the expectations 
of the world from our 1.25 billion people.

My country, India, is home to one sixth of 
the world’s population. It is a nation experiencing 
economic and social transformation on a scale rarely 
seen in the history of the world. Every country’s world 
view is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
traditions. India’s ancient wisdom sees the world as one 
family, and when I say this, I wish to make it clear that 
each country has its philosophy. I am not talking about 
ideology. With the inspiration of that philosophy, a 
country marches ahead. India is a country that since its 
Vedic times, has been saying that the world, the entire 
globe, is a family. India is a country where, beyond 
nature, we have a communication, a dialogue, with 
nature. We never struggle with nature. That is a part 
of Indian life. The reason is that with that philosophy, 
India has been moving forward. Each country and each 
nation is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
tradition. India’s ancient wisdom, as I have said, sees 
the world as one family. India is a country that not only 
speaks for itself but for worldwide justice, dignity, 
opportunity and prosperity. We have always spoken out 
in support of such issues.

Owing to our ideology, we have a firm belief in 
multilateralism. Today, as I stand here, I am equally 
aware of the hopes and expectations that are pinned on 
the General Assembly. I am struck by the sacred belief 
that brought us together. We established the Organization 
on the basis of great principles and perspectives, in the 
belief that if our futures are connected, we will have to 
work together for peace and security, for human rights 
and for the economic development of all. We must work 
together to those ends. At that time, there were only 
51 countries. Today, 193 sovereign flags fly in front of 
this building. Each new country enters on the basis of 
the same belief and expectation.

In the past six decades, we have been able to achieve 
a great deal. We have ended many wars. We have 
established and maintained peace. We have assisted 
economic development in many places. We have helped 
to build a future for poor children. We have contributed 
towards the elimination of starvation and strived to 
save our planet. The 69 United Nations peacekeeping 
missions have made the Blue Helmet a symbol of peace 
in the world.

Today, there is a surge of democracy across the 
world. The peaceful democratic transformation in 
Afghanistan shows that the Afghan people’s aspiration 
for peace will definitely triumph over violence. We 
have seen Nepal emerge from war towards peace and 
democracy. Bhutan’s young democracy is flourishing. 
There are also efforts towards democracy in West Asia 
and North Africa. Tunisia’s success shows that such a 
path of democracy is possible. In Africa, there is a new 
momentum for stability, peace and progress, and a new 
awareness is on the horizon.

We have seen unprecedented prosperity in Asia and 
beyond founded on strengthened peace and stability. 
Latin America, a continent of enormous potential, is 
coming together in the shared pursuit of stability and 
prosperity. That continent may prove to be an important 
anchor for the global community. India looks forward to 
a peaceful and stable environment for its development. 
Our future is linked to our neighbourhood. That is why, 
from the very first day, my Government gave the highest 
priority to promoting friendship and cooperation with 
our neighbouring countries.

I have the same policy towards Pakistan. I want 
to hold serious bilateral talks with Pakistan in order 
to improve friendship and cooperation in a peaceful 
atmosphere, without the shadow of terrorism. I want 
to hold bilateral talks with that country. However, it 
is also Pakistan’s responsibility to come forward and 
to genuinely establish the appropriate atmosphere for 
bilateral talks. In raising that issue in this forum, I do 
not know how successful our efforts will be. Some 
people are doubtful.

Today, we need to assist the victims of the floods 
in Kashmir. In India, we have organized large-scale 
assistance. We have not stopped at only India helping 
Kashmir. We have also asked Pakistan to assist, since 
that area was also affected by the floods. We have told 
Pakistan that just as we were helping the flood victims 
in India, we would also like to help those in Pakistan. 
We have proposed that. We are a part of the developing 
world but have limited resources. We would like to 
share our modest resources with all those who are in 
dire need of assistance.

Today, the world is witnessing a high level of 
tension and turmoil. There are no major wars, but 
tension and conflict abound. There is an absence of 
peace and uncertainty about the future. Even today, 
there is rampant poverty everywhere. The Asia-Pacific 

region, which is integrating, is still concerned about 
maritime security. That is fundamental to its future. 
Europe faces a new threat of division. In West Asia, 
the dividing lines and terrorism are increasing. In our 
own region, we are still struggling to combat terrorism 
and instability. For the past four decades, we have faced 
such a threat.

Terrorism emerges in new forms and under new 
names. Be it small or large, in the North, the South, 
the East or the West, no country is free from threats. 
I remember when I met with world leaders 20 years 
ago, and we talked about terrorism. They did not quite 
understand it and stated that it was a law-and-order 
problem. Today, the entire world is witness to the slow 
spread of terrorism far and wide.

Are we really making integrated efforts at the 
international level to fight against those powerful 
groups? I know that terrorism is a very serious problem 
for discussion. Even today, some countries are giving 
refuge to international terrorists, and they consider 
terrorism a tool of their policy. Good terrorism and bad 
terrorism — that is what we hear these days. At this 
time, there is a question mark regarding our struggle to 
fight against terrorism. The brutal return of terrorism 
in West Asia and its impact on countries far and near 
has elicited a concerted effort, which we welcome. 
However, the effort should involve all the countries of 
the region. If we want to overcome terrorism, then they 
must all contribute towards its eradication. We strongly 
emphasize this.

Oceans, seas, space and cyberspace, besides 
contributing to our common wealth and prosperity, are 
becoming new theatres of conflict. In the same oceans 
that used to connect us, we are today hearing news of 
disputes. We once saw space as holding out potential 
for our achievements. Today, in cyberspace, which 
connects us in important areas, new dangers are being 
seen. International harmony and cooperation — on 
which the United Nations was founded — are needed 
now more than ever before. Today, we talk about an 
interdependent world, but have we become more united 
as nations? We need to think about that.

Why, when we have a good forum like the United 
Nations, do we keep creating so many different groups? 
There is the Group of Four, the Group of Seven and 
the Group of 20 — and the numbers keep changing. 
Whether or not we really want to do so, we, including 
India, become members of them. Is it not the time to 
move on and leave behind those groups? When the 
United Nations celebrates its seventieth anniversary, 
how do we create a Group-of-All atmosphere? How can 
the General Assembly create an opportunity to solve 
all our problems? How can people begin to be more 
trustful? How can we become less competitive? We talk 
about unity, but then we divide the whole into different 
parts and pieces. Can we prevent ourselves from doing 
so?

On the one hand, we say that our policies are 
interconnected; on the other, we think in terms of 
zero-sum gains. We think that if the other benefits, I 
stand to lose. Who receives the benefit and who suffers 
the loss? That is what we appear to be weighing. The 
pessimists are cynical. Like them, we are inclined to 
say nothing will change. It is easy to be cynical and 
to say nothing will change. But if we do that, we run 
the risk of shirking our responsibilities and putting our 
collective future in danger.

We must unite and prepare to meet the needs of our 
times. We must really work for global peace. No one 
country or group of countries can determine the course 
of the world or its policies. It is imperative to have 
genuine international participation and partnership. We 
should try to promote positive dialogue and cooperation 
among countries. Our efforts must begin at the United 
Nations.

It is important that we improve the Security Council 
by making it more democratic and participative. 
Institutions that reflect the imperatives of the twentieth 
century will not be effective in the twenty-first century. 
They face the risk of irrelevance. I would like to 
emphasize that the policies and rules we made in the 
twentieth century may no longer be applicable. The 
speed of change is very fast. It is therefore essential 
that, in tune with the times, we adapt and reformulate, 
making the necessary changes and introducing new 
ideas. Only when we have done that will we be relevant.

We should set aside all our differences and mount 
a concerted international effort to combat terrorism 
and extremism. Towards that end, we should adopt a 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
That is something which is long overdue. It must be 
emphasized that our combined strength to fight against 
terrorism should be reflected in the convention. Our 
country, which has endured so many terrorist attacks, 
knows that, so long as the United Nations fails to take 
the initiative in that effort, and so long as we do not 
adopt a convention, we cannot be successful. In such 
work, we must not forget to make provision for peace, 

stability and order in outer space and cyberspace. We 
must work together to ensure that all countries observe 
international rules and norms.

We must include the host countries and troop-
contributing countries in our decision-making on 
United Nations peacekeeping. If they are included, their 
confidence will increase considerably. They are ready 
to make major sacrifices and to give their time and 
energy. But if they are excluded from decision-making, 
then how can United Nations peacekeeping become 
more vital and urgent? We need to seriously consider 
that. Today, let us redouble our efforts in pursuit of 
global disarmament. Let us also spare no effort to 
ensure that we work tirelessly towards those goals.

Globalization has created new industries and 
sources of employment. At the same time, billions live 
in the shadow of poverty. A great many countries are 
suffering economic deprivation, barely keeping their 
heads above water. What seems so difficult today was 
never so difficult in the past. Technology has made many 
things possible. Reduction in the cost of technology has 
made it more widely available. If we think of the speed 
with which Facebook or Twitter have spread around the 
world and cell-phone use has proliferated, then we must 
also believe that development and empowerment can 
spread with the same speed.

It is up to each country to make its own efforts 
at the national level. Each Government must fulfil its 
responsibilities. International participation is also very 
important. At one level, it requires better coordination 
of policy, so that our efforts become mutually 
supportive, not mutually damaging. It also means that, 
when we craft agreements on international trade, we 
accommodate one another’s concerns and interests.

Let us think about the scale of the need. Today, 
basic sanitation is out of the reach of 2.5 billion people; 
1.3 billion have no access to electricity and 1.1 billion 
no access to drinking water. That makes it clear that 
more comprehensive and concerted international action 
is required. We cannot keep waiting for economic 
development. In India, the most important aspects of 
my development agenda are focused precisely on those 
very issues, which should also be at the core of the post-
2015 development agenda, as they deserve our utmost 
attention.

A world that is more habitable and sustainable is an 
objective we must work towards. There has been much 
debate and much written about that, but it takes only a 
brief glance around our countries to become concerned. 
We are very concerned indeed about issues relating to 
forests, wildlife, birds, rivers, water sources and the 
blue sky above.

I would like to address three points. First, if we 
are to meet all of the challenges, we must fully uphold 
our responsibilities. The global community has 
agreed to work together on the basis of common but 
differentiated responsibility. That must continue to be 
the foundation of future action. That also means that 
developed countries must fulfil their commitments in 
terms of funding and technology transfer.

Secondly, national action is imperative. Technology 
has made many things possible, such as renewable 
energy. We need imagination and commitment. India 
stands ready to share its technology and capabilities, as 
for example through the recently announced free access 
to a satellite.

Thirdly, we need to change our lifestyles. Avoiding 
energy use is the cleanest option and would give a 
new direction to our economy. For us in India, respect 
for nature is fundamental and an integral part of 
spiritualism. It is part of our ideology.

I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to 
another idea. When we talk of climate change, we are 
also talking about holistic health care, connecting with 
nature and going back to basics. Today, I would like 
to underscore that yoga is an invaluable gift from our 
ancient tradition. Yoga embodies unity of mind and 
body, thought and action. It is important to coordinate 
all of those aspects. Such a holistic approach is valuable 
to our health and our well-being. Yoga is not just about 
exercise; it is a way to discover the sense of oneness 
with yourself, the world and nature. By changing our 
lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can also help us 
deal with climate change. Let us work towards adopting 
an international yoga day.

Finally, we are at a historic moment. Every age is 
defined by its character and remembered for how it 
rose to meet its challenges. Today, we are responsible 
to rise and meet those challenges. Next year, the United 
Nations will be 70 years old. We should ask ourselves 
whether we should wait until we are 80 or 100 years 
old to take action. I believe that next year will provide 
an opportunity for the United Nations. After a voyage 
spanning 70 years, we shall be able to look back and 
review what we have achieved, whence we began, 
why we left certain places, what motivated us, how 

we proceeded and what we have attained. What are 
the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century? If 
we can keep all of that in mind, through exchanges of 
views, dialogue with universities, and intergenerational 
discussions with young people, who can contribute 
ideas, then we will find the ways to connect all of those 
things for future generations.

That is why I say that arriving at the milestone 
of 70 years presents us with a great opportunity that 
we should not waste. By taking full advantage of this 
moment, we could achieve a new consciousness, a new 
life, with new ambitions and aspirations. We could 
give the journey of the United Nations a new form. I 
therefore feel that 70 years is a great opportunity for 
us. Let us come together and fulfil our promise to bring 
improvements to the Security Council. That issue has 
been before us for a long time, yet there has not been 
much progress. We need to think very seriously about 
it.

In preparing and implementing the post-2015 
development agenda, let us come together to keep our 
promises. For 2015, let us come together to give a new 
direction and make the moment memorable by giving 
the world a new lease on development. The year 2015 
should be a banner year in history — a turning point 
in history. I hope that we will all live up to its promise.
I come here from 
Jerusalem to speak on behalf of my people, the people 
of Israel. I have come to speak about the dangers we 
face and about the opportunities we seek. I have come 
to expose the brazen lies spoken from this very rostrum 
about my country and the brave soldiers who defend it.

The people of Israel pray for peace, but our hopes 
for peace, and those of the world, are in danger, because 
everywhere we look militant Islam is on the march. It 
is not militants; it is not Islam; it is militant Islam, and 
typically, its first victims are other Muslims. But it 
spares no one. Christians, Jews, Yazidis, Kurds — no 
creed, no faith, no ethnic group is beyond its sights, 
and it is rapidly spreading in every part of the world. 
We know the famous American saying “All politics is 
local”. For the militant Islamists, all politics is global, 
because their ultimate goal is to dominate the world.

Now that threat might seem exaggerated to some, 
since it starts out small, like a cancer that attacks a 
particular part of the body. But left unchecked, the 
cancer grows, metastasizing over wider and wider 
areas. To protect the peace and security of the world, 
we must remove that cancer before it is too late. Last 
week, many of the countries represented here rightly 
applauded President Obama for leading the effort 
to confront the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham 
(ISIS); and yet weeks before, some of those same 
countries — the same countries that now support 
confronting ISIS — opposed Israel for confronting 
Hamas. Evidently, they do not understand that ISIS and 
Hamas are branches of the same poisonous tree.

ISIS and Hamas share a fanatical creed that they 
both seek to impose well beyond the territory under their 


control. Let us listen to what ISIS’s self-declared Caliph, 
Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, said two months ago. He said 
that the day would soon come when the Muslim would 
walk everywhere as a master, and that Muslims would 
cause the world to hear and understand the meaning of 
terrorism, and destroy the idol of democracy. Now let 
us listen to Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas. He 
proclaims a similar vision of the future. “We say this to 
the West”, he says. “By Allah it will be defeated, and 
tomorrow our nation will sit on the throne of the world”.

As its Charter makes clear, Hamas’s immediate 
goal is to destroy Israel; but it has a broader objective. 
It also wants a caliphate. Hamas shares the global 
ambitions of its fellow militant Islamists, and that is 
why its supporters cheered wildly in the streets of Gaza 
when thousands of Americans were murdered on 9/11. 
That is why its leaders condemned the United States 
for killing Osama Bin Laden, whom they praised as a 
holy warrior. When it comes to their ultimate goals, 
therefore, Hamas is ISIS and ISIS is Hamas.

And what they share in common, all militant 
Islamists share in common — Boko Haram in Nigeria, 
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Hizbullah in Lebanon, Al-Nusra 
in Syria, the Al-Mahdi Army in Iraq and the Al-Qaida 
branches in Yemen, Libya, the Philippines, India and 
elsewhere. Some are radical Sunnis, some are radical 
Shiites. Some want to restore a pre-medieval caliphate 
from the seventh century. Others want to trigger the 
apocalyptic return of an imam from the ninth century.

They operate in different lands. They target 
different victims. They even kill each other in their 
battle for supremacy. But they all share a fanatic 
ideology. They all seek to create ever expanding 
enclaves of militant Islam, where there is no freedom 
and no tolerance, where women are treated as chattel, 
Christians are decimated and minorities are subjugated, 
and sometimes given the stark choice: convert or die. 
For them, anyone can be consider an infidel, including 
fellow Muslims.

Militant Islam’s ambition to dominate the world 
seems mad, but so too did the global ambitions of 
another fanatic ideology that swept into power eight 
decades ago. The Nazis believed in a master race. The 
militant Islamists believe in a master faith. They just 
disagree as to who among them will be the master of 
the master faith. That is what they truly disagree about. 
Therefore, the question before us is whether militant 
Islam will have the power to realize its unbridled 
ambitions.

There is one place where that could soon 
happen — the Islamic State of Iran. For 35 years, Iran 
has relentlessly pursued the global mission that was set 
forth by its founding ruler, Ayatollah Khomeini, with 
the following words:

“We will export our revolution to the entire world, 
until the cry ‘There is no God but Allah’ will echo 
throughout the world over”.
Ever since, the regime’s brutal enforcers, Iran’s 
Revolutionary Guards, have done exactly that. Let us 
listen to its current commander, General Mohammad 
Ali Jafari, who clearly stated that goal:
“Our Imam did not limit the Islamic Revolution to 
this country. Our duty is to prepare the way for an 
Islamic world Government.”
Iran’s president, Mr. Rouhani, stood here last 
week and shed crocodile tears over what he called the 
globalization of terrorism. Maybe he should spare us 
those phony tears and have a word instead with the 
commanders of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards. He could 
ask them to call off Iran’s global terror campaign, 
which has included attacks in two dozen countries 
on five continents since 2011 alone. To say that Iran 
does not practice terrorism is like saying Derek Jeter 
never played shortstop for the New York Yankees. The 
bemoaning by the Iranian President of the spread of 
terrorism has got to be one of history’s greatest displays 
of double talk.

Some argue that Iran’s global terror campaign — its 
subversion of countries throughout the Middle East 
and well beyond the Middle East — is the work of the 
extremists. They say that things are changing. They 
point to last year’s election in Iran. They claim that 
Iran’s smooth-talking President and Foreign Minister 
have changed not only the tone of Iran’s foreign policy 
but also its substance. They believe that Rouhani and 
Zarif generally want to reconcile with the West, that 
they have abandoned the global mission of the Islamic 
Revolution. Really?

Let us look at what Foreign Minister Zarif wrote in 
his book just a few years ago:

“We have a fundamental problem with the West, 
and especially with America. This is because we 
are heirs to a global mission which is tied to our 
raison d’être”. 
A global mission which is tied to our very 
reason for being? Then Zarif asks a question — an 
interesting question, in my view. He says, “How come 
Malaysia” — referring to an overwhelmingly Muslim 
country — “does not have similar problems?” Then he 
answers: “Because Malaysia is not trying to change the 
international order”. That is our moderate.
Let us not be fooled by Iran’s manipulative charm 
offensive. It is designed for one purpose and one purpose 
only — to have the sanctions lifted and the obstacles to 
Iran’s path to the bomb removed. The Islamic Republic 
is now trying to bamboozle its way to an agreement 
that will remove the sanctions it still faces and leave it 
with the capacity of thousands of centrifuges to enrich 
uranium. That would effectively cement Iran’s place as 
a threshold military nuclear Power. In the future, at the 
time of its choosing, Iran, the world’s most dangerous 
regime, in the world’s most dangerous region, would 
obtain the world’s most dangerous weapons. Allowing 
that to happen would pose the gravest threat to us all.

It is one thing to confront militant Islamists on 
pickup trucks armed with Kalashnikov rifles. It is 
another thing to confront militant Islamists armed with 
weapons of mass destruction. I remember that last year 
everyone here was rightly concerned about the chemical 
weapons in Syria, including the possibility that they 
would fall into the hands of terrorists. Well, that did 
not happen, and President Obama deserves great 
credit for leading the diplomatic effort to dismantle 
virtually all of Syria’s chemical weapons capability. 
We can only imagine how much more dangerous 
the Islamic State — ISIS — would be if it possessed 
chemical weapons. Now, let us imagine how much 
more dangerous the Islamic State of Iran would be if it 
possessed nuclear weapons.

Would you let ISIS enrich uranium? Would you let 
ISIS build a heavy-water reactor? Would you let ISIS 
develop intercontinental ballistic missiles? Of course 
you would not. Then you must not let the Islamic 
State of Iran do those things either, because if you do, 
here is what will happen. Once Iran produces atomic 
bombs, all the charm and all the smiles will suddenly 
disappear — they will just vanish. It is then that the 
ayatollahs will show their true face and unleash their 
aggressive fanaticism on the entire world.

There is only one responsible course of action to 
address this threat. Iran’s nuclear military capabilities 
must be fully dismantled. Make no mistake — ISIS 
must be defeated, but to defeat ISIS and leave Iran as 
a threshold nuclear Power is to win the battle and lose 
the war.

The fight against militant Islam is indivisible. When 
militant Islam succeeds anywhere, it is emboldened 
everywhere. When it suffers a blow in one place, it is set 
back in every place. That is why Israel’s fight against 
Hamas is not just our fight; it is everyone’s fight. Israel is 
fighting a fanaticism today that other countries may be 
forced to fight tomorrow. For 50 days this past summer, 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets at Israel, many of 
them supplied by Iran. I want members to think about 
what their countries would do if thousands of rockets 
were fired at their cities. Let them imagine millions 
of their citizens having seconds at most to scramble to 
bomb shelters, day after day. Members would not let 
terrorists fire rockets at their cities with impunity, nor 
would they let terrorists dig dozens of terror tunnels 
under their borders to infiltrate their towns in order to 
murder and kidnap their citizens. Israel justly defended 
itself against both rocket attacks and terror tunnels.

Yet Israel faced another challenge. We faced a 
propaganda war because, in an attempt to win the world’s 
sympathy, Hamas cynically used Palestinian civilians 
as human shields. It used schools — not just schools, 
United Nations schools — private homes, mosques 
and even hospitals to store and fire rockets at Israel. 
As Israel surgically struck at the rocket launchers and 
at the tunnels, Palestinian civilians were tragically but 
unintentionally killed. There are heartrending images 
that resulted, and these fuelled libellous charges that 
Israel was deliberately targeting civilians. We were not. 
We deeply regret every single civilian casualty.

And the truth is, Israel was doing everything to 
minimize Palestinian civilian casualties. Hamas was 
doing everything to maximize Israeli civilian casualties 
and Palestinian civilian casualties. Israel dropped 
flyers, made phone calls, sent text messages, broadcast 
warnings in Arabic on Palestinian television — all 
this to enable Palestinian civilians to evaluate targeted 
areas. No other country and no other army in history 
have gone to greater lengths to avoid casualties among 
the civilian population of their enemies.

Such concern for Palestinian life was all the more 
remarkable given that Israeli civilians were being 

bombarded by rockets, day after day, night after 
night. And as their families were being rocketed by 
Hamas, Israel’s citizen army, the brave soldiers of 
the Israel Defense Forces, our young boys and girls, 
upheld the highest moral values of any army in the 
world. Israel’s soldiers deserve not condemnation 
but admiration — admiration from decent people 
everywhere.

Here is what Hamas did. Hamas embedded 
its missile batteries in residential areas and told 
Palestinians to ignore Israel’s warnings to leave. 
And just in case people did not get the message, they 
executed Palestinian civilians in Gaza who dared to 
protest. And, no less reprehensible, Hamas deliberately 
placed its rockets where Palestinian children live and 
play.

Let me show the Assembly a photograph. It was 
taken by a France 24 crew during the recent conflict. 
It shows two Hamas rocket launchers, which were used 
to attack us. Three children can be seen playing next to 
them. Hamas deliberately put its rockets in hundreds 
of residential areas like this — hundreds of them. That 
is a war crime. I say to President Abbas, these are the 
crimes — the war crimes — committed by his Hamas 
partners in the national unity Government which he 
heads and for which he is responsible. These are the 
real war crimes he should have investigated or spoken 
out against from this rostrum last week.

As Israel’s children huddle in bomb shelters and 
Israel’s Iron Dome missile defence knocked Hamas 
rockets out of the sky, the profound moral difference 
between Israel and Hamas could not have been clearer. 
Israel was using its missiles to protect its children; 
Hamas was using its children to protect its missiles.

By investigating Israel rather than Hamas for war 
crimes, the United Nations Human Rights Council has 
betrayed its noble mission to protect the innocent. In 
fact, what it is doing is to turn the laws of war upside 
down. Israel, which took unprecedented steps to 
minimize civilian casualties, is condemned; Hamas, 
which both targeted and hid behind civilians — that is a 
double war crime — is given a pass. The Human Rights 
Council is thus sending a clear message to terrorists 
everywhere: “Use civilians as a human shield. Use 
them again and again and again.” And you know why? 
Because, sadly, it works. By granting international 
legitimacy to the use of human shields, the Human 
Rights Council has become a terrorist rights council, 
and it will have repercussions — it probably already 
has — in terms of the use of civilians as human shields. 
It is not just our interests and values that are under 
attack: it is the interests and values of all of us.

We live in a world steeped in tyranny and terror, 
where gays are hanged from cranes in Tehran, political 
prisoners are executed in Gaza, young girls are abducted 
en masse in Nigeria and hundreds of thousands are 
butchered in Syria, Libya and Iraq, yet nearly half of 
the Human Rights Council’s resolutions focusing on a 
single country have been directed against Israel — the 
one true democracy in the Middle East; Israel, where 
issues are openly debated in a boisterous Parliament, 
where human rights are protected by independent 
courts, and where women, gays and minorities live in a 
genuinely free society.

The biased treatment of Israel by the Human Rights 
Council — that is a misnomer, but I will use it just the 
same — is only one manifestation of the return of one 
of the world’s oldest prejudices. We hear mobs today in 
Europe calling for the gassing of Jews. We hear some 
national leaders compare Israel to the Nazis. This is 
not a function of Israel’s policies; it is a function of 
diseased minds, and that disease has a name. It is called 
anti-Semitism. It is now spreading in polite society 
where it masquerades as legitimate criticism of Israel. 
For centuries, the Jewish people have been demonized 
with blood libels and charges of deicide. Today, the 
Jewish State is demonized with the apartheid libel and 
charges of genocide.

In what moral universe does genocide include 
warning the enemy civilian population to get out 
of harm’s way or ensuring that they receive tons of 
humanitarian aid each day, even as thousands of rockets 
are being fired at us, or setting up a field hospital 
to aid their wounded? I suppose it is the same moral 
universe in which a man who wrote a dissertation of 
lies about the Holocaust and who insists on a Palestine 
free of Jews — Judenrein — can stand at this rostrum 
and shamelessly accuse Israel of genocide and ethnic 
cleansing. In the past, outrageous lies against the Jews 
were the precursors to the wholesale slaughter of our 
people. But no more; today, we the Jewish people have 
the power to defend ourselves. We will defend ourselves 
against our enemies on the battlefield and we will expose 
their lies against us in the court of public opinion. Israel 
will continue to stand proud and unbowed.

Despite the enormous challenges facing Israel, I 
believe we have a historic opportunity. After decades of 
seeing Israel as their enemy, leading States in the Arab 
world increasingly recognize that together we and they 
face many of the same dangers. Principally, that means 
a nuclear-armed Iran and militant Islamist movements 
gaining ground in the Sunni world. Our challenge is to 
transform those common interests in order to create a 
productive partnership that would build a more secure, 
peaceful and prosperous Middle East. Together we can 
strengthen regional security. We can advance projects 
in water, agriculture, transportation, health care, energy 
and so many other fields.

I believe that the partnership between us can also 
help facilitate peace between Israel and the Palestinians. 
Many have long assumed that an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace can help facilitate a broader rapprochement 
between Israel and the Arab world. But I believe that, 
these days, it may work the other way around, namely, 
that a broader rapprochement between Israel and the 
Arab world may help facilitate an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace. Therefore, to achieve that peace, we must look 
not only to Jerusalem and Ramallah but also to Cairo, 
Amman, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh and elsewhere. I believe 
that peace could be realized with the active involvement 
of Arab countries that are willing to provide political, 
material and other indispensable support.

I am ready to make a historic compromise, and not 
because Israel occupies a foreign land. The people of 
Israel are not occupiers in the land of Israel. History, 
archaeology and common sense all make clear that we 
have had a singular attachment to this land for over 
3,000 years. I want peace because I want to create a 
better future for my people. But it must be a genuine 
peace, one that is anchored in mutual recognition and 
enduring security arrangements — rock-solid security 
arrangements — on the ground. Israel’s withdrawal 
from Lebanon and Gaza created two militant Islamic 
enclaves on our borders from which tens of thousands 
of rockets have been fired at Israel. Those sobering 
experiences heighten Israel’s security concerns 
regarding potential territorial concessions in the future.

Those security concerns are even greater today. Let 
us just look around. The Middle East is in chaos. States 
are disintegrating, and militant Islamists are filling 
the void. Israel cannot have territories from which it 
withdraws taken over by Islamic militants yet again, 
as happened in Gaza and Lebanon. That would place 
the likes of ISIS within mortar range, a few miles of 
80 per cent of our population. Think about that. The 
distance between the 1967 lines and the suburbs of 
Tel Aviv is similar to the distance between United 
Nations Headquarters and Times Square. Israel is a tiny 
country. That is why in any peace agreement, which 
will obviously necessitate a territorial compromise, I 
will always insist that Israel be able to defend itself, by 
itself, against any threat.

Yet despite everything that has happened, some still 
do not take Israel’s security concerns seriously, but I do 
and I always will. That is because as Prime Minister of 
Israel I am entrusted with the awesome responsibility 
of ensuring the future of the Jewish people and the 
future of the Jewish State. No matter what pressure is 
brought to bear, I will never waver in fulfilling that 
responsibility.

I believe that with a fresh approach on the part 
of our neighbours, we can advance peace despite the 
difficulties we face. In Israel, we have a record of making 
the impossible possible. We have made a desolate land 
flourish, and with very few natural resources we have 
used the fertile minds of our people to turn Israel into 
a global centre of technology and innovation. Peace 
would enable Israel to realize its full potential and to 
bring a promising future not only to our people and not 
only to the Palestinian people, but to many, many others 
in our region. But the old template for peace must be 
updated. It must take into account new realities and 
new roles and responsibilities for our Arab neighbours.

There is a new Middle East. It presents new dangers 
but also new opportunities. Israel is prepared to work 
with Arab partners and the international community to 
confront those dangers and to seize those opportunities. 
Together, we must recognize the global threat of 
militant Islam, the primacy of dismantling Iran’s 
nuclear weapons capability, and the indispensable role 
of Arab States in advancing peace with the Palestinians. 
All that may fly in the face of conventional wisdom, but 
it is the truth. And the truth must always be spoken, 
especially in the United Nations. Isaiah, a great prophet 
of peace, taught us nearly 3,000 years ago in Jerusalem 
to speak truth to power. He said:

“For the sake of Zion, I will not be silent. For the 
sake of Jerusalem, I will not be still until her justice 
shines bright and her salvation glows like a flaming 
torch”.
Let us light a torch of truth and justice to safeguard 
our common future.

It is an honour to 
address the General Assembly today on behalf of the 
Prime Minister and Government of New Zealand. Our 
general election took place in the past week. Our Prime 
Minister, the Right Honourable John Key, is engaged in 
forming a Government, and that is why he is unable to 
be in New York today.

I want to begin by acknowledging the success of 
the recent third International Conference on Small 
Island Developing States, held in Samoa. The success 
of the Conference was the result of the extraordinary 
work Samoa put into preparing for the Conference and 
the ownership of the agenda that was demonstrated by 
the small island developing States (SIDS). While it is 
undoubtedly true that small island developing States 
have placed great value on the opportunity to talk, it 
is also true that there was an undertone of frustration, 
born of the fact that too often in the past talk has not 
been followed by action. I strongly identify with that 
view. The multilateral world is awash with talk of plans 
and strategies and funds, while out there in the real 
world of small island developing States, not enough is 
happening on the ground. My country, New Zealand, is 
intent on avoiding that shortcoming, especially in our 
own region, the Pacific.

Renewable energy featured strongly in the SIDS 
Conference agenda, as it had at the Secretary-General’s 
2014 Climate Summit in the past week. Pacific nations 
spend 10 per cent of their gross domestic product and up 
to 30 per cent of their entire import bills on importing 
diesel fuel for electricity generation. Sustainable 
economic development therefore simply cannot happen 
in our region without renewable energy.

Significant progress is being achieved, especially 
since the Pacific Energy Summit 2013 that we co-hosted 
with the European Union in Auckland in March 2013, 
at which $635 million in funding was committed for 
over 50 projects. The Tokelau Islands have moved from 
100 per cent dependence on fossil fuels to 93 per cent 
renewable. During the SIDS Conference itself, we 
opened a 2.2-megawatt plant, a solar array in Samoa. 
A year earlier we opened a 1.2-megawatt plant in 
Tonga. Next month, we will open a 1-megawatt array in 
Rarotonga. And in the next 12 months, all of the outer 
islands of Tuvalu and all but one of the outer Cook 
Islands will be close to 100 per cent renewable. 

We are making real progress towards converting 
our Pacific neighbourhood to renewable energy, 
bringing significant environmental benefits and 
greatly enhancing prospects for sustainable economic 
development. My country has committed over 
$100 million to that process. We are not waiting for a 
new multilateral agreement or a new green fund. We 
are simply getting ahead with robust partnerships and 
making it happen.

Another key topic at the SIDS Conference was 
sustainable fisheries. For our region, that is critically 
important. The biggest economic asset in the Pacific 
is its fisheries. In the past year, over $3.3 billion worth 
of tuna was harvested from Pacific waters, yet only 
14 per cent of that value, about $460 million, made 
its way back to Pacific nations. New Zealand has 
committed over $70 million over the next five years 
to advance a comprehensive approach that includes 
enhanced surveillance, training of monitors, training 
in commercial fishing practices, research and science 
initiatives and improving management practices. Our 
objective is to see the owners of the Pacific tuna resource 
receive a significantly greater share of the value of that 
resource, and to ensure that it is sustainably managed 
for the future.

A key message from the SIDS Conference is the need 
to share experiences and skills among the SIDS regions. 
That is starting to happen. Fisheries management is a 
prime candidate for greater cooperation. We have also 
commenced a process of interregional cooperation in 
renewable energy by supporting the development of 
geothermal energy in the Caribbean and Africa.

While small island developing States are showing 
real leadership in addressing climate change and 
shifting to renewable energy, those issues require action 
on a global scale. We therefore commend the Secretary-
General for convening the Climate Summit here in 
New York last week. We are participating actively in 
those negotiations and hope they will pave the way for 
a successful conclusion in Paris next year. We have 
made an initial commitment to the Green Climate 
Fund to show our support for the global effort, but we 
will unashamedly continue to prioritize making real 
progress with real projects in our own region, which 
will continue to consume the bulk of our resources.

The other major event that has recently taken place 
in the Pacific is the election in Fiji. We congratulate the 
Prime Minister, his party and the people of Fiji on their 
successful return to democratic rule. Fiji’s successful 
elections are hugely important for the region. I am 
delighted that following the preliminary report of the 
multinational observers group, both the Pacific Islands 
Forum and the Commonwealth have commenced the 
process of lifting Fiji’s suspension. We look forward to 
rebuilding and strengthening the connections between 
us. Neither New Zealand nor Fiji can contemplate a 
future that does not entail close and continuing links 
with the other. We also welcomed the safe return of the 
Fiji peacekeepers who were held hostage in the Golan 
Heights. That incident again underlined the great 
challenges and the dangers faced by United Nations 
peacekeepers and the responsibilities we all have to 
ensure the safety and security of peacekeeping and 
other United Nations personnel.

It is as well that we are able to note some bright 
spots for our region, because the situation in other parts 
of the world does look bleak. 

What happened over the past few months in 
Gaza was an affront to humanity. No good was done 
for the cause of Palestine by Hamas firing rockets 
indiscriminately into Israel. No good was done for peace 
in the Middle East by Israel pounding Gaza with such 
intensity and at such cost of civilian lives. We welcome 
the ceasefire that was agreed after so many false starts 
and are thankful that so far it endures. We call on all 
sides not only to keep the guns and rockets silent but to 
refrain from actions that may destabilize what can only 
be described as an uneasy peace. In that connection, we 
express our profound regret at Israel’s appropriation of 
400 hectares of privately owned Palestinian land near 
Bethlehem for settlements. That act itself is profoundly 
unhelpful.

The problems of the Middle East are deep and 
difficult. They go back to the earliest days of the 
Organization and beyond. But what happened over 
the past months in and in relation to Gaza was a 
modern failure — a failure of leadership, of purpose 
and of vision. We urge the leaders of Israel and of 
Palestine, both West Bank and Gaza, to live up to their 
responsibilities to their peoples and to their positions.

In Syria and Iraq, we see the truly frightening 
consequences when leadership, both internally and 
in the Security Council, has failed. Syria has been a 
weeping sore for over three years. Thousands of Syrians 
have died, millions have become refugees and all 
Syrian people have suffered terribly from the multiple 
conflicts engulfing the country. And now the tragedy 
of Syria has spilled over into Iraq, which was already 
wrestling with its own deep-seated problems. Many 
actors, in both the recent past and over a longer time 
frame, have had a hand in contributing to the situation 
we now confront, but now it is time for action.

We need to find a way to contain the madness that 
is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to address 
the humanitarian tragedy and to help the people of Syria 
and Iraq craft a better future. By any objective standard, 


that is a situation that cries out for Security Council 
attention, and that is true of both sides of the border. 
We need the Council members and the Governments 
concerned to move past the ideological stalemate that 
has kept the Council largely impotent for the past three 
years. The challenge we all face in Syria and Iraq is 
unlike any the United Nations has faced before. The 
political circumstances in which it is being played out 
are about as bad as they get. Yet somehow we must find 
a way of coming together to defeat that shared problem.

Paralysis has also prevailed in the Security Council 
over Ukraine. The Council has been essentially 
a bystander as one of its permanent members has 
undermined the integrity of another Member State. We 
recognize the difficulties of managing ethnic tensions 
that straddle borders and the risks of local fires being 
stoked into wider national and international crises. But 
with the strong shared histories of cooperation and 
achievement between Russia and Ukraine, there is no 
excuse for leaders allowing matters to unravel as they 
have, to the point where international peace and security 
may be at risk. Already hundreds of innocent civilians 
on Flight MH-17 lost their lives through an associated 
mistake and miscalculation. We welcome the ceasefire 
agreed earlier this month, which has held, for the most 
part. We call on all involved to step back, think about 
what is at stake and start rebuilding the trust essential 
to finding a lasting solution.

Events in the Middle East and Ukraine have 
dominated the headlines in recent months and have 
diverted attention from the serious situations that 
continue to play out in Africa, particularly in Libya, 
Mali, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, 
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
United Nations is directly involved in those crises, 
and they continue to challenge the capacity of the 
Organization and of the African Union to respond 
to the sheer scale of human suffering and to the 
continuing need for external assistance to restore and 
keep the peace, keep civilian populations safe and 
deliver humanitarian assistance. Those issues, no less 
than those in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, 
will continue to require constant attention from the 
Security Council and the coordinated efforts of the 
broader United Nations family. They show that for all 
its failings and structural inequalities, the Council still 
has a vital role to play in maintaining international 
peace and security.

But there is one lesson that we must learn from 
all those recent crises — the United Nations must 
fundamentally improve its performance in preventing 
conflict. Once fighting is in full spate, the options for 
peace disappear. Prevention is critical, not just in new 
conflicts, but also in the cases on the agenda where 
conflict has been frozen or where peacebuilding has 
not really taken hold.

We are deeply troubled by the unprecedented scale 
of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. We recognize 
the huge challenges it poses to the economies and 
the political and security cohesion in the region. We 
have contributed and will continue to contribute to the 
humanitarian work under way, and on the formation of 
a new Government, we will look at further practical 
steps to support the international effort.

In 18 days’ time, the United Nations membership 
will decide who will be on the Security Council for the 
next two-year term. New Zealand has been a candidate 
for that position since 2004. It has been 20 years since 
we were last on the Council. It has been a long and 
demanding campaign, and it will continue right up to 
the elections on 16 October. With tough competitors, 
such as our good friends Spain and Turkey, that has to 
be the case. The campaign has been a great opportunity 
for us to engage with nations around the world. We 
greatly value the new relationships we have forged 
and the enhanced character of existing relationships. 
Whatever the outcome, we are determined to maintain 
them. 

In the past, New Zealand has demonstrated that as 
a member of the Council it acts strongly, effectively and 
independently. It champions the rights of small States 
and for the voices of all to be heard. In short, as my 
Prime Minister said from this rostrum last year, there 
is no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 
numbers. Sometimes one has to speak up and shine a 
light on what is going on, or not going on, even when it 
is embarassing or inconvenient to others to do so.

Above all, I can assure the Assembly that if we 
are elected, New Zealand will be a credible, positive 
influence on the Security Council. At our core, New 
Zealand is an optimistic country and New Zealanders 
are an optimistic people. We believe that things can be 
better than they are and are prepared, as a people, to 
work hard to achieve that. Despite the many challenges 
on the international agenda, my hope is that the 
membership of the United Nations will give us an 

opportunity to prove that by serving on the Security 
Council from next year.
There is growing evidence today of a contradiction 
between the need for collective and partnership efforts 
in order to develop adequate responses to the challenges 
common to us all, on the one hand, and, on the other, 
the aspiration of a number of States to domination and 
a revival of the archaic bloc thinking based on military 
drill discipline and the erroneous logic of friend or foe.

The United States-led Western alliance, which 
portrays itself as a champion of democracy, the rule of 
law and human rights within individual countries, acts 
from a directly opposite position in the international 
arena, rejecting the democratic principles of the 
sovereign equality of States enshrined the Charter of 
the United Nations and trying to decide for everyone 
what is good or evil.

Washington has openly declared its right to the 
unilateral use of military force anywhere to advocate 
its own interests. Military interference has become a 
norm, despite the dismal outcome of all the operations 
involving the use of force that the United States has 
carried out in recent years.

The sustainability of the international system has 
been severely shaken by the NATO bombardment of 
Yugoslavia, the intervention in Iraq, the attack against 
Libya and the failure in Afghanistan. It was due only 
to intensive diplomatic efforts that aggression against 
Syria was prevented in 2013. The various colour 
revolutions and other schemes aimed at changing 


unsuitable regimes inevitably give the impression that 
their goal is to create chaos and instability.

Today Ukraine has fallen victim to that policy. 
The situation there has revealed the deep-rooted and 
systemic flaws remaining in the existing Euro-Atlantic 
architecture. The West has embarked on a course 
towards a vertical structuring of humankind tailored to 
its own standards, which are hardly inoffensive.

After the West declared victory in the Cold War 
and the so-called end of history, the United States and 
the European Union opted to expand the geopolitical 
area under their control without taking into account 
the balance of legitimate interests of all the peoples 
of Europe. The Western partners did not heed our 
numerous warnings with regard to the unacceptable 
violations of the principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and time and again 
they have avoided serious joint work to establish a 
common space of equal and indivisible security and 
cooperation from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans.

The Russian proposal to draft a European security 
treaty was rejected. We were told directly that only the 
members of the North Atlantic Alliance can have legally 
binding security guarantees, and the NATO expansion 
to the East continued in spite of the promises to the 
contrary given earlier. NATO’s instant switch to hostile 
rhetoric and the reduction of its cooperation with Russia, 
even to the detriment of the West’s own interests, and 
the additional build-up of military infrastructure along 
Russia’s borders revealed the inability of the Alliance 
to change the genetic code embedded in it during the 
Cold War.

The United States and the European Union supported 
the coup d’état in Ukraine, recklessly justifying any 
acts by the self-proclaimed Kyiv authorities, who 
opted to suppress by force that part of the Ukrainian 
people who had rejected the attempts to impose an 
anti-constitutional order throughout the country and 
wanted to defend their rights to their native language, 
culture and history. It is precisely the aggressive assault 
on those rights that compelled the population of Crimea 
to take its destiny in its own hands and make a choice 
in favour of self-determination. That was an absolutely 
free choice, no matter what was invented by those 
who were responsible in the first place for the internal 
conflict in Ukraine.

There have been attempts to distort the truth and 
hide facts behind blanket accusations at all stages of the 
Ukrainian crisis. Nothing has been done to track down 
and prosecute those responsible for the bloody February 
events at Maidan and the massive loss of human lives 
in Odessa, Mariupol and other regions of Ukraine. The 
scale of the appalling humanitarian disaster provoked 
by the acts of the Ukrainian army in south-eastern 
Ukraine has been deliberately understated.

Recently, horrifying new facts came to light when 
mass graves were discovered near Donetsk. Despite 
Security Council resolution 2166 (2014), a thorough 
and independent investigation into the circumstances 
of the loss of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over 
Ukrainian territory has been delayed. Those guilty for 
all those crimes must be found and brought to justice. 
Otherwise, national reconciliation in Ukraine can 
hardly be expected.

Russia is sincerely interested in the restoration of 
peace in a neighbouring country, and that should be well 
understood by anyone even slightly acquainted with the 
deep-rooted and fraternal relations between the two 
peoples. The path to a political settlement is known. 
As early as this April, Kyiv made a commitment in the 
Geneva Statement on Ukraine — agreed upon by Russia, 
Ukraine, the United States and the European Union 
(EU) — to immediately start a nation-wide dialogue 
involving all of Ukraine’s regions and political forces 
to implement constitutional reforms. The fulfilment 
of that obligation would allow all Ukrainians to agree 
on how to live in accordance with their traditions and 
culture and would allow Ukraine to return to its organic 
role as a link between the different parts of the European 
space, which certainly implies the preservation and 
respect by everyone of its non-aligned, neutral status. 
We are convinced that with goodwill and the refusal 
to support the party of war in Kyiv, which is trying to 
push the Ukrainian people into the abyss of national 
catastrophe, a way out of the crisis is within reach.

A way to overcome the situation has opened with 
a ceasefire agreement for south-eastern Ukraine on 
the basis of initiatives of Presidents Poroshenko and 
Putin. With the participation of representatives of Kyiv, 
Donetsk, Luhansk, the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Russia, practical 
measures are being agreed on for the consecutive 
realization of those agreements, including the separation 
of the parties, the withdrawal of the heavy weapons of 
the Ukrainian military forces and of the militias, and 
the organization of monitoring through the OSCE.


Russia is ready to continue to actively promote a 
political settlement, both under the framework of the 
well-known recommendations of the Minsk process 
and in other formats. But it should be quite clear that 
we are doing this for the sake of peace, tranquillity 
and the well-being of the Ukrainian people, and not to 
appease someone’s ambitions. Attempts to put pressure 
on Russia to force it to abandon its values of truth and 
justice are absolutely futile.

I will allow myself a digression into recent history. 
As a condition for the establishment of diplomatic 
relations with the Soviet Union in 1933, the United 
States Government demanded from Moscow guarantees 
of non-interference in the internal affairs of the United 
States, obligations not to undertake any actions aimed at 
changing the political and social structure of America. 
At that time, Washington feared the revolutionary virus, 
and such guarantees were secured between America 
and the Soviet Union, on the basis of reciprocity.

Perhaps it makes sense to return to that subject 
and reproduce the then demand of the American 
Government on a universal scale. Why not adopt a 
General Assembly declaration about the inadmissibility 
of interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign 
States and non-recognition of coups d’état as a 
method of regime change? It is time to fully exclude 
from international interaction attempts at illegitimate 
pressure by some States against others. The meaningless 
and counterproductive nature of unilateral sanctions is 
obvious in the example of the American blockade of 
Cuba.

A policy of ultimatums and a philosophy of 
superiority and domination do not meet the needs 
of the twenty-first century; they are in conflict with 
the objective processes of forming a polycentric, 
democratic world order. Russia promotes a positive, 
unifying agenda. We have always been and will be open 
to discussing the most difficult questions, no matter 
how intractable they may seem at first. We will be 
ready to seek a compromise and a balance of interests 
and to agree to exchange concessions, provided only 
that the conversation is respectful and equitable.

The Minsk Agreement of 5 and 19 September about 
the ways out of the Ukrainian crisis and the compromise 
about the dates of entry into force of the Association 
Agreement between Kyiv and the European Union are 
good examples to emulate, as is the readiness, at last, 
of Brussels to begin negotiations on establishing a free 
trade area between the EU and the Customs Union of 
Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, as Mr. Putin suggested 
back in January.

Russia has consistently advocated the harmonization 
of integration projects in Europe and Eurasia. 
Agreement on political benchmarks and terms such 
as “convergence of integration” would be a real 
contribution to the work of the OSCE on the topic 
of Helsinki+40. Another important aspect of that 
work would be to launch a pragmatic, de-ideologized 
conversation on politico-military architecture in the 
Euro-Atlantic area, so that not only members of NATO 
and of the Collective Security Treaty Organization but 
all the countries of the region, including Ukraine, the 
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, would enjoy equal 
and indivisible security and not have to make a false 
choice of “either with us, or against us”. New dividing 
lines must not be allowed in Europe, especially because 
in the context of globalization they could become a 
watershed between the West and the rest of the world.

It must be stated honestly that no one has a 
monopoly on the truth; no one can forcibly tailor global 
and regional processes to suit their needs. Today there 
is no alternative to developing consensus on the rules 
of sustainable global governance in the new historical 
conditions, with full respect for the cultural and 
civilizational diversity of the world and the multiplicity 
of development models. To attain such a consensus 
on every issue will be difficult, perhaps tedious. But 
recognizing that in every State democracy is “the worst 
form of Government except for all the others” also took 
a long time, not until Churchill issued his verdict. It 
is time to recognize the inevitability of that axiom in 
international affairs, which currently suffer from a huge 
deficit of democracy. Of course, someone will have to 
break the age-old stereotypes, to abandon claims to 
eternal exceptionalism. But there is no other way.

United efforts can be built only on the principles of 
mutual respect and mutual consideration of interests, as 
is done, for example, within the Security Council, the 
Group of 20, the BRICS States of Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa, and the Shanghai Cooperation 
Council.

The theory of the advantages of collective work 
are confirmed in practice, for instance, the progress 
in settling the situation concerning the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the successful completion of 
the chemical demilitarization of Syria. By the way, 
speaking of chemical weapons, I would like to obtain 
honest information on the state of Libya’s chemical 


arsenals. We understand that our NATO colleagues, 
having bombed the country in violation of Security 
Council resolutions, do not want to stir up the disorder 
they created. However, the problem of uncontrolled 
Libyan chemical arsenals is too serious to turn a blind 
eye to. We believe the Secretary-General must show his 
responsibility in that matter.

The main thing today is to see the global priorities 
and avoid making them hostage to a one-sided agenda. 
There is an urgent need to refrain from double 
standards in approaches to conflict resolution. By 
and large, everybody agrees that the key task is to 
resolutely counter the terrorists, who are trying to 
gain control of increasingly larger areas of Iraq, Syria, 
Libya, Afghanistan and the Sahel-Sahara region. That 
being the case, that problem cannot be sacrificed to 
ideological schemes or to settle a score. Terrorists, 
whatever slogans they hide behind, must be outlawed.

At the same time, of course, the fight against 
terrorism should be based on the solid foundation of 
international law. An important stage in that fight 
was the unanimous adoption of a series of Security 
Council resolutions, including those on the issue of 
foreign terrorist fighters. On the other hand, attempts 
to act contrary to the Charter of our Organization 
do not contribute to the success of joint efforts. The 
fight against terrorists in Syria should be built on 
cooperation with the Syrian Government, which has 
clearly stated its willingness in that regard. Damascus 
has already demonstrated its ability to cooperate with 
the international community and to fulfil its obligations 
in the framework of the programme for eliminating its 
chemical weapons.

From the very outset of the Arab Spring, Russia 
urged that it not be abandoned to the control of 
extremists, that a united front be created to counter the 
growing terrorist threat. We have warned against the 
temptation to take as allies almost anyone who declared 
himself an enemy of Bashar Al-Assad, whether 
Al-Qaida, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other fellow travellers 
of regime change, including the Islamic State of Iraq 
and the Levant (ISIL), which today is the focus of 
attention. As they say, better late than never. This is not 
the first time that Russia is making a real contribution 
to the fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups in 
the region. We are delivering large-scale supplies of 
arms and military equipment to Iraq, Syria and other 
Middle Eastern and North African countries, and we 
will continue to support their efforts to suppress the 
terrorists.

The terrorist threat requires a comprehensive 
approach if we want to eradicate its causes and not 
be doomed to reacting to the symptoms. ISIL is only 
part of the problem. We propose to organize, under the 
auspices of the Security Council, an in-depth study of 
the threat of extremism and terrorism in all of their 
aspects throughout the Middle East and North African 
region. That integrated approach also presupposes 
that chronic conflicts should be considered, above 
all the Arab-Israeli conflict. The failure to settle the 
Palestinian issue over several decades remains, as is 
widely recognized, one of the main factors of instability 
in the region, and that helps extremists to recruit more 
and more new jihadists.

Another area of our common work together 
demanding attention is uniting our efforts to implement 
the decisions of the General Assembly and Security 
Council to combat the Ebola virus. Our doctors are 
already working in Africa. There are plans to send 
additional humanitarian assistance, medical equipment 
and instruments, medicine and teams of experts to assist 
the United Nations programmes in Guinea, Liberia and 
Sierra Leone.

The United Nations was established on the ruins 
of the Second World War, and it is entering the year 
of its seventieth anniversary. We all have an obligation 
to celebrate in an appropriate manner the anniversary 
of the great victory and to pay tribute to the memory 
of all who perished for freedom and the right of each 
people to determine their own destiny. The lessons 
of that terrible war and the entire course of events in 
today’s world require us to join efforts and forget about 
unilateral interests and national electoral cycles when 
it comes to countering global threats to all humankind. 
National egoism should not be allowed to prevail over 
collective responsibility.
We come together at a 
crossroads between war and peace, between disorder 
and integration, between fear and hope. Around the 
globe, there are signposts of progress. The shadow of 
the Second World War that existed at the founding of 
this institution has been lifted, and the prospect of war 
between major Powers reduced. The ranks of Member 
States have more than tripled, and more people live 
under Governments that they elected. Hundreds of 
millions of human beings have been freed from the 
prison of poverty, with the proportion of those living 
in extreme poverty cut in half. And the world economy 
continues to strengthen after the worst financial crisis 
of our lives.

Today, whether you live in downtown Manhattan or 
in my grandmother’s village more than 200 miles from 
Nairobi, you can hold in your hand more information 
than the world’s greatest libraries. Together, we have 
learned how to cure disease and harness the power 
of the wind and the sun. The very existence of this 
Organization is a unique achievement, with the people 
of the world committing to resolve their differences 
peacefully and to solve their problems together. I often 
tell young people in the United States that, despite 
the headlines, this is the best time in human history 
to be born, for you are more likely than ever before to 
be literate, to be healthy and to be free to pursue your 
dreams.

And yet there is a pervasive unease in our world — a 
sense that the very forces that have brought us together 
have created new dangers and made it difficult for any 
single nation to insulate itself from global forces. As we 
gather here, an outbreak of Ebola overwhelms public 
health systems in West Africa and threatens to move 
rapidly across borders. Russian aggression in Europe 
recalls the days when large nations trampled small 
ones in pursuit of territorial ambitions. The brutality 
of terrorists in Syria and Iraq forces us to look into the 
heart of darkness.

Each of those problems demands urgent attention. 
But they are also symptoms of a broader problem: 
the failure of our international system to keep pace 
with an interconnected world. We, collectively, have 
not invested adequately in the public health capacity 
of developing countries. Too often, we have failed 
to enforce international norms when it has been 



inconvenient to do so. And we have not confronted 
forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism and 
hopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many 
parts of the globe.

Fellow representatives, we come together as 
United Nations with a choice to make. We can renew 
the international system that has enabled so much 
progress, or we can allow ourselves to be pulled back 
by an undertow of instability. We can reaffirm our 
collective responsibility to confront global problems, or 
be swamped by more and more outbreaks of instability. 
And for America, the choice is clear — we choose hope 
over fear. We see the future not as something out of our 
control, but as something we can shape for the better 
through concerted and collective effort. We reject 
fatalism or cynicism when it comes to human affairs. 
We choose to work for the world as it should be, as our 
children deserve it to be.

There is much that must be done to meet the test 
of this moment. But today I would like to focus on 
two defining questions at the root of so many of our 
challenges. Will the nations represented here today 
be able to renew the purpose of the United Nations 
founding, and will we come together to reject the cancer 
of violent extremism?

First, all of us — big nations and small — must meet 
our responsibility to observe and enforce international 
norms. We are here because others realized that we 
gain more from cooperation than from conquest. One 
hundred years ago, a World War claimed the lives of 
many millions, proving that with the terrible power of 
modern weaponry, the cause of empire ultimately leads 
to the graveyard. It would then take another World War 
to roll back the forces of fascism, the notions of racial 
supremacy, and form the United Nations to ensure that 
no nation can subjugate its neighbours and claim their 
territory.

Recently, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have 
challenged that post-war order. Here are the facts. After 
the people of Ukraine mobilized popular protests and 
calls for reform, their corrupt President fled. Against 
the will of the Government in Kyiv, Crimea was annexed 
by Russia. Russia poured arms into eastern Ukraine, 
fuelling violent separatists and a conflict that has killed 
thousands. When a civilian airliner was shot down from 
areas that those proxy forces controlled, those forces 
refused to allow access to the crash site for days. When 
Ukraine started to reassert control over its territory, 
Russia gave up the pretence of merely supporting the 
separatists and moved troops across the border.

That reflects a vision of a world in which might 
makes right; a world in which one nation’s borders 
can be redrawn by another and civilized people are 
not allowed to recover the remains of their loved ones 
because of the truth that might be revealed.

America stands for something different. We believe 
that right makes might, that bigger nations should not 
be able to bully smaller ones and that people should 
be able to choose their own future. Those are simple 
truths, but they must be defended. America and our 
allies will support the people of Ukraine as they develop 
their democracy and economy. We will reinforce our 
NATO allies and uphold our commitment to collective 
self-defence. We will impose a cost on Russia for its 
aggression, and we will counter falsehoods with the 
truth. And we call upon others to join us on the right 
side of history, for while small gains can be won at the 
barrel of a gun, they will ultimately be turned back if 
enough voices support the freedom of nations and the 
right of peoples to make their own decisions.

Moreover, a different path is available — the path of 
diplomacy and peace, and the ideals that this institution 
is designed to uphold. The recent ceasefire agreement in 
Ukraine offers an opening to achieve those objectives. 
If Russia takes that path — a path that for stretches of 
the post-Cold War period resulted in prosperity for the 
Russian people — then we will lift our sanctions and 
welcome Russia’s role in addressing common challenges. 
That is, after all, what the United States and Russia 
have been able to do in past years — from reducing our 
nuclear stockpiles to meeting our obligations under the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to cooperating to 
remove and destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons. 
That is the kind of cooperation we are prepared to 
pursue again, if Russia changes course.

That speaks to a central question of our global 
age — will we solve our problems together in a spirit of 
mutual interest and mutual respect, or will we descend 
into the destructive rivalries of the past? When nations 
find common ground — not simply based on power, but 
on principle — then we can make enormous progress. 
And I stand before the Assembly today committed to 
investing American strength and to working with all 
nations to address the problems we face in the twenty-
first century.

As we speak, America is deploying our doctors and 
scientists, supported by our military, to help contain 
the outbreak of Ebola and pursue new treatments. But 
we need a broader effort to stop a disease that could 
kill hundreds of thousands, inflict horrific suffering, 



destabilize economies and move rapidly across borders. 
It is easy to see that problem as a distant problem, 
until it is not. And that is why we will continue to 
mobilize other countries to join us in making concrete 
commitments, significant commitments to fight the 
outbreak and enhance our system of global health 
security for the long term.

America is pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the 
Iranian nuclear issue, as part of our commitment to stop 
the spread of nuclear weapons and pursue the peace 
and security of a world without them. But that can take 
place only if Iran seizes this historic opportunity. My 
message to Iran’s leaders and people has been simple 
and consistent: do not let this opportunity pass. We can 
reach a solution that meets Iran’s energy needs while 
assuring the world that Iran’s nuclear programme is 
peaceful.

America is and will continue to be a Pacific 
Power, promoting peace, stability, and the free flow 
of commerce among nations. But we will insist that 
all nations abide by the rules of the road and resolve 
their territorial disputes peacefully, consistent with 
international law. That is how the Asia-Pacific region 
has grown. And that is the only way to protect the 
progress going forward.

America is committed to a development agenda that 
eradicates extreme poverty by 2030. We will do our part 
to help people feed themselves, power their economies 
and care for their sick. If the world acts together, we 
can make sure that all of our children enjoy lives of 
opportunity and dignity.

America is pursuing ambitious reductions in 
its carbon emissions, and we have increased our 
investments in clean energy. We will do our part and 
help developing nations do theirs. But the science tells 
us that we can succeed in combating climate change 
only if we are joined in that effort by every other nation, 
by every major Power. That is how we can protect the 
planet for our children and our grandchildren.

In other words, on issue after issue, we cannot rely 
on a rule book written for a different century. If we lift 
our eyes beyond our borders, if we think globally and 
if we act cooperatively, we can shape the course of this 
century as our predecessors shaped the post-World War 
Two age.

But as we look to the future, one issue risks starting 
a cycle of conflict that could derail so much progress. 
That is the cancer of violent extremism, which has 
ravaged so many parts of the Muslim world. Of course, 
terrorism is not new. Speaking before the Assembly, 
President Kennedy put it well:

“Terror is not a new weapon. Throughout 
history it has been used by those who could not 
prevail either by persuasion or by example.” 
(A/PV.1013, para. 96)
In the twentieth century, terror was used by all 
manner of groups who failed to come to power through 
public support. But in this century, we have faced a 
more lethal and ideological brand of terrorists who have 
perverted one of the world’s great religions. With access 
to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, 
they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would 
divide the world into adherents and infidels — killing 
as many innocent civilians as possible and employing 
the most brutal methods to intimidate people within 
their communities.

I have made it clear that America will not base its 
entire foreign policy on reacting to terrorism. Instead, 
we have waged a focused campaign against Al-Qaida 
and its associated forces — taking out their leaders 
and denying them the safe havens they rely on. At the 
same time, we have reaffirmed again and again that the 
United States is not and never will be at war with Islam. 
Islam teaches peace. Muslims the world over aspire to 
live with dignity and a sense of justice. And when it 
comes to America and Islam, there is no us and them, 
there is only us, because millions of Muslim Americans 
are part of the fabric of our country.

So we reject any suggestion of a clash of 
civilizations. Belief in permanent religious war is the 
misguided refuge of extremists who cannot build or 
create anything and therefore peddle only fanaticism 
and hate. And it is no exaggeration to say that the future 
of humankind depends on our uniting against those 
who would divide us along the fault lines of tribe or 
sect, race or religion.

But this is not simply a matter of words. Collectively, 
we must take concrete steps to address the danger posed 
by religiously motivated fanatics and the trends that 
fuel their recruitment. Moreover, the campaign against 
extremism goes beyond a narrow security challenge. 
For while we have worked methodically to degrade 
Al-Qaida at its core and have supported a transition to 
a sovereign Afghan Government, extremist ideology 
has shifted to other places, particularly in the Middle 
East and North Africa, where a quarter of the young 



people have no job, where food and water could grow 
scarce, and where corruption is rampant and sectarian 
conflicts have become increasingly hard to contain.

As an international community, we must meet this 
challenge with a focus on four areas. First, the terrorist 
group known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) must be degraded and ultimately destroyed. It 
has terrorized all those whom it has come across in Iraq 
and Syria. Mothers, sisters and daughters have been 
subjected to rape as a weapon of war. Innocent children 
have been gunned down. Bodies have been dumped into 
mass graves. Religious minorities have been starved to 
death. In the most horrific crimes imaginable, innocent 
human beings have been beheaded, with videos of 
the atrocity distributed to shock the conscience of the 
world.

No god condones such terror. No grievance 
justifies such actions. There can be no reasoning or 
negotiation with that brand of evil. The only language 
understood by killers of that kind is the language of 
force. So the United States of America will work with 
a broad coalition to dismantle that network of death. In 
this effort, we do not act alone, nor do we intend to send 
United States troops to occupy foreign lands. Instead, 
we will support Iraqis and Syrians fighting to reclaim 
their communities. We will use our military might to 
roll back ISIL in a campaign of air strikes. We will train 
and equip forces fighting those terrorists on the ground. 
We will work to cut off their financing and stop the flow 
of fighters into and out of the region. And more than 
40 nations have already offered to join the coalition. 
Today, I ask the world to join in this effort. Those who 
have joined ISIL should leave the battlefield while they 
can. Those who continue to fight for a hateful cause 
will find that they are increasingly alone. For we will 
not succumb to threats, and we will demonstrate that 
the future belongs to those who build, not to those who 
destroy. So that is an immediate challenge, the first one 
we must meet.

The second challenge is that it is time for the 
world, especially Muslim communities, to explicitly, 
forcefully and consistently reject the ideology of 
organizations such as Al-Qaida and ISIL. It is one of 
the tasks of all great religions to accommodate devout 
faith with a modern, multicultural world. No children 
are born hating, and no children anywhere should be 
educated to hate other people. There should be no 
further tolerance of so-called clerics who call on people 
to harm innocents because they are Jewish or Christian 
or Muslim. It is time for a new compact among the 
civilized peoples of this world to eradicate war at its 
most fundamental source, and that is the corruption of 
young minds by violent ideology.

That means cutting off the funding that fuels such 
hatred. It is time to end the hypocrisy of those who 
accumulate wealth through the global economy and 
then siphon funds to those who teach children to tear 
it down. That means contesting the space that terrorists 
occupy, including the Internet and social media. Their 
propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad 
to fight their wars and has turned students — young 
people full of potential — into suicide bombers. We 
must offer an alternative vision. That means bringing 
people of different faiths together. All religions have 
been attacked by extremists from within at some point, 
and all people of faith have a responsibility to lift up the 
value at the heart of all great religions. Do unto your 
neighbour as you would do — as you would have others 
do — unto yourself.

The ideology of ISIL or Al-Qaida or Boko 
Haram will wilt and die if it is consistently exposed 
and confronted and refuted in the light of day. Look 
at the new Forum for Promoting Peace in Muslim 
Societies, whose purpose Sheikh Abdallah Bin Bayyah 
has described as “We must declare war on war, so 
the outcome will be peace upon peace”. Look at the 
young British Muslims who have responded to terrorist 
propaganda by starting the #notinmyname campaign, 
declaring that ISIL is hiding behind a false Islam. Look 
at the Christian and Muslim leaders who came together 
in the Central African Republic to reject violence; listen 
to the imam there who said that, while politics may try 
to divide the religious in that country, religion should 
not be a cause of hate, war, or strife.

Later today, the Security Council will adopt a 
resolution that underscores the responsibility of States 
to counter violent extremism. But resolutions must 
be followed by tangible commitments, so that we are 
accountable when we fall short. Next year, we should 
all be prepared to announce the concrete steps that 
we have taken to counter extremist ideologies in our 
own countries — by getting intolerance out of schools, 
stopping radicalization before it spreads and promoting 
institutions and programmes that build new bridges of 
understanding.

Thirdly, we must address the cycle of conflict, 
especially sectarian conflict, that creates the conditions 
that terrorists prey upon. There is nothing new about 



wars within religions. Christianity endured centuries of 
vicious sectarian conflict. Today it is violence within 
Muslim communities that has become the source 
of so much human misery. It is time to acknowledge 
the destruction wrought by proxy wars and terror 
campaigns between Sunni and Shia across the Middle 
East. And it is time that political, civic and religious 
leaders rejected sectarian strife. So let us be clear. This 
is a fight that no one is winning. A brutal civil war in 
Syria has already killed nearly 200,000 people and has 
displaced millions. Iraq has come perilously close to 
plunging back into the abyss. The conflict has created 
a fertile recruiting ground for terrorists, who inevitably 
export such violence.

The good news is that we also see signs that the tide 
can be reversed. We have a new, inclusive Government 
in Baghdad and a new Iraqi Prime Minister welcomed 
by his neighbours; we see Lebanese factions that reject 
those who try to provoke war. Such steps must be followed 
by a broader truce. Nowhere is that more necessary 
than in Syria. Together with our partners, America is 
training and equipping the Syrian opposition to be a 
counterweight to the terrorists of ISIL and the brutality 
of the Al-Assad regime. But the only lasting solution 
to Syria’s civil war is political — an inclusive political 
transition that responds to the legitimate aspirations of 
all Syrian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, regardless 
of creed.

Cynics may argue that such an outcome can never 
come to pass. But there is no other way for the madness 
in Syria to end, whether one year from now or 10. And it 
points to the fact that it is time for a broader negotiation 
in the region, in which major Powers address their 
differences directly, honestly and peacefully across 
the table from one another, rather than through gun-
wielding proxies. I can promise the international 
community that America will remain engaged in the 
region, and we are prepared to engage in that effort.

My fourth and final point is a simple one. The 
countries of the Arab and Muslim world must focus on 
the extraordinary potential of their people, especially 
the youth. And here I would like to speak directly to 
young people across the Muslim world. You come 
from a great tradition that stands for education, not 
ignorance; innovation, not destruction; the dignity of 
life, not murder. Those who call you away from that 
path are betraying that tradition, not defending it. You 
have demonstrated that when young people have the 
tools to succeed — good schools, education in math 
and science, an economy that nurtures creativity and 
entrepreneurship — then societies will flourish. So, 
America will partner with those who promote that 
vision.

Where women are full participants in a country’s 
politics or economy, societies are more likely to 
succeed. And that is why we support the participation of 
women in parliaments and peace processes, schools and 
the economy. If young people live in places where the 
only option is between the dictates of a State or the lure 
of an extremist underground, then no counterterrorism 
strategy can succeed. But where a genuine civil society 
is allowed to flourish — where people can express their 
views and organize peacefully for a better life — then 
you dramatically expand the alternatives to terror.

And such positive change need not come at the 
expense of tradition and faith. We see that in Iraq, where 
a young man started a library for his peers. “We link 
Iraq’s heritage to their hearts”, he said, and “give them 
a reason to stay”. We see it in Tunisia, where secular 
and Islamist parties worked together through a political 
process to produce a new constitution. We see it in 
Senegal, where civil society thrives alongside a strong 
democratic Government. We see it in Malaysia, where 
vibrant entrepreneurship is propelling a former colony 
into the ranks of advanced economies. And we see it in 
Indonesia, where what began as a violent transition has 
evolved into a genuine democracy.

Ultimately the task of rejecting sectarianism and 
rejecting extremism is a generational one, and a task 
for the people of the Middle East themselves. No 
external power can bring about a transformation of 
hearts and minds. But America will be a respectful 
and constructive partner. We will neither tolerate 
terrorist safe havens nor act as an occupying Power. 
We will take action against threats to our security and 
our allies, while building an architecture of counter-
terrorism cooperation. We will increase efforts to lift 
up those who counter extremist ideologies and who 
seek to resolve sectarian conflict. And we will expand 
our programmes to support entrepreneurship and civil 
society, education and youth, because ultimately those 
investments are the best antidote to violence.

We recognize as well that leadership will be 
necessary to address the conflict between Palestinians 
and Israelis. As bleak as the landscape appears, America 
will not give up on the pursuit of peace. Understand that 
the situation in Iraq and Syria and Libya should cure 
anybody of the illusion that the Arab-Israeli conflict 



is the main source of problems in the region. For far 
too long that has been used as an excuse to distract 
people from problems at home. The violence engulfing 
the region today has made too many Israelis ready to 
abandon the hard work of peace. And that is something 
worthy of reflection within Israel. Because let us be 
clear: the status quo in the West Bank and Gaza is not 
sustainable. We cannot afford to turn away from that 
effort — not when rockets are fired at innocent Israelis, 
or when the lives of so many Palestinian children are 
taken from us in Gaza. So long as I am President, we 
will stand up for the principle that Israelis, Palestinians, 
the region and the world will be more just and more 
safe with two States living side by side, in peace and 
security.

So this is what America is prepared to do: take 
action against immediate threats, while pursuing a 
world in which the need for such action is diminished. 
The United States will never shy away from defending 
our interests, but we will also not shy away from the 
promise of this institution and its Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights — the notion that peace is not merely 
the absence of war, but the presence of a better life.

I realize that America’s critics will be quick to point 
out that at times we too have failed to live up to our 
ideals and that America has plenty of problems within 
its own borders. That is true. In a summer marked by 
instability in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, I 
know the world also took notice of the small American 
city of Ferguson, Missouri, where a young man was 
killed and a community was divided. So, yes, we have 
our own racial and ethnic tensions. And, like every 
country, we continually wrestle with how to reconcile 
the vast changes wrought by globalization and greater 
diversity with the traditions that we hold dear.

But we welcome the scrutiny of the world, because 
what you see in America is a country that has steadily 
worked to address our problems, to make our union 
more perfect, to bridge the divides that existed at the 
founding of this nation. America is not the same as it 
was 100 years ago or 50 years ago or even a decade ago. 
We fight for our ideals and we are willing to criticize 
ourselves when we fall short. We hold our leaders 
accountable and insist on a free press and an independent 
judiciary. We address our differences in the open space 
of democracy, with respect for the rule of law, with a 
place for people of every race and every religion and 
with an unyielding belief in the ability of individual 
men and women to change their communities and their 
circumstances and their countries for the better.

After nearly six years as President, I believe that that 
promise can help light the world. I have seen a longing 
for positive change — for peace and for freedom and for 
opportunity and for an end to bigotry — in the eyes of 
young people whom I have met around the globe. They 
remind me that no matter who you are or where you 
come from or what you look like or what God you pray 
to or whom you love, there is something fundamental 
that we all share. 

Eleanor Roosevelt, a champion of the United 
Nations and America’s role in it, once asked, 

“Where, after all, do universal human rights 
begin? In small places, close to home — so close 
and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps 
of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual 
person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or 
college he attends; the factory, farm or office where 
he works.”
Around the world, young people are moving forward, 
hungry for a better world. Around the world, in small 
places, they are overcoming hatred and bigotry and 
sectarianism. And they are learning to respect each 
other, despite differences.
The people of the world now look to us, here, to 
be as decent and dignified and courageous as they are 
trying to be in their daily lives. And at this crossroads, 
I can promise the Assembly that the United States 
of America will not be distracted or deterred from 
what must be done. We are heirs to a proud legacy of 
freedom, and we are prepared to do what is necessary 
to secure that legacy for generations to come. I ask 
that the Assembly join us in this common mission, for 
today’s children and tomorrow’s.

I should like to congratulate you, 
Mr. President, and your country, Uganda, on assuming, 
on behalf of the continent of Africa, the responsibilities 
of President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth 
session. The theme that you have chosen for this general 
debate and the sixty-ninth session, namely, “Delivering 
on and implementing a transformative post-2015 
development agenda”, is timely and most appropriate.

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
galvanized and mobilized the international community 
and the United Nations in a manner never seen before. 
We have good stories to tell about the journey of the 
past 15 years of implementing the MDGS. In Africa, 
we seized the opportunity and adopted the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), our 
sociodevelopment blueprint. The African Union’s 
Vision 2063 will, together with NEPAD and other 
socioeconomic development programmes, be the 
cornerstone and foundation of Africa’s development 
agenda going forward. South Africa has also made 
significant progress in achieving the MDGs. Reducing 
by half the number of people earning less than a dollar 
a day has been achieved, while the proportion of those 
experiencing hunger has also been halved. South 
Africa has attained Goal 2, namely, to provide access 
to primary education for all.

By official international indicators, South Africa is 
also doing well on MDG 3 to promote and empower 
women. South Africa has recorded impressive progress 
through the expansion of its health infrastructure 
and improved access to health services for all South 
Africans.

On the reduction of child mortality, MDG 4, and the 
improvement of maternal health, MDG 5, significant 
progress has also been recorded, but more work remains 
to be done. In fact. more work remains worldwide to 
fully achieve those goals, especially in the developing 
world. We have to confront the underlying root causes 
that continue to make it impossible for our people to 
have a better life.

In spite of the progress that we have made thus far, 
reports continue to show that Africa is lagging behind 
in the attainment of some of the MDGs. It is for that 
reason that we appreciate the crafting of a post-2015 
global development agenda that will carry forward the 
unfinished business of the MDGs. The post-2015 global 

development agenda will provide a frame of reference 
for our collective agreement on what has to be done. 
We reiterate that developed countries should be reliable 
partners and meet their commitments to development 
goals, such as contributing 0.7 per cent of their 
gross national income towards official development 
assistance. We say that because it does not matter 
what the great Organization has achieved in the past 
six decades if we do not deal comprehensively with the 
scourge of poverty, unemployment and diseases. The 
poor of the world will then consider everything done 
to have been a failure. Indeed, we would have failed in 
our duty if we succeed in preventing another world war 
but continue to have children dying of malnutrition and 
treatable diseases.

The recent outbreak of Ebola in some West 
African States and the number of lives that have 
been unnecessarily lost provide a clear example of 
the challenges that developing countries continue to 
contend with. We believe that Ebola would have been 
contained within a few days had the outbreak been in 
the developed world. But now it has become a pandemic 
that threatens the economies of affected African States.

The outbreak has thus exposed the challenges 
resulting from lack of capacity, lack of infrastructure 
and other limited resources in Africa. We are pleased 
that the United Nations, under the leadership of the 
Secretary-General, is deploying a mission to coordinate 
efforts to combat the virus. South Africa stands ready to 
continue to provide whatever resources we have at our 
disposal to assist the people and Governments of our 
sister countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. 
We add our voice in calling for more resources to be 
deployed so as to ensure that the virus is contained.

The role of the United Nations in supporting the 
struggles of self-determination and freedom has been 
remarkable. South Africa is a shining example. Twenty 
years ago, President Nelson Mandela thanked all 
nations for support from this very podium when South 
Africa was readmitted to the United Nations as a free 
and democratic State. We are reminded of that fact on 
this important day, which is National Heritage Day in 
my country.

Since 1994, South Africa has made significant 
progress in transforming the apartheid State into a 
democratic one, founded on the values of human dignity, 
non-discrimination, non-racialism and non-sexism, the 
rule of law and universal adult suffrage, as enshrined in 
the Constitution. Given our history and heritage, we are 
mindful of our historic and moral responsibility in the 
global struggle against racism, racial discrimination 
and other intolerances. We will, in this regard, continue 
to be at the forefront of efforts to eliminate all forms of 
racism, racial discrimination and any other intolerance, 
including xenophobia and anti-Semitism.

The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
remain the primary framework adopted by a United 
Nations conference in the fight against racism. We 
will continue to support the struggles for freedom 
and self-determination, including the struggles of the 
peoples of Palestine and Western Sahara, who continue 
to experience occupation and colonialism of different 
forms. The people of Cuba also hold a special place 
in our hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for 
African freedom. We will therefore continue to support 
their struggle for economic liberation.

While the United Nations has done remarkably well 
in supporting self-determination, when it celebrates 70 
years of existence next year, this body may be found 
wanting by the people of Palestine. The Israeli-Palestine 
question is one of the oldest items on the United 
Nations agenda, but progress remains elusive. In the 
past few months in particular, the world has witnessed 
a devastating conflict that left a humanitarian crisis 
of shocking proportions. People in Palestine were left 
homeless, with no medical facilities, no safe drinking 
water, bereaved and having to care for the wounded 
after a trail of destructive military actions by Israel.

South Africa has condemned the actions of both 
Israel and Hamas, and we have called for an immediate 
cessation of hostilities. Our strongly held view is 
that there can be no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian question. We should all remain committed 
to the two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, 
with Palestine and Israel coexisting side by side in 
peace.

Of concern in this matter has been the helplessness 
displayed by the United Nations, especially the Security 
Council during the current conflict. The United 
Nations has the moral authority and legitimacy to unite 
the world in promoting the quest for peace, justice and 
self-determination for the people of Palestine, while 
addressing whatever security concerns Israel may have. 
This body must play its role without fear or favour and 
be a beacon for all who suffer oppression in the world.


Let me reiterate that the seventieth anniversary of 
the United Nations next year provides an opportunity 
for us seriously to reflect on the need to reform this 
august body, moving beyond words to action. Ten years 
ago, world leaders celebrating the sixtieth anniversary 
of the United Nations agreed on the need for reform 
of the Security Council in particular. The decision 
remains valid and must be implemented. When we 
convene here next year, in the seventieth year of the 
United Nations, we should be able to adopt a concrete 
programme that will guide us towards a strengthened 
United Nations and a reformed Security Council. Some 
contentious aspects of the United Nations system, 
including the power of veto and the exclusion of regions 
such as Africa from the Security Council, are some of 
the critical matters that cannot be ignored in the quest 
for transformation.

Among the achievements of the Organization in its 
recent history is the cooperation between the African 
Union and the United Nations, particularly since the 
formation of the African Union Peace and Security 
Architecture. In this regard, the full implementation 
of Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 
(2012), on cooperation between the United Nations 
and regional organizations, particularly the African 
Union, remains crucial. Progress has been made in a 
number of areas where this cooperation is in place, for 
example in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
two affected subregional organizations, the Southern 
African Development Community and the International 
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, continue to 
take significant strides with the support of the United 
Nations.

This body celebrated the formation of a new State 
of South Sudan not long ago. Recent developments and 
the ongoing conflict in South Sudan have resulted in 
loss of life and other dire humanitarian consequences. 
We will continue to contribute as much as we can to 
finding solutions working with the African Union and 
this body. South Sudan should not be allowed to regress.

Next year marks 20 years since the the Fourth 
World Conference on Women adopted the Beijing 
Platform for Action. The anniversary provides an 
opportunity for the United Nations and the international 
community to reflect and take forward the struggle 
for the emancipation of women from all forms of 
discrimination.

Last December, the world descended on South 
Africa to pay last respects to our beloved Madiba. 
Those who did not come to South Africa honoured 
Madiba in various ways. We will continue to work with 
the world to promote Madiba’s legacy and passion for 
justice, freedom, equality and human rights. We are 
grateful to the General Assembly and the President of 
the Assembly at the sixty-eighth session for the decision 
to establish the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela Prize that will be awarded to an outstanding 
individual who will have demonstrated a commitment 
to the aims, objectives and principles of the United 
Nations Charter. The Prize is a great testament to the 
outstanding individual that Madiba was and will always 
be.

As we recommit to the Millennium Development 
Goals, let me once again borrow from the words of 
Madiba uttered on his historic inauguration day in 1994 
when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
This year 
marks the centenary of the outbreak of the First World 
War. A distinguished thinker in modern China, Yan Fu, 
described the devastation caused by the war: “How sad 
that the air is heavy with the stench of war”.

Next year will be the seventieth anniversary of the 
end of the Second World War. Over 2 billion people 
across the world were affected by that calamity. In 
China alone, the aggression committed by Japanese 
militarists left more than 35 million Chinese soldiers 
and civilians dead or injured.

The United Nations was established to keep the 
scourge of the two World Wars from occurring again, 
and it embodies the fervent hope of all countries for 
peace and stability. To achieve that goal, the Charter 
of the United Nations presented a grand vision of joint 
efforts to build a better world.

In this world, we should treat each other as equals. 
The principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity 
must be upheld. The pursuit by different countries of 
economic and social development must be respected. 
Their right to independently choose their own social 
systems and development paths must be safeguarded. 
We should be open and inclusive. Only in that way 
can we open the door of dialogue and exchange and 
achieve harmony among countries with different social 
systems, religions and cultural traditions. We should 
pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. Each country 
should align its own interests with those of others and 
work to maximize areas where their interests converge.

Only by helping one another can countries prosper. 
We should jointly initiate a new thinking for win-win 
and all-win progress and reject the old notion of a zero-
sum game, or the winner takes all. We should uphold 
justice. It is imperative to promote greater democracy 
and the rule of law in international relations, to apply 
fair and just rules to tell right from wrong and settle 
disputes, and to pursue peace and development within 
the framework of international law. All parties should 
jointly uphold the authority and effectiveness of the 
United Nations and reform and improve the global 
governance structure.

As we have seen in Gaza, Iraq, the Central African 
Republic and South Sudan, our world is far from 
peaceful. In the face of all those who have been killed 
in war, we must ask ourselves how we can keep the 
tragedies from recurring. In the face of women and 
children displaced by fighting, we must ask ourselves 
when they can return home. In the face of incessant 
conflicts, we must ask ourselves how we can open the 
door to lasting peace. To address those problems, China 
believes that we should do the following.

First, we should seek political solutions. To beat 
swords into ploughshares may take time and effort, but 
history and reality have repeatedly demonstrated that 
to meet violence with violence will not lead to enduring 
peace, and the use of force will only create more 
problems than solutions. Coercive action should be 
authorized by the Security Council. If a country places 
its domestic law above international law and interferes 
in other countries’ internal affairs at will, or even seeks 
regime change, the international community cannot but 
question the legitimacy of its actions.

Secondly, we should accommodate the interests 
of all parties. Parties to a conflict should reject the 
zero-sum approach, address each other’s concerns in 
negotiations and endeavour to meet each other half 
way. They should seek to meet their legitimate concerns 
through consultations in a mutually accommodating 
way. When conducting mediation, the international 
community should uphold justice and take an objective 
and balanced position. Countries should not be partial 
to any party in the conflict. Still less should they avail 
themselves of the opportunity to pursue their own 
agenda.

Thirdly, we should promote national reconciliation. 
The ongoing armed conflicts are largely caused by 
ethnic and sectarian tensions. The process of national 
reconciliation and the process of political settlement 
should be advanced in tandem with each other. All 
parties should uphold the Charter of the United 
Nations, develop and practice a culture of inclusion and 
tolerance and uproot the seeds of hatred and retaliation, 
so that the fruit of inclusion and amity will grow on 
post-conflict land.

Fourthly, we should uphold multilateralism. We 
should give full play to the role of the United Nations 
and observe international law and the basic norms 
governing international relations. Chapter VII of the 
Charter is not the only means for the Security Council 
to maintain international peace and security. We should 
make better and full use of the means of prevention, 
mediation and conciliation stipulated in Chapter VI.

Given their familiarity with local developments, we 
should leverage the strengths of regional organizations 
and countries and support them in addressing regional 
issues in ways suited to their regions.

The conflicts in Ukraine remain a cause of 
concern. We welcome and support the Minsk ceasefire 
agreement and urge all parties in Ukraine to strictly 

implement it and seek a comprehensive, sustained 
and balanced political solution through political 
dialogue and negotiation. China hopes that the various 
ethnic groups in Ukraine will live in harmony and 
that Ukraine will live in peace with other countries. 
That is the fundamental way for Ukraine to achieve 
long-term stability and security. China hopes that 
the United Nations will play its due role in finding a 
proper solution to the Ukrainian crisis and supports the 
international community’s constructive efforts to ease 
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

China supports Iraq in upholding its sovereignty, 
independence and territorial integrity. The formation of 
the new Iraqi Government has provided an important 
opportunity. We hope that the Iraqi Government will 
lead its people in a joint endeavour to develop their 
country in the spirit of inclusion and reconciliation. 
China calls for providing more humanitarian assistance 
to support Iraq. To help the Iraqi people overcome 
difficulties and to achieve peace and stability in their 
country is the shared responsibility of the international 
community.

China firmly opposes all terrorist acts and supports 
the international community in responding to the 
threat posed by terrorist forces in a coordinated and 
concerted way in accordance with the relevant Security 
Council resolutions. China believes that in conducting 
international counter-terrorism cooperation, we should 
take a multipronged approach and address both the 
symptoms and root causes of terrorism, and that the 
United Nations and the Security Council should fully 
play leading roles. There should be no double standard 
when it comes to fighting terrorism; still less should 
terrorism be identified with any particular ethnic group 
or religion.

As new developments emerge in the global fight 
against terrorism, the international community should 
take new measures to address them. In particular, it 
should focus on combating religious extremism and 
cyberterrorism, resolutely eliminate the root causes of 
terrorism and extremism, block channels that spread 
them and crack down hard and effectively on the use of 
the Internet and other new means of communication by 
terrorists to instigate, recruit, finance or plot terrorist 
attacks.

The Syrian crisis has continued for nearly four 
years. It is negotiation, not fighting, that offers 
solutions. China urges all parties in Syria to end the 
fighting and violence immediately, cooperate fully with 
United Nations humanitarian assistance operations and 
help bring an end to the suffering of innocent civilians 
as soon as possible. We urge all the parties to act in the 
overall interests of the future and fate of their country 
and people, demonstrate the necessary political will, 
actively support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, and follow a middle 
way that draws on workable practices from other 
countries and regions, suits Syria’s national conditions 
and accommodates the interests of various parties, in 
order to give peace a chance.

The Palestinian issue is an open wound on the 
conscience of humankind. China calls on Israel 
and Palestine to agree on a durable ceasefire, and it 
urges Israel to lift its blockade of the Gaza Strip and 
stop building settlements. At the same time, Israel’s 
legitimate security concerns should be respected. We 
hope that Israel and Palestine will choose the way of 
peace and resume and advance the peace talks as soon 
as possible. The aspirations and legitimate demands of 
the Palestinian people for an independent nation must 
not remain unmet indefinitely. Advancing peace in the 
Middle East calls for the concerted efforts of many, not 
of one or two countries alone. The Security Council 
should play its rightful role, and we support its efforts 
to take action in response to the demands of Palestine 
and the League of Arab States.

Negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue have 
entered a crucial stage. All the parties should display 
good faith, continue their efforts in a spirit of mutual 
respect, equality, collaboration and accommodation, 
and work hard on the most difficult issues, so that a 
win-win agreement that is comprehensive, fair and 
balanced is arrived at as soon as possible.

The two sides of the conflict in South Sudan 
should establish a ceasefire immediately, organize an 
active political dialogue that addresses the interests 
of the people in South Sudan in general and, through 
the mediation of the Intergovernmental Authority 
on Development, work with all the country’s ethnic 
groups and parties to speedily reach a fair and balanced 
solution and achieve national reconciliation and ethnic 
unity. South Sudan is the youngest Member of the 
United Nations. The South Sudanese people deserve a 
life of hope and vitality, not the devastation caused by 
conflicts and wars.


China welcomes the election of Mr. Ashraf Ghani 
as the new President of Afghanistan and Mr. Abdullah 
Abdullah as its Chief Executive, and will continue to 
support the Afghan people in their work to achieve a 
smooth political, security and economic transition and 
to build jointly with them an Afghanistan that enjoys 
unity, stability, development and amity. We support 
an Afghan-led and -owned peace process, with the 
international community fulfilling its commitment and 
responsibility to Afghanistan and its people. China will 
host the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul 
Process so that we can give Afghanistan fresh support 
as it stands on the threshold of a new era.

On the issue of the Korean peninsula, China calls 
on all the parties to act objectively and impartially, 
remain committed to the goal of denuclearizing the 
peninsula, firmly uphold its peace and stability, and 
endeavour to resolve the issues through dialogue and 
consultation. The Six-Party Talks remain the only 
viable and effective way to resolve the nuclear issue on 
the Korean peninsula, and we now have the pressing 
task of restarting the talks as soon as possible. The issue 
should be tackled through a sustainable, irreversible 
and effective dialogue process that addresses all the 
parties’ concerns in a comprehensive and balanced 
way. Since there are still many uncertainties on the 
peninsula today, all the parties concerned should 
exercise restraint, refrain from provocative acts, work 
harder to help ease tensions and jointly uphold peace 
and stability.

While the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) established by the United Nations in 2000 
have contributed greatly to improving human survival 
and development, global development is still a task for 
the long term. The international community is not only 
dealing with the formidable challenges of reducing 
poverty, eradicating hunger and improving education 
and the health of women and children, it is also facing 
new challenges in the form of the environment, climate 
change and energy and resource security.

Next year is the deadline for meeting the MDGs, 
and the post-2015 development agenda will take 
over this historic mission. Building on past progress 
and also breaking new ground, the international 
community should formulate more effective plans 
and take more robust action to advance humankind’s 
shared development. As we see it, the development 
agenda should have three goals. First, it should advance 
people’s well-being, with a focus on eradicating 
poverty and encouraging development. Secondly, 
it should promote inclusiveness, in the interests of 
supporting social equity and justice. Thirdly, it should 
ensure the implementation of all these things. Based 
on the principles of diversity in development models 
and shared but differentiated responsibilities, the 
agenda should aim to enhance global partnerships for 
development and improve implementation tools and 
mechanisms.

Climate change is a challenge that all humankind 
is facing. Mr. Zhang Gaoli, Vice Premier of the State 
Council, led the Chinese delegation to this year’s 
Climate Summit at the United Nations as a special 
envoy of China’s President. We congratulate the 
United Nations on the Summit’s success and hope that 
the political momentum it generated will translate 
into effective actions for improving international 
cooperation on climate change. All parties should 
work to conclude negotiations on a new post-2020 
climate-change regime as scheduled, by the end of 
2015, in accordance with the principles of shared but 
differentiated responsibilities, equity and respective 
capabilities, with the aim of creating fairer and more 
equitable and effective arrangements for international 
cooperation on climate change.

The Ebola epidemic, which is raging in some 
African countries, has once again sounded the alarm 
on global health security. As a good brother and partner 
of Africa, with whom it shares the good and the bad, 
China will continue to stand firmly with the African 
people and to support and assist them to the best of its 
ability. We will also take an active part in the relevant 
international assistance efforts. China calls on the 
World Health Organization, the United Nations and 
other international agencies to work closely with the 
international community, come up with new initiatives 
for strengthening global health security and provide 
more assistance to developing countries, particularly in 
Africa.

Next year is one of special historic significance, 
as it marks the seventieth anniversary of victory in 
the anti-fascist world war, the founding of the United 
Nations and victory in the Chinese people’s war against 
Japanese aggression. Remembering the past makes us 
cherish peace, and recalling history will help to guide 
us as we embrace the future. China welcomes the 
inclusion of the seventieth anniversary of the end of the 
Second World War on the agenda of this session of the 
General Assembly as an important opportunity.

When we look back on what happened 70 years 
ago, the historical facts are clear, and a final verdict 
has been pronounced on what was right and what was 
wrong. History should not be falsified or truth distorted. 
Today, 70 years later, let us jointly uphold human 
justice and conscience so that those who attempt to 
deny aggression and distort history will have nowhere 
to hide. Let us jointly defend the Charter of the United 
Nations and the outcomes of the Second World War, 
so that that vision of a world free of war, with lasting 
peace, will take deep root in our hearts and pass from 
one generation to the next.
The year 
2014 is a special one for Europeans — a special year 
of commemoration. In the summer 100 years ago, 
European diplomacy failed and the world slid into the 
First World War. Seventy-five years ago, Germany 
attacked its neighbour Poland, plunging the world into 
the Second World War. Twenty-five years ago, the 
Berlin Wall fell, bringing an end to the world’s decades-
long division into East and West.

However, merely to look back and remember would 
not be enough in this year of commemoration. On the 
contrary, we must ask ourselves: what have we learned 
for the future? The most important lesson learned 
from that history was the establishment of the United 
Nations, for the United Nations embodies the world’s 
hope for peace. That hope derives from an idea which 
is as simple as it is revolutionary: there is peace when 
the world sets rules for itself and replaces the law of 
force with the force of law, when conflicts are resolved 
at the negotiating table and not on the battlefield, when 
the world renounces, step by step, the cynical logic of 
violence.

To date, the United Nations has provided a universal 
foundation for the hope for peace. But that universality 
is under threat from the ghosts of the past and from new 
demons.

In 2014 our world seems to be unraveling. Crises are 
coming at us thick and fast. That is why it is not enough 
simply to call upon the United Nations. No, we need to 
breathe life into that call. Hope will remain but a hope, 
an unattainable goal, unless States are prepared to take 
on responsibility. The United Nations is not a forum 
onto which we can shrug off responsibility. The United 
Nations is a forum whereby we assume responsibility.

Germany, embedded in a united Europe, is prepared 
to take on responsibility in and with the United Nations. 
First and foremost we have a responsibility to the people 
bearing the brunt of the suffering in the crises.

Next month Germany will host a conference in 
Berlin to mobilize urgently needed humanitarian 
assistance for the millions of Syrian refugees. My 
country will play its part, and I sincerely hope that 
many others will follow suit. Support is needed above 
all by Syria’s neighbours. They are doing a tremendous 
job but are also under tremendous strain due to the huge 
influx of displaced persons and refugees from Syria.

The Ebola epidemic is raging in West Africa. 
It is bringing suffering and death into the homes of 
individual families. It is endangering the cohesion 
of entire societies. That is why we are sending 
humanitarian and medical assistance and setting up an 
airlift to the region. I am delighted that many volunteers 
in my country have responded to the call, saying, “I 
want to go there to help on the spot”.

Above and beyond the immediate solidarity, 
however, we need a long-term commitment. We need 
the expertise of the World Health Organization and 
the coordinating umbrella of the United Nations, 
particularly in the long term as we try to strengthen 
States and health-care systems. Germany will contribute 
to both of those goals. We cannot bring the dead back to 
life, but we may be able to prevent far too many more 
people dying of Ebola who ought not to be dying if they 
were treated. And we must certainly make sure that the 
next epidemic does not have consequences as deadly as 
the one we are still fighting.

If we are to move towards the hope of peace, we need 
many small steps — the commitment of individuals, 
bilateral diplomacy and regional initiatives. But none 
of that can replace the United Nations. Only the United 
Nations can provide a universal foundation for the hope 
of peace. That foundation is international law, to which 
everyone who belongs to the community of nations in 
the United Nations, and those who want to belong, has 
subscribed. That is what must be preserved; that is the 
core of our hope for peace.

That is why I must here mention the conflict 
in Ukraine. Some people in the Hall may regard it 
as nothing more than a regional conflict in Eastern 
Europe. But I am convinced that that view is incorrect. 
I believe that that conflict affects each and every one of 
us. Not just any State, but a permanent member of the 
Security Council — Russia — has, with its annexation 
of Crimea, unilaterally altered existing borders in 
Europe and has thus violated international law. We 
must counter that dangerous sign, because we must not 
allow the power of international law to be eroded from 
the inside. We must not allow the old divisions between 
East and West to re-emerge in the United Nations.

Because so much is at stake in that conflict, not 
only for the people of Ukraine but also for the future of 
international law, Germany and its partners have taken 
on responsibility and committed themselves vigorously 
to defusing the conflict. I am under no illusion: a 
political solution is still a long way off. However, just a 
few weeks ago we were on the brink of a direct military 
confrontation between Russian and Ukrainian armed 
forces. I am happy to say that diplomacy prevented the 
worst. Now the priority must be to bring about a lasting 
ceasefire and achieve a political solution, one based on 
the principles of the United Nations and preserving the 
unity of Ukraine.

I am not discussing only Ukraine. As long as that 
conflict is simmering and as long as Russia and the 
West are in a dispute over Ukraine, there is a threat 
of paralysing the United Nations. We therefore need a 
Security Council that is able and willing to act to tackle 
the new and, in the long term, far more important tasks 
we are facing. The world of 2014 is plagued not only by 
the old ghost of division, but also by new demons.

We are all shocked by the unspeakable brutality of 
the terrorists who misuse the name of God in carrying 
out their evil deeds. My question is, ought we not to 
be particularly worried that the preachers of hate are 
drawing in young people who have grown up in the 
midst of our own societies?

That is why that, too, is not exclusively a regional 
conflict — a problem in Iraq or in Syria or in Africa, 

where terrorists are stamping on the fundamental rights 
of women and girls in particular. That barbarity is 
directed against every one of us, and against everything 
for which the United Nations stands.

Precisely for that reason, our response needs 
to go much further than the immediately necessary 
humanitarian and military response. Germany is 
making substantial contributions to both, including 
militarily. But all that must be part of a political alliance 
against the terror of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. 
My country is strongly committed to that alliance, and 
I very much hope in particular that the societies of the 
Middle East, realizing that far more is at stake than just 
their security, will also join.

In a world haunted both by old ghosts and new 
demons, we have to be able to pursue both paths. On the 
one hand, we must steadfastly continue to work towards 
political solutions in Ukraine, in the Middle East, in 
Syria, but at the same time we must tackle the huge 
tasks of the twenty-first century.

I am referring to the fight against climate change. 
Germany is contributing $1 billion dollars to the Green 
Climate Fund. And we will support our closest partner, 
France, on the road to a successful Paris climate summit 
in 2015 and to a universal and legally binding climate 
convention, which we urgently need.

I am also referring to the digital age. Yes, the 
Internet should be a global, free, open and safe space. 
But that is not a matter solely for Government agencies 
or big companies. That global, free, open and safe space 
must be shaped by society as a whole. If we fail to act, 
the vast technological possibilities will sweep aside the 
human dimension. We need an international law for the 
digital world. Resolution 68/167, which we introduced 
together with Brazil, has made a start in that direction, 
I hope, at the United Nations.

I am also referring to the post-2015 agenda, because 
the fight against poverty begins with asking how we 
actually create value. How do we create prosperity? 
That question is not only directed at a few countries 
in need of help. Rather, it is a call to the whole world 
for more sustainable economic activity. With its shift to 
renewable energies, Germany has set out on a path that, 
although not easy, is one the world must take if we want 
to preserve our natural resources and if the fight for 
scarce resources, water and arable land is not to become 
the major conflict of the twenty-first century.

Our children will judge us by those huge tasks. 
They will look back, just as we are looking back at 
our forebears in this year of commemoration. Having 
learned from two World Wars, our forebears established 
the United Nations as their lesson to us. If we want to 
continue that lesson, if we want to master the tasks 
facing us, then we must further develop this institution. 
The United Nations is not a finished product. Perhaps it 
will never be a finished product. It must evolve further, 
so that in all its parts, including the Security Council, it 
reflects today’s world.

I believe that the United Nations is worth every 
effort, for in it lives the world’s hope for peace and a 
legal order. I assure the Assembly that my country will 
play its part in making that hope a reality, step by step.
The 
Assembly will understand that I am speaking today 
with particular emotion, because one of my compatriots 
has just been the subject of a cowardly assassination in 
Algeria by a terrorist group linked to Daesh. His name 
was Hervé Gourdel. He was a man full of enthusiasm 
who loved mountains and thought that he would be able 
to pursue his passion by going to the Djurdjura area in 
Algeria. He was captured, and he was decapitated. That 
is what terrorism does. And it does not do that only to 
France. Several days ago it was American and British 
individuals subjected to the same barbarity.

That group — Daesh — does not strike only those 
who think differently from themselves; they also strike 
Muslims, they strike civilian populations, and they 
strike minorities. They rape, they kill. That is why 
the battle that the international community must wage 
against terrorism knows no borders. The same flag must 
be carried, that of the United Nations, that of the values 
for which this Organization was founded — human 
dignity, freedom, the vision we must have of a world of 
tomorrow, a world of justice.

France is fully engaged in this battle. That was 
the case in Africa when it was called to Mali, where, 
fortunately, it was joined by many African and European 
countries and now by the United Nations. France has 
been engaged whenever there is a risk. But today it is 
in Iraq and Syria where that threat exists. But it does 
not concern that region alone, because the Daesh group 
has decided not only to conquer territory, imagining 
that it will found a State; it threatens the entire world 
by provoking attacks, organizing kidnappings and 
recruiting fighters from around the world to train them 
and show them the barbarity of which the group is 
capable, so they may reproduce that horrific terrorist 
movement in our own countries.

It is because this threat exists not only for the 
region but for the world that France responded to the 
Iraqi authorities’ appeal to provide them first with 
military aid through the delivery of weapons this past 
August and also with aerial support to keep the Daesh 
group from being able to continue its advance. We want 
to weaken it. We want to quash it.

But we also know that as long as there is no 
settlement of the Syrian crisis, all our efforts risk being 
undermined. So the challenge is not only to act against 
Daesh, but also to achieve a political solution. We in 
France support the democratic Syrian opposition. We 
consider it the sole legitimate representative of the 
Syrian people. In that case, too, we will not back down; 
we will not compromise because of threats. The Bashar 
Al-Assad regime deserves to be condemned because 
they are complicit in what has been going on for the 
past three years in Syria — 200,000 deaths and so 
many displaced persons.

This is a sad time for France, with the death — the 
murder — of one of our citizens, but France will never 
give in to blackmail, pressure or barbarous acts. On the 
contrary, France knows what is expected of it. France 
knows that it upholds values, France knows it has a role 
to play and will never abandon that role, and that the 
fight against terrorism will be continued and expanded 
as much as necessary within respect for the rule of law 
and the sovereignty of States, for we make no mistake 
when we act. We will always act with respect for the 
principles of the United Nations.

I also wanted to talk to about other things, but 
it must be understood that a great question is being 
asked of my country and also of the Assembly. When 
faced with barbarism, with terrorism, will we remain 
spectators, or will we be actors together in what should 
be a just international order? The question, if we do 
not respond to it, or if we respond too weakly, then 
terrorists will continue their business of recruitment 
and indoctrination. It is not weakness that will be the 
response to terrorism; it is force — the force of law, 
the force of the United Nations. At a certain point also, 
it will be the force of military action when it becomes 
necessary.

I also wanted to talk about other regions of the 
world that are facing threats that also affect our own 
security. I want to talk to the Assembly about the Ebola 
epidemic, because I know just how much it is affecting 
our African friends. But again, let us look beyond those 
who are affected. Who can imagine that the epidemic 
will remain confined to just a few countries if we do 
not intervene? It is also a global threat. Again, the 
response must be a global. Therefore, France, Europe 


and the world must provide to the countries affected by 
the epidemic the necessary medical care, indispensable 
protection and economic assistance that is expected. 
Because again, if there is the slightest weakness, the 
slightest failure to show solidarity, all of our countries 
will be affected.

I have also come here before the General Assembly 
to speak about what is happening in Europe and next to 
Europe, to speak about what occurred in Ukraine and 
the failures there to uphold principles of international 
law. But what is at stake today, even in Europe, is peace 
and ensuring that the ceasefire that was agreed can be 
transformed into a lasting solution to the conflict.

No continent has been spared from any threat. 
Everything is fragile, everything is precarious, 
everything is vulnerable. We have to have the same 
awareness of the risks, the dangers and the perils that 
we had right after the Second World War. We must not 
think that all we have to do is remember; we have to 
think of the future, of the world we want. The world 
that we want is the final subject I wish to address here.

The world that we want has to be one of profound 
change. The present disorder also threatens not only 
our generation but naturally those that will follow 
us. It threatens our very security, as there are more 
displaced persons resulting from climate imbalance 
than from wars, which are sadly so intense and deadly 
on our planet. France has lived up to its responsibilities 
in that area too. We decided to organize the climate 
conference in December 2015. I am pleased that thanks 
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, there was a summit 
here that mobilized awareness, States, financial 
institutions, businesses and civil society. Many events 
took place. We have to succeed at the Paris conference, 
not because it will take place in Paris, but because it is 
the world’s appointment with itself.

There are periods in history when we have the 
power to decide, and decide not just for ourselves but 
for humankind. This is one of those moments. Therefore 
in Paris, we have to do everything can be done to reach 
a comprehensive, binding agreement that differentiates 
according to levels of development, everything so that 
there can be that Green Climate Fund, to which France 
has contributed $1 billion for the coming years. I hope 
that other countries follow our example, because we 
need that Green Fund to allow less developed countries 
to grow and to succeed in their energy transition at the 
same time.

This is a sad moment that I am living today on 
behalf of France, that the French are experiencing, but 
it is also a moment of awakening and responsibility. For 
the world, for the planet, we must fight terrorism, we 
must act in favour of peace, we must reduce inequalities, 
we must also do our duty for future generations. We 
must ensure that the Paris conference is successful 
for the sake of the climate. We must make certain that 
the United Nations can remain faithful to the mandate 
given to it after a war — a terrible war. We are still 
facing challenges, but we are certain to meet them if we 
are united and come together to claim victory.This year we 
face extraordinary tests of our values and our resolve. 
In responding to the aggression against one of our 
Member States, Ukraine; in seeking peace in the Middle 
East; in dealing with the terrifying spread of the Ebola 
virus in West Africa; and in overcoming what I want to 
focus on today, which is the mortal threat we all face 

from the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) in Syria and Iraq. Deir ez-Zor is a province in 
eastern Syria. Home to the Al-Sheitaat tribe it was 
captured by ISIL last month. Seven hundred tribesmen 
were executed; many were beheaded. The vast majority 
were civilians, Muslims who refused to take an oath of 
allegiance to ISIL’s sick extremist world view and who 
paid for this with their lives. They are not alone. Across 
Syria and northern Iraq thousands have suffered the 
same fate — Muslims, both Sunni and Shia; Christians; 
Yazidis; people of every faith and none.

ISIL is not a problem restricted to just one region. It 
has murderous plans to expand its borders well beyond 
Iraq and Syria and to carry out terrorist atrocities right 
across the world. It is recruiting new fighters from all 
over the world. Five hundred have gone there from 
my country, Britain, and one of them almost certainly 
brutally murdered two American journalists and a 
British aid worker. This is a problem that affects us all 
and we must tackle it together.

There is not one person in this Hall who will view 
this challenge without reference to the past, whether in 
Iraq or in Afghanistan. Of course it is absolutely right 
that we should learn the lessons of the past, especially 
what happened in Iraq a decade ago. But we have to 
learn the right lessons — yes to careful preparation; 
no to rushing to join a conflict without a clear plan. 
But we must not be so frozen with fear that we do not 
do anything at all. Isolation and withdrawing from a 
problem like ISIL will only make matters worse.

We must not allow past mistakes to become an 
excuse for indifference or inaction. The right lesson is 
that we should act, but act differently. We should be 
comprehensive, defeating the ideology of extremism 
that is the root cause of this terrorism, so that we win the 
battle of ideas and not just the battle of military might. 
We should be intelligent, supporting representative and 
accountable Governments and working with them at 
their request, not going in over their heads. We should 
be inclusive, working with partners in the region who 
are prepared to be part of the solution, potentially 
including Iran. We should be uncompromising, using 
all the means at our disposal, including military force, 
to hunt down these extremists. Let me take each of 
these in turn.

The root cause of this terrorist threat is a poisonous 
ideology of Islamist extremism. This has nothing 
to do with Islam, which is a peaceful religion that 
inspires countless acts of generosity every day. Islamist 
extremism on the other hand believes in using the most 
brutal forms of terrorism to force people to accept a 
warped world view and to live in a quasi-mediaeval 
state. To defeat ISIL, and organizations like it, we must 
defeat this ideology in all its forms.

As evidence emerges about the backgrounds of 
those convicted of terrorist offences, it is clear that 
many of them were initially influenced by preachers 
who claim not to encourage violence but whose world 
view can be used as a justification for it. We know 
this world view. The peddling of lies — that 9/11 was 
somehow a Jewish plot, or that the 7/7 London attacks 
were staged; the idea that Muslims are persecuted all 
over the world as a deliberate act of Western policy; and 
the concept of an inevitable clash of civilizations.

We must be clear. To defeat the ideology of 
extremism we need to deal with all forms of extremism, 
not just violent extremism. For governments there 
are some obvious ways we can do this. We must ban 
preachers of hate from coming to our countries. We must 
proscribe organizations that incite terrorism against 
people at home and abroad. We must work together 
to take down illegal online material like the recent 
videos of ISIL murdering hostages. We must stop the 
so-called non-violent extremists from inciting hatred 
and intolerance in our schools, universities and even 
our prisons. Of course, some will argue that this is not 
compatible with free speech and intellectual inquiry. 
But I ask “Would we sit back and allow right-wing 
extremists, Nazis or Ku Klux Klansmen to recruit on 
our university campuses?” No, so we should not stand 
by and just allow any form of non-violent extremism.

We need to argue that prophecies of a global war 
of religion pitting Muslims against the rest of the world 
are nonsense. We need Muslims and their Governments 
throughout the world to reclaim their religion from 
these sick terrorists as so many are doing, and quite 
rightly doing, today. We all need to help them with 
programmes that channel young people away from 
these poisonous ideologues, and we need the strongest 
possible international focus on tackling this ideology, 
which is why here at the United Nations the United 
Kingdom is calling for a new Special Representative 
on extremism.

But fighting extremism will never be enough. 
Communism was defeated not simply by pointing out its 
flaws, but by showing that the alternative of economic 
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law could build a 
better society and a better world. Young people need 


to see the power of a different, better, more open, 
more democratic path. The twentieth century taught 
us the vital role of representative and accountable 
Governments in offering their people opportunity, hope 
and dignity.

Of course we should not be naïve. Not every 
country can move at the same speed or even reach the 
same destination. We should respect different cultures, 
traditions and histories. But let us be clear — the failure 
to meet people’s aspirations can create a breeding 
ground where extremist and even terrorist insurgency 
can take root. Governments that only govern for some 
of their people cause deep resentment. In Iraq, the 
failure of the Al-Maliki Government to represent all of 
the people has driven some of them into the arms of the 
extremists.

Too often, people have been faced with a false choice 
between an autocratic and unrepresentative government 
on the one hand and a brutal insurgency, with religion 
misused as its rallying call, on the other. To combat this 
we must support the building blocks of free and open 
societies. In Iraq this means supporting the creation of 
a new and genuinely inclusive Government capable of 
uniting all Iraqis — Sunnis, Shia, Kurd, Christians and 
others. In Syria, it must mean a political transition and 
an end to Al-Assad’s brutality.

I know there are some who think that we should 
do a deal with Al-Assad in order to defeat ISIL. But I 
think this view is dangerously misguided. Our enemies’ 
enemy is not our friend; it is another enemy. Doing a 
deal with Al-Assad will not defeat ISIL because the 
bias and the brutality of the Al-Assad regime were and 
are one of the most powerful recruiting tools for the 
extremists. Syria needs what Iraq needs — an inclusive, 
representative, democratic Government that can look 
after the interests of all its peoples.

To those who have backed Al-Assad or who have 
stood on the sidelines, I would say this: “We are ready 
to join with you in a new political effort to secure 
a representative and accountable Government in 
Damascus that can take the fight to ISIL”. It is simply 
not credible for Al-Assad to lead such a government 
although we are prepared to look at every practical 
option to find a way forward.

We must be inclusive, engaging the widest possible 
coalition of countries in this international effort. ISIL is 
a threat to us all, but the greatest threat is to the region. 
It is very welcome that a number of Arab countries 
have already taken part in the action to degrade ISIL. 
They have shown courage and leadership. Iran should 
also be given the chance to show it can be part of the 
solution, not part of the problem. Earlier today I met 
with President Rouhani. We have severe disagreements. 
Iran’s support for terrorist organizations, its nuclear 
programme, and its treatment of its people all need to 
change. But Iran’s leaders could help in defeating the 
threat from ISIL. They could help to secure a more 
stable, inclusive Iraq, and a more stable and inclusive 
Syria. If they are prepared to do this, we should 
welcome their engagement.

Finally, when the safety and security of our 
people are at stake, we must be uncompromising in 
our response. That starts at home. For our part, in 
the United Kingdom we are introducing new powers 
to strengthen our ability to seize passports and stop 
suspects from travelling; to allow us to strip British 
identity from dual nationals and temporarily prevent 
some British nationals getting back into our country; 
to ensure that airlines comply with our no fly lists 
and security screening requirements; and to enable 
our police and security services to apply for stronger 
locational constraints on those in the United Kingdom 
who pose a risk. Here at the United Nations we have 
led in the adoption of a Security Council resolution to 
disrupt the flows of finance to ISIL, to sanction those 
who are seeking to recruit to ISIL and to encourage 
countries to do all they can to prevent foreign fighters 
joining the extremist cause.

What about the role of our military? I do not believe 
that the treat of Islamist extremism will best be solved 
by Western ground troops directly trying to pacify or 
reconstruct Middle Eastern or African countries. But, 
pursuing an intelligent and comprehensive approach 
should include a place for our military. Our military 
can support the enormous humanitarian efforts that 
are necessary, as our Royal Air Force did in helping 
the millions of people who fled from ISIL. We should, 
together, do more to build the capability of the legitimate 
authorities that are fighting the extremists. That can 
mean training, equipping and advising, and providing 
technology and the other assets necessary for success. 
Whether it is supporting action against Boko Haram in 
Nigeria, against Al-Shabaab in Somalia, against Ansar 
al-Sharia in Libya, or against Al-Qaida in Yemen, it is 
right to help those who are fighting on the front line for 
their societies, their countries and their freedom.


Along with our European partners, we have already 
been supplying equipment directly to Kurdish forces. 
We are strengthening the resilience of the military 
forces in neighbouring Lebanon and Jordan, and 
British Tornado and surveillance aircraft have already 
been helping with intelligence gathering and logistics 
support to help those taking on ISIL in Iraq.

We now have a substantial international coalition in 
place, including Arab nations, committed to confronting 
and defeating ISIL. We have a comprehensive strategy 
to do that, with the political, diplomatic, humanitarian 
and military components that are needed to succeed 
over time. The Security Council has now received a 
clear request from the Iraqi Government to support it 
in its military action against ISIL. So we have a clear 
basis in international law for action, and we have a need 
to act in our own national interest to protect our people 
and our society. It is right that Britain should now move 
to a new phase of action. I am therefore recalling the 
British Parliament on Friday to secure approval for the 
United Kingdom to take part in international air strikes 
against ISIL in Iraq.

My message today is simple. We are facing an evil 
against which the whole world should unite. As ever, in 
the cause of freedom, democracy and justice, Britain 
will play its part.

At the outset, I would like 
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.

It is a truly a great honour for me to address the 
Assembly for the first time as Prime Minister of India. 
I am humbled by the hopes and expectations of the 
people of India. I am also mindful of the expectations 
of the world from our 1.25 billion people.

My country, India, is home to one sixth of 
the world’s population. It is a nation experiencing 
economic and social transformation on a scale rarely 
seen in the history of the world. Every country’s world 
view is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
traditions. India’s ancient wisdom sees the world as one 
family, and when I say this, I wish to make it clear that 
each country has its philosophy. I am not talking about 
ideology. With the inspiration of that philosophy, a 
country marches ahead. India is a country that since its 
Vedic times, has been saying that the world, the entire 
globe, is a family. India is a country where, beyond 
nature, we have a communication, a dialogue, with 
nature. We never struggle with nature. That is a part 
of Indian life. The reason is that with that philosophy, 
India has been moving forward. Each country and each 
nation is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
tradition. India’s ancient wisdom, as I have said, sees 
the world as one family. India is a country that not only 
speaks for itself but for worldwide justice, dignity, 
opportunity and prosperity. We have always spoken out 
in support of such issues.

Owing to our ideology, we have a firm belief in 
multilateralism. Today, as I stand here, I am equally 
aware of the hopes and expectations that are pinned on 
the General Assembly. I am struck by the sacred belief 
that brought us together. We established the Organization 
on the basis of great principles and perspectives, in the 
belief that if our futures are connected, we will have to 
work together for peace and security, for human rights 
and for the economic development of all. We must work 
together to those ends. At that time, there were only 
51 countries. Today, 193 sovereign flags fly in front of 
this building. Each new country enters on the basis of 
the same belief and expectation.

In the past six decades, we have been able to achieve 
a great deal. We have ended many wars. We have 
established and maintained peace. We have assisted 
economic development in many places. We have helped 
to build a future for poor children. We have contributed 
towards the elimination of starvation and strived to 
save our planet. The 69 United Nations peacekeeping 
missions have made the Blue Helmet a symbol of peace 
in the world.

Today, there is a surge of democracy across the 
world. The peaceful democratic transformation in 
Afghanistan shows that the Afghan people’s aspiration 
for peace will definitely triumph over violence. We 
have seen Nepal emerge from war towards peace and 
democracy. Bhutan’s young democracy is flourishing. 
There are also efforts towards democracy in West Asia 
and North Africa. Tunisia’s success shows that such a 
path of democracy is possible. In Africa, there is a new 
momentum for stability, peace and progress, and a new 
awareness is on the horizon.

We have seen unprecedented prosperity in Asia and 
beyond founded on strengthened peace and stability. 
Latin America, a continent of enormous potential, is 
coming together in the shared pursuit of stability and 
prosperity. That continent may prove to be an important 
anchor for the global community. India looks forward to 
a peaceful and stable environment for its development. 
Our future is linked to our neighbourhood. That is why, 
from the very first day, my Government gave the highest 
priority to promoting friendship and cooperation with 
our neighbouring countries.

I have the same policy towards Pakistan. I want 
to hold serious bilateral talks with Pakistan in order 
to improve friendship and cooperation in a peaceful 
atmosphere, without the shadow of terrorism. I want 
to hold bilateral talks with that country. However, it 
is also Pakistan’s responsibility to come forward and 
to genuinely establish the appropriate atmosphere for 
bilateral talks. In raising that issue in this forum, I do 
not know how successful our efforts will be. Some 
people are doubtful.

Today, we need to assist the victims of the floods 
in Kashmir. In India, we have organized large-scale 
assistance. We have not stopped at only India helping 
Kashmir. We have also asked Pakistan to assist, since 
that area was also affected by the floods. We have told 
Pakistan that just as we were helping the flood victims 
in India, we would also like to help those in Pakistan. 
We have proposed that. We are a part of the developing 
world but have limited resources. We would like to 
share our modest resources with all those who are in 
dire need of assistance.

Today, the world is witnessing a high level of 
tension and turmoil. There are no major wars, but 
tension and conflict abound. There is an absence of 
peace and uncertainty about the future. Even today, 
there is rampant poverty everywhere. The Asia-Pacific 

region, which is integrating, is still concerned about 
maritime security. That is fundamental to its future. 
Europe faces a new threat of division. In West Asia, 
the dividing lines and terrorism are increasing. In our 
own region, we are still struggling to combat terrorism 
and instability. For the past four decades, we have faced 
such a threat.

Terrorism emerges in new forms and under new 
names. Be it small or large, in the North, the South, 
the East or the West, no country is free from threats. 
I remember when I met with world leaders 20 years 
ago, and we talked about terrorism. They did not quite 
understand it and stated that it was a law-and-order 
problem. Today, the entire world is witness to the slow 
spread of terrorism far and wide.

Are we really making integrated efforts at the 
international level to fight against those powerful 
groups? I know that terrorism is a very serious problem 
for discussion. Even today, some countries are giving 
refuge to international terrorists, and they consider 
terrorism a tool of their policy. Good terrorism and bad 
terrorism — that is what we hear these days. At this 
time, there is a question mark regarding our struggle to 
fight against terrorism. The brutal return of terrorism 
in West Asia and its impact on countries far and near 
has elicited a concerted effort, which we welcome. 
However, the effort should involve all the countries of 
the region. If we want to overcome terrorism, then they 
must all contribute towards its eradication. We strongly 
emphasize this.

Oceans, seas, space and cyberspace, besides 
contributing to our common wealth and prosperity, are 
becoming new theatres of conflict. In the same oceans 
that used to connect us, we are today hearing news of 
disputes. We once saw space as holding out potential 
for our achievements. Today, in cyberspace, which 
connects us in important areas, new dangers are being 
seen. International harmony and cooperation — on 
which the United Nations was founded — are needed 
now more than ever before. Today, we talk about an 
interdependent world, but have we become more united 
as nations? We need to think about that.

Why, when we have a good forum like the United 
Nations, do we keep creating so many different groups? 
There is the Group of Four, the Group of Seven and 
the Group of 20 — and the numbers keep changing. 
Whether or not we really want to do so, we, including 
India, become members of them. Is it not the time to 
move on and leave behind those groups? When the 
United Nations celebrates its seventieth anniversary, 
how do we create a Group-of-All atmosphere? How can 
the General Assembly create an opportunity to solve 
all our problems? How can people begin to be more 
trustful? How can we become less competitive? We talk 
about unity, but then we divide the whole into different 
parts and pieces. Can we prevent ourselves from doing 
so?

On the one hand, we say that our policies are 
interconnected; on the other, we think in terms of 
zero-sum gains. We think that if the other benefits, I 
stand to lose. Who receives the benefit and who suffers 
the loss? That is what we appear to be weighing. The 
pessimists are cynical. Like them, we are inclined to 
say nothing will change. It is easy to be cynical and 
to say nothing will change. But if we do that, we run 
the risk of shirking our responsibilities and putting our 
collective future in danger.

We must unite and prepare to meet the needs of our 
times. We must really work for global peace. No one 
country or group of countries can determine the course 
of the world or its policies. It is imperative to have 
genuine international participation and partnership. We 
should try to promote positive dialogue and cooperation 
among countries. Our efforts must begin at the United 
Nations.

It is important that we improve the Security Council 
by making it more democratic and participative. 
Institutions that reflect the imperatives of the twentieth 
century will not be effective in the twenty-first century. 
They face the risk of irrelevance. I would like to 
emphasize that the policies and rules we made in the 
twentieth century may no longer be applicable. The 
speed of change is very fast. It is therefore essential 
that, in tune with the times, we adapt and reformulate, 
making the necessary changes and introducing new 
ideas. Only when we have done that will we be relevant.

We should set aside all our differences and mount 
a concerted international effort to combat terrorism 
and extremism. Towards that end, we should adopt a 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
That is something which is long overdue. It must be 
emphasized that our combined strength to fight against 
terrorism should be reflected in the convention. Our 
country, which has endured so many terrorist attacks, 
knows that, so long as the United Nations fails to take 
the initiative in that effort, and so long as we do not 
adopt a convention, we cannot be successful. In such 
work, we must not forget to make provision for peace, 

stability and order in outer space and cyberspace. We 
must work together to ensure that all countries observe 
international rules and norms.

We must include the host countries and troop-
contributing countries in our decision-making on 
United Nations peacekeeping. If they are included, their 
confidence will increase considerably. They are ready 
to make major sacrifices and to give their time and 
energy. But if they are excluded from decision-making, 
then how can United Nations peacekeeping become 
more vital and urgent? We need to seriously consider 
that. Today, let us redouble our efforts in pursuit of 
global disarmament. Let us also spare no effort to 
ensure that we work tirelessly towards those goals.

Globalization has created new industries and 
sources of employment. At the same time, billions live 
in the shadow of poverty. A great many countries are 
suffering economic deprivation, barely keeping their 
heads above water. What seems so difficult today was 
never so difficult in the past. Technology has made many 
things possible. Reduction in the cost of technology has 
made it more widely available. If we think of the speed 
with which Facebook or Twitter have spread around the 
world and cell-phone use has proliferated, then we must 
also believe that development and empowerment can 
spread with the same speed.

It is up to each country to make its own efforts 
at the national level. Each Government must fulfil its 
responsibilities. International participation is also very 
important. At one level, it requires better coordination 
of policy, so that our efforts become mutually 
supportive, not mutually damaging. It also means that, 
when we craft agreements on international trade, we 
accommodate one another’s concerns and interests.

Let us think about the scale of the need. Today, 
basic sanitation is out of the reach of 2.5 billion people; 
1.3 billion have no access to electricity and 1.1 billion 
no access to drinking water. That makes it clear that 
more comprehensive and concerted international action 
is required. We cannot keep waiting for economic 
development. In India, the most important aspects of 
my development agenda are focused precisely on those 
very issues, which should also be at the core of the post-
2015 development agenda, as they deserve our utmost 
attention.

A world that is more habitable and sustainable is an 
objective we must work towards. There has been much 
debate and much written about that, but it takes only a 
brief glance around our countries to become concerned. 
We are very concerned indeed about issues relating to 
forests, wildlife, birds, rivers, water sources and the 
blue sky above.

I would like to address three points. First, if we 
are to meet all of the challenges, we must fully uphold 
our responsibilities. The global community has 
agreed to work together on the basis of common but 
differentiated responsibility. That must continue to be 
the foundation of future action. That also means that 
developed countries must fulfil their commitments in 
terms of funding and technology transfer.

Secondly, national action is imperative. Technology 
has made many things possible, such as renewable 
energy. We need imagination and commitment. India 
stands ready to share its technology and capabilities, as 
for example through the recently announced free access 
to a satellite.

Thirdly, we need to change our lifestyles. Avoiding 
energy use is the cleanest option and would give a 
new direction to our economy. For us in India, respect 
for nature is fundamental and an integral part of 
spiritualism. It is part of our ideology.

I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to 
another idea. When we talk of climate change, we are 
also talking about holistic health care, connecting with 
nature and going back to basics. Today, I would like 
to underscore that yoga is an invaluable gift from our 
ancient tradition. Yoga embodies unity of mind and 
body, thought and action. It is important to coordinate 
all of those aspects. Such a holistic approach is valuable 
to our health and our well-being. Yoga is not just about 
exercise; it is a way to discover the sense of oneness 
with yourself, the world and nature. By changing our 
lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can also help us 
deal with climate change. Let us work towards adopting 
an international yoga day.

Finally, we are at a historic moment. Every age is 
defined by its character and remembered for how it 
rose to meet its challenges. Today, we are responsible 
to rise and meet those challenges. Next year, the United 
Nations will be 70 years old. We should ask ourselves 
whether we should wait until we are 80 or 100 years 
old to take action. I believe that next year will provide 
an opportunity for the United Nations. After a voyage 
spanning 70 years, we shall be able to look back and 
review what we have achieved, whence we began, 
why we left certain places, what motivated us, how 

we proceeded and what we have attained. What are 
the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century? If 
we can keep all of that in mind, through exchanges of 
views, dialogue with universities, and intergenerational 
discussions with young people, who can contribute 
ideas, then we will find the ways to connect all of those 
things for future generations.

That is why I say that arriving at the milestone 
of 70 years presents us with a great opportunity that 
we should not waste. By taking full advantage of this 
moment, we could achieve a new consciousness, a new 
life, with new ambitions and aspirations. We could 
give the journey of the United Nations a new form. I 
therefore feel that 70 years is a great opportunity for 
us. Let us come together and fulfil our promise to bring 
improvements to the Security Council. That issue has 
been before us for a long time, yet there has not been 
much progress. We need to think very seriously about 
it.

In preparing and implementing the post-2015 
development agenda, let us come together to keep our 
promises. For 2015, let us come together to give a new 
direction and make the moment memorable by giving 
the world a new lease on development. The year 2015 
should be a banner year in history — a turning point 
in history. I hope that we will all live up to its promise.
I come here from 
Jerusalem to speak on behalf of my people, the people 
of Israel. I have come to speak about the dangers we 
face and about the opportunities we seek. I have come 
to expose the brazen lies spoken from this very rostrum 
about my country and the brave soldiers who defend it.

The people of Israel pray for peace, but our hopes 
for peace, and those of the world, are in danger, because 
everywhere we look militant Islam is on the march. It 
is not militants; it is not Islam; it is militant Islam, and 
typically, its first victims are other Muslims. But it 
spares no one. Christians, Jews, Yazidis, Kurds — no 
creed, no faith, no ethnic group is beyond its sights, 
and it is rapidly spreading in every part of the world. 
We know the famous American saying “All politics is 
local”. For the militant Islamists, all politics is global, 
because their ultimate goal is to dominate the world.

Now that threat might seem exaggerated to some, 
since it starts out small, like a cancer that attacks a 
particular part of the body. But left unchecked, the 
cancer grows, metastasizing over wider and wider 
areas. To protect the peace and security of the world, 
we must remove that cancer before it is too late. Last 
week, many of the countries represented here rightly 
applauded President Obama for leading the effort 
to confront the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham 
(ISIS); and yet weeks before, some of those same 
countries — the same countries that now support 
confronting ISIS — opposed Israel for confronting 
Hamas. Evidently, they do not understand that ISIS and 
Hamas are branches of the same poisonous tree.

ISIS and Hamas share a fanatical creed that they 
both seek to impose well beyond the territory under their 


control. Let us listen to what ISIS’s self-declared Caliph, 
Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, said two months ago. He said 
that the day would soon come when the Muslim would 
walk everywhere as a master, and that Muslims would 
cause the world to hear and understand the meaning of 
terrorism, and destroy the idol of democracy. Now let 
us listen to Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas. He 
proclaims a similar vision of the future. “We say this to 
the West”, he says. “By Allah it will be defeated, and 
tomorrow our nation will sit on the throne of the world”.

As its Charter makes clear, Hamas’s immediate 
goal is to destroy Israel; but it has a broader objective. 
It also wants a caliphate. Hamas shares the global 
ambitions of its fellow militant Islamists, and that is 
why its supporters cheered wildly in the streets of Gaza 
when thousands of Americans were murdered on 9/11. 
That is why its leaders condemned the United States 
for killing Osama Bin Laden, whom they praised as a 
holy warrior. When it comes to their ultimate goals, 
therefore, Hamas is ISIS and ISIS is Hamas.

And what they share in common, all militant 
Islamists share in common — Boko Haram in Nigeria, 
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Hizbullah in Lebanon, Al-Nusra 
in Syria, the Al-Mahdi Army in Iraq and the Al-Qaida 
branches in Yemen, Libya, the Philippines, India and 
elsewhere. Some are radical Sunnis, some are radical 
Shiites. Some want to restore a pre-medieval caliphate 
from the seventh century. Others want to trigger the 
apocalyptic return of an imam from the ninth century.

They operate in different lands. They target 
different victims. They even kill each other in their 
battle for supremacy. But they all share a fanatic 
ideology. They all seek to create ever expanding 
enclaves of militant Islam, where there is no freedom 
and no tolerance, where women are treated as chattel, 
Christians are decimated and minorities are subjugated, 
and sometimes given the stark choice: convert or die. 
For them, anyone can be consider an infidel, including 
fellow Muslims.

Militant Islam’s ambition to dominate the world 
seems mad, but so too did the global ambitions of 
another fanatic ideology that swept into power eight 
decades ago. The Nazis believed in a master race. The 
militant Islamists believe in a master faith. They just 
disagree as to who among them will be the master of 
the master faith. That is what they truly disagree about. 
Therefore, the question before us is whether militant 
Islam will have the power to realize its unbridled 
ambitions.

There is one place where that could soon 
happen — the Islamic State of Iran. For 35 years, Iran 
has relentlessly pursued the global mission that was set 
forth by its founding ruler, Ayatollah Khomeini, with 
the following words:

“We will export our revolution to the entire world, 
until the cry ‘There is no God but Allah’ will echo 
throughout the world over”.
Ever since, the regime’s brutal enforcers, Iran’s 
Revolutionary Guards, have done exactly that. Let us 
listen to its current commander, General Mohammad 
Ali Jafari, who clearly stated that goal:
“Our Imam did not limit the Islamic Revolution to 
this country. Our duty is to prepare the way for an 
Islamic world Government.”
Iran’s president, Mr. Rouhani, stood here last 
week and shed crocodile tears over what he called the 
globalization of terrorism. Maybe he should spare us 
those phony tears and have a word instead with the 
commanders of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards. He could 
ask them to call off Iran’s global terror campaign, 
which has included attacks in two dozen countries 
on five continents since 2011 alone. To say that Iran 
does not practice terrorism is like saying Derek Jeter 
never played shortstop for the New York Yankees. The 
bemoaning by the Iranian President of the spread of 
terrorism has got to be one of history’s greatest displays 
of double talk.

Some argue that Iran’s global terror campaign — its 
subversion of countries throughout the Middle East 
and well beyond the Middle East — is the work of the 
extremists. They say that things are changing. They 
point to last year’s election in Iran. They claim that 
Iran’s smooth-talking President and Foreign Minister 
have changed not only the tone of Iran’s foreign policy 
but also its substance. They believe that Rouhani and 
Zarif generally want to reconcile with the West, that 
they have abandoned the global mission of the Islamic 
Revolution. Really?

Let us look at what Foreign Minister Zarif wrote in 
his book just a few years ago:

“We have a fundamental problem with the West, 
and especially with America. This is because we 
are heirs to a global mission which is tied to our 
raison d’être”. 
A global mission which is tied to our very 
reason for being? Then Zarif asks a question — an 
interesting question, in my view. He says, “How come 
Malaysia” — referring to an overwhelmingly Muslim 
country — “does not have similar problems?” Then he 
answers: “Because Malaysia is not trying to change the 
international order”. That is our moderate.
Let us not be fooled by Iran’s manipulative charm 
offensive. It is designed for one purpose and one purpose 
only — to have the sanctions lifted and the obstacles to 
Iran’s path to the bomb removed. The Islamic Republic 
is now trying to bamboozle its way to an agreement 
that will remove the sanctions it still faces and leave it 
with the capacity of thousands of centrifuges to enrich 
uranium. That would effectively cement Iran’s place as 
a threshold military nuclear Power. In the future, at the 
time of its choosing, Iran, the world’s most dangerous 
regime, in the world’s most dangerous region, would 
obtain the world’s most dangerous weapons. Allowing 
that to happen would pose the gravest threat to us all.

It is one thing to confront militant Islamists on 
pickup trucks armed with Kalashnikov rifles. It is 
another thing to confront militant Islamists armed with 
weapons of mass destruction. I remember that last year 
everyone here was rightly concerned about the chemical 
weapons in Syria, including the possibility that they 
would fall into the hands of terrorists. Well, that did 
not happen, and President Obama deserves great 
credit for leading the diplomatic effort to dismantle 
virtually all of Syria’s chemical weapons capability. 
We can only imagine how much more dangerous 
the Islamic State — ISIS — would be if it possessed 
chemical weapons. Now, let us imagine how much 
more dangerous the Islamic State of Iran would be if it 
possessed nuclear weapons.

Would you let ISIS enrich uranium? Would you let 
ISIS build a heavy-water reactor? Would you let ISIS 
develop intercontinental ballistic missiles? Of course 
you would not. Then you must not let the Islamic 
State of Iran do those things either, because if you do, 
here is what will happen. Once Iran produces atomic 
bombs, all the charm and all the smiles will suddenly 
disappear — they will just vanish. It is then that the 
ayatollahs will show their true face and unleash their 
aggressive fanaticism on the entire world.

There is only one responsible course of action to 
address this threat. Iran’s nuclear military capabilities 
must be fully dismantled. Make no mistake — ISIS 
must be defeated, but to defeat ISIS and leave Iran as 
a threshold nuclear Power is to win the battle and lose 
the war.

The fight against militant Islam is indivisible. When 
militant Islam succeeds anywhere, it is emboldened 
everywhere. When it suffers a blow in one place, it is set 
back in every place. That is why Israel’s fight against 
Hamas is not just our fight; it is everyone’s fight. Israel is 
fighting a fanaticism today that other countries may be 
forced to fight tomorrow. For 50 days this past summer, 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets at Israel, many of 
them supplied by Iran. I want members to think about 
what their countries would do if thousands of rockets 
were fired at their cities. Let them imagine millions 
of their citizens having seconds at most to scramble to 
bomb shelters, day after day. Members would not let 
terrorists fire rockets at their cities with impunity, nor 
would they let terrorists dig dozens of terror tunnels 
under their borders to infiltrate their towns in order to 
murder and kidnap their citizens. Israel justly defended 
itself against both rocket attacks and terror tunnels.

Yet Israel faced another challenge. We faced a 
propaganda war because, in an attempt to win the world’s 
sympathy, Hamas cynically used Palestinian civilians 
as human shields. It used schools — not just schools, 
United Nations schools — private homes, mosques 
and even hospitals to store and fire rockets at Israel. 
As Israel surgically struck at the rocket launchers and 
at the tunnels, Palestinian civilians were tragically but 
unintentionally killed. There are heartrending images 
that resulted, and these fuelled libellous charges that 
Israel was deliberately targeting civilians. We were not. 
We deeply regret every single civilian casualty.

And the truth is, Israel was doing everything to 
minimize Palestinian civilian casualties. Hamas was 
doing everything to maximize Israeli civilian casualties 
and Palestinian civilian casualties. Israel dropped 
flyers, made phone calls, sent text messages, broadcast 
warnings in Arabic on Palestinian television — all 
this to enable Palestinian civilians to evaluate targeted 
areas. No other country and no other army in history 
have gone to greater lengths to avoid casualties among 
the civilian population of their enemies.

Such concern for Palestinian life was all the more 
remarkable given that Israeli civilians were being 

bombarded by rockets, day after day, night after 
night. And as their families were being rocketed by 
Hamas, Israel’s citizen army, the brave soldiers of 
the Israel Defense Forces, our young boys and girls, 
upheld the highest moral values of any army in the 
world. Israel’s soldiers deserve not condemnation 
but admiration — admiration from decent people 
everywhere.

Here is what Hamas did. Hamas embedded 
its missile batteries in residential areas and told 
Palestinians to ignore Israel’s warnings to leave. 
And just in case people did not get the message, they 
executed Palestinian civilians in Gaza who dared to 
protest. And, no less reprehensible, Hamas deliberately 
placed its rockets where Palestinian children live and 
play.

Let me show the Assembly a photograph. It was 
taken by a France 24 crew during the recent conflict. 
It shows two Hamas rocket launchers, which were used 
to attack us. Three children can be seen playing next to 
them. Hamas deliberately put its rockets in hundreds 
of residential areas like this — hundreds of them. That 
is a war crime. I say to President Abbas, these are the 
crimes — the war crimes — committed by his Hamas 
partners in the national unity Government which he 
heads and for which he is responsible. These are the 
real war crimes he should have investigated or spoken 
out against from this rostrum last week.

As Israel’s children huddle in bomb shelters and 
Israel’s Iron Dome missile defence knocked Hamas 
rockets out of the sky, the profound moral difference 
between Israel and Hamas could not have been clearer. 
Israel was using its missiles to protect its children; 
Hamas was using its children to protect its missiles.

By investigating Israel rather than Hamas for war 
crimes, the United Nations Human Rights Council has 
betrayed its noble mission to protect the innocent. In 
fact, what it is doing is to turn the laws of war upside 
down. Israel, which took unprecedented steps to 
minimize civilian casualties, is condemned; Hamas, 
which both targeted and hid behind civilians — that is a 
double war crime — is given a pass. The Human Rights 
Council is thus sending a clear message to terrorists 
everywhere: “Use civilians as a human shield. Use 
them again and again and again.” And you know why? 
Because, sadly, it works. By granting international 
legitimacy to the use of human shields, the Human 
Rights Council has become a terrorist rights council, 
and it will have repercussions — it probably already 
has — in terms of the use of civilians as human shields. 
It is not just our interests and values that are under 
attack: it is the interests and values of all of us.

We live in a world steeped in tyranny and terror, 
where gays are hanged from cranes in Tehran, political 
prisoners are executed in Gaza, young girls are abducted 
en masse in Nigeria and hundreds of thousands are 
butchered in Syria, Libya and Iraq, yet nearly half of 
the Human Rights Council’s resolutions focusing on a 
single country have been directed against Israel — the 
one true democracy in the Middle East; Israel, where 
issues are openly debated in a boisterous Parliament, 
where human rights are protected by independent 
courts, and where women, gays and minorities live in a 
genuinely free society.

The biased treatment of Israel by the Human Rights 
Council — that is a misnomer, but I will use it just the 
same — is only one manifestation of the return of one 
of the world’s oldest prejudices. We hear mobs today in 
Europe calling for the gassing of Jews. We hear some 
national leaders compare Israel to the Nazis. This is 
not a function of Israel’s policies; it is a function of 
diseased minds, and that disease has a name. It is called 
anti-Semitism. It is now spreading in polite society 
where it masquerades as legitimate criticism of Israel. 
For centuries, the Jewish people have been demonized 
with blood libels and charges of deicide. Today, the 
Jewish State is demonized with the apartheid libel and 
charges of genocide.

In what moral universe does genocide include 
warning the enemy civilian population to get out 
of harm’s way or ensuring that they receive tons of 
humanitarian aid each day, even as thousands of rockets 
are being fired at us, or setting up a field hospital 
to aid their wounded? I suppose it is the same moral 
universe in which a man who wrote a dissertation of 
lies about the Holocaust and who insists on a Palestine 
free of Jews — Judenrein — can stand at this rostrum 
and shamelessly accuse Israel of genocide and ethnic 
cleansing. In the past, outrageous lies against the Jews 
were the precursors to the wholesale slaughter of our 
people. But no more; today, we the Jewish people have 
the power to defend ourselves. We will defend ourselves 
against our enemies on the battlefield and we will expose 
their lies against us in the court of public opinion. Israel 
will continue to stand proud and unbowed.

Despite the enormous challenges facing Israel, I 
believe we have a historic opportunity. After decades of 
seeing Israel as their enemy, leading States in the Arab 
world increasingly recognize that together we and they 
face many of the same dangers. Principally, that means 
a nuclear-armed Iran and militant Islamist movements 
gaining ground in the Sunni world. Our challenge is to 
transform those common interests in order to create a 
productive partnership that would build a more secure, 
peaceful and prosperous Middle East. Together we can 
strengthen regional security. We can advance projects 
in water, agriculture, transportation, health care, energy 
and so many other fields.

I believe that the partnership between us can also 
help facilitate peace between Israel and the Palestinians. 
Many have long assumed that an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace can help facilitate a broader rapprochement 
between Israel and the Arab world. But I believe that, 
these days, it may work the other way around, namely, 
that a broader rapprochement between Israel and the 
Arab world may help facilitate an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace. Therefore, to achieve that peace, we must look 
not only to Jerusalem and Ramallah but also to Cairo, 
Amman, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh and elsewhere. I believe 
that peace could be realized with the active involvement 
of Arab countries that are willing to provide political, 
material and other indispensable support.

I am ready to make a historic compromise, and not 
because Israel occupies a foreign land. The people of 
Israel are not occupiers in the land of Israel. History, 
archaeology and common sense all make clear that we 
have had a singular attachment to this land for over 
3,000 years. I want peace because I want to create a 
better future for my people. But it must be a genuine 
peace, one that is anchored in mutual recognition and 
enduring security arrangements — rock-solid security 
arrangements — on the ground. Israel’s withdrawal 
from Lebanon and Gaza created two militant Islamic 
enclaves on our borders from which tens of thousands 
of rockets have been fired at Israel. Those sobering 
experiences heighten Israel’s security concerns 
regarding potential territorial concessions in the future.

Those security concerns are even greater today. Let 
us just look around. The Middle East is in chaos. States 
are disintegrating, and militant Islamists are filling 
the void. Israel cannot have territories from which it 
withdraws taken over by Islamic militants yet again, 
as happened in Gaza and Lebanon. That would place 
the likes of ISIS within mortar range, a few miles of 
80 per cent of our population. Think about that. The 
distance between the 1967 lines and the suburbs of 
Tel Aviv is similar to the distance between United 
Nations Headquarters and Times Square. Israel is a tiny 
country. That is why in any peace agreement, which 
will obviously necessitate a territorial compromise, I 
will always insist that Israel be able to defend itself, by 
itself, against any threat.

Yet despite everything that has happened, some still 
do not take Israel’s security concerns seriously, but I do 
and I always will. That is because as Prime Minister of 
Israel I am entrusted with the awesome responsibility 
of ensuring the future of the Jewish people and the 
future of the Jewish State. No matter what pressure is 
brought to bear, I will never waver in fulfilling that 
responsibility.

I believe that with a fresh approach on the part 
of our neighbours, we can advance peace despite the 
difficulties we face. In Israel, we have a record of making 
the impossible possible. We have made a desolate land 
flourish, and with very few natural resources we have 
used the fertile minds of our people to turn Israel into 
a global centre of technology and innovation. Peace 
would enable Israel to realize its full potential and to 
bring a promising future not only to our people and not 
only to the Palestinian people, but to many, many others 
in our region. But the old template for peace must be 
updated. It must take into account new realities and 
new roles and responsibilities for our Arab neighbours.

There is a new Middle East. It presents new dangers 
but also new opportunities. Israel is prepared to work 
with Arab partners and the international community to 
confront those dangers and to seize those opportunities. 
Together, we must recognize the global threat of 
militant Islam, the primacy of dismantling Iran’s 
nuclear weapons capability, and the indispensable role 
of Arab States in advancing peace with the Palestinians. 
All that may fly in the face of conventional wisdom, but 
it is the truth. And the truth must always be spoken, 
especially in the United Nations. Isaiah, a great prophet 
of peace, taught us nearly 3,000 years ago in Jerusalem 
to speak truth to power. He said:

“For the sake of Zion, I will not be silent. For the 
sake of Jerusalem, I will not be still until her justice 
shines bright and her salvation glows like a flaming 
torch”.
Let us light a torch of truth and justice to safeguard 
our common future.

It is an honour to 
address the General Assembly today on behalf of the 
Prime Minister and Government of New Zealand. Our 
general election took place in the past week. Our Prime 
Minister, the Right Honourable John Key, is engaged in 
forming a Government, and that is why he is unable to 
be in New York today.

I want to begin by acknowledging the success of 
the recent third International Conference on Small 
Island Developing States, held in Samoa. The success 
of the Conference was the result of the extraordinary 
work Samoa put into preparing for the Conference and 
the ownership of the agenda that was demonstrated by 
the small island developing States (SIDS). While it is 
undoubtedly true that small island developing States 
have placed great value on the opportunity to talk, it 
is also true that there was an undertone of frustration, 
born of the fact that too often in the past talk has not 
been followed by action. I strongly identify with that 
view. The multilateral world is awash with talk of plans 
and strategies and funds, while out there in the real 
world of small island developing States, not enough is 
happening on the ground. My country, New Zealand, is 
intent on avoiding that shortcoming, especially in our 
own region, the Pacific.

Renewable energy featured strongly in the SIDS 
Conference agenda, as it had at the Secretary-General’s 
2014 Climate Summit in the past week. Pacific nations 
spend 10 per cent of their gross domestic product and up 
to 30 per cent of their entire import bills on importing 
diesel fuel for electricity generation. Sustainable 
economic development therefore simply cannot happen 
in our region without renewable energy.

Significant progress is being achieved, especially 
since the Pacific Energy Summit 2013 that we co-hosted 
with the European Union in Auckland in March 2013, 
at which $635 million in funding was committed for 
over 50 projects. The Tokelau Islands have moved from 
100 per cent dependence on fossil fuels to 93 per cent 
renewable. During the SIDS Conference itself, we 
opened a 2.2-megawatt plant, a solar array in Samoa. 
A year earlier we opened a 1.2-megawatt plant in 
Tonga. Next month, we will open a 1-megawatt array in 
Rarotonga. And in the next 12 months, all of the outer 
islands of Tuvalu and all but one of the outer Cook 
Islands will be close to 100 per cent renewable. 

We are making real progress towards converting 
our Pacific neighbourhood to renewable energy, 
bringing significant environmental benefits and 
greatly enhancing prospects for sustainable economic 
development. My country has committed over 
$100 million to that process. We are not waiting for a 
new multilateral agreement or a new green fund. We 
are simply getting ahead with robust partnerships and 
making it happen.

Another key topic at the SIDS Conference was 
sustainable fisheries. For our region, that is critically 
important. The biggest economic asset in the Pacific 
is its fisheries. In the past year, over $3.3 billion worth 
of tuna was harvested from Pacific waters, yet only 
14 per cent of that value, about $460 million, made 
its way back to Pacific nations. New Zealand has 
committed over $70 million over the next five years 
to advance a comprehensive approach that includes 
enhanced surveillance, training of monitors, training 
in commercial fishing practices, research and science 
initiatives and improving management practices. Our 
objective is to see the owners of the Pacific tuna resource 
receive a significantly greater share of the value of that 
resource, and to ensure that it is sustainably managed 
for the future.

A key message from the SIDS Conference is the need 
to share experiences and skills among the SIDS regions. 
That is starting to happen. Fisheries management is a 
prime candidate for greater cooperation. We have also 
commenced a process of interregional cooperation in 
renewable energy by supporting the development of 
geothermal energy in the Caribbean and Africa.

While small island developing States are showing 
real leadership in addressing climate change and 
shifting to renewable energy, those issues require action 
on a global scale. We therefore commend the Secretary-
General for convening the Climate Summit here in 
New York last week. We are participating actively in 
those negotiations and hope they will pave the way for 
a successful conclusion in Paris next year. We have 
made an initial commitment to the Green Climate 
Fund to show our support for the global effort, but we 
will unashamedly continue to prioritize making real 
progress with real projects in our own region, which 
will continue to consume the bulk of our resources.

The other major event that has recently taken place 
in the Pacific is the election in Fiji. We congratulate the 
Prime Minister, his party and the people of Fiji on their 
successful return to democratic rule. Fiji’s successful 
elections are hugely important for the region. I am 
delighted that following the preliminary report of the 
multinational observers group, both the Pacific Islands 
Forum and the Commonwealth have commenced the 
process of lifting Fiji’s suspension. We look forward to 
rebuilding and strengthening the connections between 
us. Neither New Zealand nor Fiji can contemplate a 
future that does not entail close and continuing links 
with the other. We also welcomed the safe return of the 
Fiji peacekeepers who were held hostage in the Golan 
Heights. That incident again underlined the great 
challenges and the dangers faced by United Nations 
peacekeepers and the responsibilities we all have to 
ensure the safety and security of peacekeeping and 
other United Nations personnel.

It is as well that we are able to note some bright 
spots for our region, because the situation in other parts 
of the world does look bleak. 

What happened over the past few months in 
Gaza was an affront to humanity. No good was done 
for the cause of Palestine by Hamas firing rockets 
indiscriminately into Israel. No good was done for peace 
in the Middle East by Israel pounding Gaza with such 
intensity and at such cost of civilian lives. We welcome 
the ceasefire that was agreed after so many false starts 
and are thankful that so far it endures. We call on all 
sides not only to keep the guns and rockets silent but to 
refrain from actions that may destabilize what can only 
be described as an uneasy peace. In that connection, we 
express our profound regret at Israel’s appropriation of 
400 hectares of privately owned Palestinian land near 
Bethlehem for settlements. That act itself is profoundly 
unhelpful.

The problems of the Middle East are deep and 
difficult. They go back to the earliest days of the 
Organization and beyond. But what happened over 
the past months in and in relation to Gaza was a 
modern failure — a failure of leadership, of purpose 
and of vision. We urge the leaders of Israel and of 
Palestine, both West Bank and Gaza, to live up to their 
responsibilities to their peoples and to their positions.

In Syria and Iraq, we see the truly frightening 
consequences when leadership, both internally and 
in the Security Council, has failed. Syria has been a 
weeping sore for over three years. Thousands of Syrians 
have died, millions have become refugees and all 
Syrian people have suffered terribly from the multiple 
conflicts engulfing the country. And now the tragedy 
of Syria has spilled over into Iraq, which was already 
wrestling with its own deep-seated problems. Many 
actors, in both the recent past and over a longer time 
frame, have had a hand in contributing to the situation 
we now confront, but now it is time for action.

We need to find a way to contain the madness that 
is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to address 
the humanitarian tragedy and to help the people of Syria 
and Iraq craft a better future. By any objective standard, 


that is a situation that cries out for Security Council 
attention, and that is true of both sides of the border. 
We need the Council members and the Governments 
concerned to move past the ideological stalemate that 
has kept the Council largely impotent for the past three 
years. The challenge we all face in Syria and Iraq is 
unlike any the United Nations has faced before. The 
political circumstances in which it is being played out 
are about as bad as they get. Yet somehow we must find 
a way of coming together to defeat that shared problem.

Paralysis has also prevailed in the Security Council 
over Ukraine. The Council has been essentially 
a bystander as one of its permanent members has 
undermined the integrity of another Member State. We 
recognize the difficulties of managing ethnic tensions 
that straddle borders and the risks of local fires being 
stoked into wider national and international crises. But 
with the strong shared histories of cooperation and 
achievement between Russia and Ukraine, there is no 
excuse for leaders allowing matters to unravel as they 
have, to the point where international peace and security 
may be at risk. Already hundreds of innocent civilians 
on Flight MH-17 lost their lives through an associated 
mistake and miscalculation. We welcome the ceasefire 
agreed earlier this month, which has held, for the most 
part. We call on all involved to step back, think about 
what is at stake and start rebuilding the trust essential 
to finding a lasting solution.

Events in the Middle East and Ukraine have 
dominated the headlines in recent months and have 
diverted attention from the serious situations that 
continue to play out in Africa, particularly in Libya, 
Mali, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, 
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
United Nations is directly involved in those crises, 
and they continue to challenge the capacity of the 
Organization and of the African Union to respond 
to the sheer scale of human suffering and to the 
continuing need for external assistance to restore and 
keep the peace, keep civilian populations safe and 
deliver humanitarian assistance. Those issues, no less 
than those in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, 
will continue to require constant attention from the 
Security Council and the coordinated efforts of the 
broader United Nations family. They show that for all 
its failings and structural inequalities, the Council still 
has a vital role to play in maintaining international 
peace and security.

But there is one lesson that we must learn from 
all those recent crises — the United Nations must 
fundamentally improve its performance in preventing 
conflict. Once fighting is in full spate, the options for 
peace disappear. Prevention is critical, not just in new 
conflicts, but also in the cases on the agenda where 
conflict has been frozen or where peacebuilding has 
not really taken hold.

We are deeply troubled by the unprecedented scale 
of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. We recognize 
the huge challenges it poses to the economies and 
the political and security cohesion in the region. We 
have contributed and will continue to contribute to the 
humanitarian work under way, and on the formation of 
a new Government, we will look at further practical 
steps to support the international effort.

In 18 days’ time, the United Nations membership 
will decide who will be on the Security Council for the 
next two-year term. New Zealand has been a candidate 
for that position since 2004. It has been 20 years since 
we were last on the Council. It has been a long and 
demanding campaign, and it will continue right up to 
the elections on 16 October. With tough competitors, 
such as our good friends Spain and Turkey, that has to 
be the case. The campaign has been a great opportunity 
for us to engage with nations around the world. We 
greatly value the new relationships we have forged 
and the enhanced character of existing relationships. 
Whatever the outcome, we are determined to maintain 
them. 

In the past, New Zealand has demonstrated that as 
a member of the Council it acts strongly, effectively and 
independently. It champions the rights of small States 
and for the voices of all to be heard. In short, as my 
Prime Minister said from this rostrum last year, there 
is no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 
numbers. Sometimes one has to speak up and shine a 
light on what is going on, or not going on, even when it 
is embarassing or inconvenient to others to do so.

Above all, I can assure the Assembly that if we 
are elected, New Zealand will be a credible, positive 
influence on the Security Council. At our core, New 
Zealand is an optimistic country and New Zealanders 
are an optimistic people. We believe that things can be 
better than they are and are prepared, as a people, to 
work hard to achieve that. Despite the many challenges 
on the international agenda, my hope is that the 
membership of the United Nations will give us an 

opportunity to prove that by serving on the Security 
Council from next year.
There is growing evidence today of a contradiction 
between the need for collective and partnership efforts 
in order to develop adequate responses to the challenges 
common to us all, on the one hand, and, on the other, 
the aspiration of a number of States to domination and 
a revival of the archaic bloc thinking based on military 
drill discipline and the erroneous logic of friend or foe.

The United States-led Western alliance, which 
portrays itself as a champion of democracy, the rule of 
law and human rights within individual countries, acts 
from a directly opposite position in the international 
arena, rejecting the democratic principles of the 
sovereign equality of States enshrined the Charter of 
the United Nations and trying to decide for everyone 
what is good or evil.

Washington has openly declared its right to the 
unilateral use of military force anywhere to advocate 
its own interests. Military interference has become a 
norm, despite the dismal outcome of all the operations 
involving the use of force that the United States has 
carried out in recent years.

The sustainability of the international system has 
been severely shaken by the NATO bombardment of 
Yugoslavia, the intervention in Iraq, the attack against 
Libya and the failure in Afghanistan. It was due only 
to intensive diplomatic efforts that aggression against 
Syria was prevented in 2013. The various colour 
revolutions and other schemes aimed at changing 


unsuitable regimes inevitably give the impression that 
their goal is to create chaos and instability.

Today Ukraine has fallen victim to that policy. 
The situation there has revealed the deep-rooted and 
systemic flaws remaining in the existing Euro-Atlantic 
architecture. The West has embarked on a course 
towards a vertical structuring of humankind tailored to 
its own standards, which are hardly inoffensive.

After the West declared victory in the Cold War 
and the so-called end of history, the United States and 
the European Union opted to expand the geopolitical 
area under their control without taking into account 
the balance of legitimate interests of all the peoples 
of Europe. The Western partners did not heed our 
numerous warnings with regard to the unacceptable 
violations of the principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and time and again 
they have avoided serious joint work to establish a 
common space of equal and indivisible security and 
cooperation from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans.

The Russian proposal to draft a European security 
treaty was rejected. We were told directly that only the 
members of the North Atlantic Alliance can have legally 
binding security guarantees, and the NATO expansion 
to the East continued in spite of the promises to the 
contrary given earlier. NATO’s instant switch to hostile 
rhetoric and the reduction of its cooperation with Russia, 
even to the detriment of the West’s own interests, and 
the additional build-up of military infrastructure along 
Russia’s borders revealed the inability of the Alliance 
to change the genetic code embedded in it during the 
Cold War.

The United States and the European Union supported 
the coup d’état in Ukraine, recklessly justifying any 
acts by the self-proclaimed Kyiv authorities, who 
opted to suppress by force that part of the Ukrainian 
people who had rejected the attempts to impose an 
anti-constitutional order throughout the country and 
wanted to defend their rights to their native language, 
culture and history. It is precisely the aggressive assault 
on those rights that compelled the population of Crimea 
to take its destiny in its own hands and make a choice 
in favour of self-determination. That was an absolutely 
free choice, no matter what was invented by those 
who were responsible in the first place for the internal 
conflict in Ukraine.

There have been attempts to distort the truth and 
hide facts behind blanket accusations at all stages of the 
Ukrainian crisis. Nothing has been done to track down 
and prosecute those responsible for the bloody February 
events at Maidan and the massive loss of human lives 
in Odessa, Mariupol and other regions of Ukraine. The 
scale of the appalling humanitarian disaster provoked 
by the acts of the Ukrainian army in south-eastern 
Ukraine has been deliberately understated.

Recently, horrifying new facts came to light when 
mass graves were discovered near Donetsk. Despite 
Security Council resolution 2166 (2014), a thorough 
and independent investigation into the circumstances 
of the loss of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over 
Ukrainian territory has been delayed. Those guilty for 
all those crimes must be found and brought to justice. 
Otherwise, national reconciliation in Ukraine can 
hardly be expected.

Russia is sincerely interested in the restoration of 
peace in a neighbouring country, and that should be well 
understood by anyone even slightly acquainted with the 
deep-rooted and fraternal relations between the two 
peoples. The path to a political settlement is known. 
As early as this April, Kyiv made a commitment in the 
Geneva Statement on Ukraine — agreed upon by Russia, 
Ukraine, the United States and the European Union 
(EU) — to immediately start a nation-wide dialogue 
involving all of Ukraine’s regions and political forces 
to implement constitutional reforms. The fulfilment 
of that obligation would allow all Ukrainians to agree 
on how to live in accordance with their traditions and 
culture and would allow Ukraine to return to its organic 
role as a link between the different parts of the European 
space, which certainly implies the preservation and 
respect by everyone of its non-aligned, neutral status. 
We are convinced that with goodwill and the refusal 
to support the party of war in Kyiv, which is trying to 
push the Ukrainian people into the abyss of national 
catastrophe, a way out of the crisis is within reach.

A way to overcome the situation has opened with 
a ceasefire agreement for south-eastern Ukraine on 
the basis of initiatives of Presidents Poroshenko and 
Putin. With the participation of representatives of Kyiv, 
Donetsk, Luhansk, the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Russia, practical 
measures are being agreed on for the consecutive 
realization of those agreements, including the separation 
of the parties, the withdrawal of the heavy weapons of 
the Ukrainian military forces and of the militias, and 
the organization of monitoring through the OSCE.


Russia is ready to continue to actively promote a 
political settlement, both under the framework of the 
well-known recommendations of the Minsk process 
and in other formats. But it should be quite clear that 
we are doing this for the sake of peace, tranquillity 
and the well-being of the Ukrainian people, and not to 
appease someone’s ambitions. Attempts to put pressure 
on Russia to force it to abandon its values of truth and 
justice are absolutely futile.

I will allow myself a digression into recent history. 
As a condition for the establishment of diplomatic 
relations with the Soviet Union in 1933, the United 
States Government demanded from Moscow guarantees 
of non-interference in the internal affairs of the United 
States, obligations not to undertake any actions aimed at 
changing the political and social structure of America. 
At that time, Washington feared the revolutionary virus, 
and such guarantees were secured between America 
and the Soviet Union, on the basis of reciprocity.

Perhaps it makes sense to return to that subject 
and reproduce the then demand of the American 
Government on a universal scale. Why not adopt a 
General Assembly declaration about the inadmissibility 
of interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign 
States and non-recognition of coups d’état as a 
method of regime change? It is time to fully exclude 
from international interaction attempts at illegitimate 
pressure by some States against others. The meaningless 
and counterproductive nature of unilateral sanctions is 
obvious in the example of the American blockade of 
Cuba.

A policy of ultimatums and a philosophy of 
superiority and domination do not meet the needs 
of the twenty-first century; they are in conflict with 
the objective processes of forming a polycentric, 
democratic world order. Russia promotes a positive, 
unifying agenda. We have always been and will be open 
to discussing the most difficult questions, no matter 
how intractable they may seem at first. We will be 
ready to seek a compromise and a balance of interests 
and to agree to exchange concessions, provided only 
that the conversation is respectful and equitable.

The Minsk Agreement of 5 and 19 September about 
the ways out of the Ukrainian crisis and the compromise 
about the dates of entry into force of the Association 
Agreement between Kyiv and the European Union are 
good examples to emulate, as is the readiness, at last, 
of Brussels to begin negotiations on establishing a free 
trade area between the EU and the Customs Union of 
Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, as Mr. Putin suggested 
back in January.

Russia has consistently advocated the harmonization 
of integration projects in Europe and Eurasia. 
Agreement on political benchmarks and terms such 
as “convergence of integration” would be a real 
contribution to the work of the OSCE on the topic 
of Helsinki+40. Another important aspect of that 
work would be to launch a pragmatic, de-ideologized 
conversation on politico-military architecture in the 
Euro-Atlantic area, so that not only members of NATO 
and of the Collective Security Treaty Organization but 
all the countries of the region, including Ukraine, the 
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, would enjoy equal 
and indivisible security and not have to make a false 
choice of “either with us, or against us”. New dividing 
lines must not be allowed in Europe, especially because 
in the context of globalization they could become a 
watershed between the West and the rest of the world.

It must be stated honestly that no one has a 
monopoly on the truth; no one can forcibly tailor global 
and regional processes to suit their needs. Today there 
is no alternative to developing consensus on the rules 
of sustainable global governance in the new historical 
conditions, with full respect for the cultural and 
civilizational diversity of the world and the multiplicity 
of development models. To attain such a consensus 
on every issue will be difficult, perhaps tedious. But 
recognizing that in every State democracy is “the worst 
form of Government except for all the others” also took 
a long time, not until Churchill issued his verdict. It 
is time to recognize the inevitability of that axiom in 
international affairs, which currently suffer from a huge 
deficit of democracy. Of course, someone will have to 
break the age-old stereotypes, to abandon claims to 
eternal exceptionalism. But there is no other way.

United efforts can be built only on the principles of 
mutual respect and mutual consideration of interests, as 
is done, for example, within the Security Council, the 
Group of 20, the BRICS States of Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa, and the Shanghai Cooperation 
Council.

The theory of the advantages of collective work 
are confirmed in practice, for instance, the progress 
in settling the situation concerning the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the successful completion of 
the chemical demilitarization of Syria. By the way, 
speaking of chemical weapons, I would like to obtain 
honest information on the state of Libya’s chemical 


arsenals. We understand that our NATO colleagues, 
having bombed the country in violation of Security 
Council resolutions, do not want to stir up the disorder 
they created. However, the problem of uncontrolled 
Libyan chemical arsenals is too serious to turn a blind 
eye to. We believe the Secretary-General must show his 
responsibility in that matter.

The main thing today is to see the global priorities 
and avoid making them hostage to a one-sided agenda. 
There is an urgent need to refrain from double 
standards in approaches to conflict resolution. By 
and large, everybody agrees that the key task is to 
resolutely counter the terrorists, who are trying to 
gain control of increasingly larger areas of Iraq, Syria, 
Libya, Afghanistan and the Sahel-Sahara region. That 
being the case, that problem cannot be sacrificed to 
ideological schemes or to settle a score. Terrorists, 
whatever slogans they hide behind, must be outlawed.

At the same time, of course, the fight against 
terrorism should be based on the solid foundation of 
international law. An important stage in that fight 
was the unanimous adoption of a series of Security 
Council resolutions, including those on the issue of 
foreign terrorist fighters. On the other hand, attempts 
to act contrary to the Charter of our Organization 
do not contribute to the success of joint efforts. The 
fight against terrorists in Syria should be built on 
cooperation with the Syrian Government, which has 
clearly stated its willingness in that regard. Damascus 
has already demonstrated its ability to cooperate with 
the international community and to fulfil its obligations 
in the framework of the programme for eliminating its 
chemical weapons.

From the very outset of the Arab Spring, Russia 
urged that it not be abandoned to the control of 
extremists, that a united front be created to counter the 
growing terrorist threat. We have warned against the 
temptation to take as allies almost anyone who declared 
himself an enemy of Bashar Al-Assad, whether 
Al-Qaida, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other fellow travellers 
of regime change, including the Islamic State of Iraq 
and the Levant (ISIL), which today is the focus of 
attention. As they say, better late than never. This is not 
the first time that Russia is making a real contribution 
to the fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups in 
the region. We are delivering large-scale supplies of 
arms and military equipment to Iraq, Syria and other 
Middle Eastern and North African countries, and we 
will continue to support their efforts to suppress the 
terrorists.

The terrorist threat requires a comprehensive 
approach if we want to eradicate its causes and not 
be doomed to reacting to the symptoms. ISIL is only 
part of the problem. We propose to organize, under the 
auspices of the Security Council, an in-depth study of 
the threat of extremism and terrorism in all of their 
aspects throughout the Middle East and North African 
region. That integrated approach also presupposes 
that chronic conflicts should be considered, above 
all the Arab-Israeli conflict. The failure to settle the 
Palestinian issue over several decades remains, as is 
widely recognized, one of the main factors of instability 
in the region, and that helps extremists to recruit more 
and more new jihadists.

Another area of our common work together 
demanding attention is uniting our efforts to implement 
the decisions of the General Assembly and Security 
Council to combat the Ebola virus. Our doctors are 
already working in Africa. There are plans to send 
additional humanitarian assistance, medical equipment 
and instruments, medicine and teams of experts to assist 
the United Nations programmes in Guinea, Liberia and 
Sierra Leone.

The United Nations was established on the ruins 
of the Second World War, and it is entering the year 
of its seventieth anniversary. We all have an obligation 
to celebrate in an appropriate manner the anniversary 
of the great victory and to pay tribute to the memory 
of all who perished for freedom and the right of each 
people to determine their own destiny. The lessons 
of that terrible war and the entire course of events in 
today’s world require us to join efforts and forget about 
unilateral interests and national electoral cycles when 
it comes to countering global threats to all humankind. 
National egoism should not be allowed to prevail over 
collective responsibility.
We come together at a 
crossroads between war and peace, between disorder 
and integration, between fear and hope. Around the 
globe, there are signposts of progress. The shadow of 
the Second World War that existed at the founding of 
this institution has been lifted, and the prospect of war 
between major Powers reduced. The ranks of Member 
States have more than tripled, and more people live 
under Governments that they elected. Hundreds of 
millions of human beings have been freed from the 
prison of poverty, with the proportion of those living 
in extreme poverty cut in half. And the world economy 
continues to strengthen after the worst financial crisis 
of our lives.

Today, whether you live in downtown Manhattan or 
in my grandmother’s village more than 200 miles from 
Nairobi, you can hold in your hand more information 
than the world’s greatest libraries. Together, we have 
learned how to cure disease and harness the power 
of the wind and the sun. The very existence of this 
Organization is a unique achievement, with the people 
of the world committing to resolve their differences 
peacefully and to solve their problems together. I often 
tell young people in the United States that, despite 
the headlines, this is the best time in human history 
to be born, for you are more likely than ever before to 
be literate, to be healthy and to be free to pursue your 
dreams.

And yet there is a pervasive unease in our world — a 
sense that the very forces that have brought us together 
have created new dangers and made it difficult for any 
single nation to insulate itself from global forces. As we 
gather here, an outbreak of Ebola overwhelms public 
health systems in West Africa and threatens to move 
rapidly across borders. Russian aggression in Europe 
recalls the days when large nations trampled small 
ones in pursuit of territorial ambitions. The brutality 
of terrorists in Syria and Iraq forces us to look into the 
heart of darkness.

Each of those problems demands urgent attention. 
But they are also symptoms of a broader problem: 
the failure of our international system to keep pace 
with an interconnected world. We, collectively, have 
not invested adequately in the public health capacity 
of developing countries. Too often, we have failed 
to enforce international norms when it has been 



inconvenient to do so. And we have not confronted 
forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism and 
hopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many 
parts of the globe.

Fellow representatives, we come together as 
United Nations with a choice to make. We can renew 
the international system that has enabled so much 
progress, or we can allow ourselves to be pulled back 
by an undertow of instability. We can reaffirm our 
collective responsibility to confront global problems, or 
be swamped by more and more outbreaks of instability. 
And for America, the choice is clear — we choose hope 
over fear. We see the future not as something out of our 
control, but as something we can shape for the better 
through concerted and collective effort. We reject 
fatalism or cynicism when it comes to human affairs. 
We choose to work for the world as it should be, as our 
children deserve it to be.

There is much that must be done to meet the test 
of this moment. But today I would like to focus on 
two defining questions at the root of so many of our 
challenges. Will the nations represented here today 
be able to renew the purpose of the United Nations 
founding, and will we come together to reject the cancer 
of violent extremism?

First, all of us — big nations and small — must meet 
our responsibility to observe and enforce international 
norms. We are here because others realized that we 
gain more from cooperation than from conquest. One 
hundred years ago, a World War claimed the lives of 
many millions, proving that with the terrible power of 
modern weaponry, the cause of empire ultimately leads 
to the graveyard. It would then take another World War 
to roll back the forces of fascism, the notions of racial 
supremacy, and form the United Nations to ensure that 
no nation can subjugate its neighbours and claim their 
territory.

Recently, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have 
challenged that post-war order. Here are the facts. After 
the people of Ukraine mobilized popular protests and 
calls for reform, their corrupt President fled. Against 
the will of the Government in Kyiv, Crimea was annexed 
by Russia. Russia poured arms into eastern Ukraine, 
fuelling violent separatists and a conflict that has killed 
thousands. When a civilian airliner was shot down from 
areas that those proxy forces controlled, those forces 
refused to allow access to the crash site for days. When 
Ukraine started to reassert control over its territory, 
Russia gave up the pretence of merely supporting the 
separatists and moved troops across the border.

That reflects a vision of a world in which might 
makes right; a world in which one nation’s borders 
can be redrawn by another and civilized people are 
not allowed to recover the remains of their loved ones 
because of the truth that might be revealed.

America stands for something different. We believe 
that right makes might, that bigger nations should not 
be able to bully smaller ones and that people should 
be able to choose their own future. Those are simple 
truths, but they must be defended. America and our 
allies will support the people of Ukraine as they develop 
their democracy and economy. We will reinforce our 
NATO allies and uphold our commitment to collective 
self-defence. We will impose a cost on Russia for its 
aggression, and we will counter falsehoods with the 
truth. And we call upon others to join us on the right 
side of history, for while small gains can be won at the 
barrel of a gun, they will ultimately be turned back if 
enough voices support the freedom of nations and the 
right of peoples to make their own decisions.

Moreover, a different path is available — the path of 
diplomacy and peace, and the ideals that this institution 
is designed to uphold. The recent ceasefire agreement in 
Ukraine offers an opening to achieve those objectives. 
If Russia takes that path — a path that for stretches of 
the post-Cold War period resulted in prosperity for the 
Russian people — then we will lift our sanctions and 
welcome Russia’s role in addressing common challenges. 
That is, after all, what the United States and Russia 
have been able to do in past years — from reducing our 
nuclear stockpiles to meeting our obligations under the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to cooperating to 
remove and destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons. 
That is the kind of cooperation we are prepared to 
pursue again, if Russia changes course.

That speaks to a central question of our global 
age — will we solve our problems together in a spirit of 
mutual interest and mutual respect, or will we descend 
into the destructive rivalries of the past? When nations 
find common ground — not simply based on power, but 
on principle — then we can make enormous progress. 
And I stand before the Assembly today committed to 
investing American strength and to working with all 
nations to address the problems we face in the twenty-
first century.

As we speak, America is deploying our doctors and 
scientists, supported by our military, to help contain 
the outbreak of Ebola and pursue new treatments. But 
we need a broader effort to stop a disease that could 
kill hundreds of thousands, inflict horrific suffering, 



destabilize economies and move rapidly across borders. 
It is easy to see that problem as a distant problem, 
until it is not. And that is why we will continue to 
mobilize other countries to join us in making concrete 
commitments, significant commitments to fight the 
outbreak and enhance our system of global health 
security for the long term.

America is pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the 
Iranian nuclear issue, as part of our commitment to stop 
the spread of nuclear weapons and pursue the peace 
and security of a world without them. But that can take 
place only if Iran seizes this historic opportunity. My 
message to Iran’s leaders and people has been simple 
and consistent: do not let this opportunity pass. We can 
reach a solution that meets Iran’s energy needs while 
assuring the world that Iran’s nuclear programme is 
peaceful.

America is and will continue to be a Pacific 
Power, promoting peace, stability, and the free flow 
of commerce among nations. But we will insist that 
all nations abide by the rules of the road and resolve 
their territorial disputes peacefully, consistent with 
international law. That is how the Asia-Pacific region 
has grown. And that is the only way to protect the 
progress going forward.

America is committed to a development agenda that 
eradicates extreme poverty by 2030. We will do our part 
to help people feed themselves, power their economies 
and care for their sick. If the world acts together, we 
can make sure that all of our children enjoy lives of 
opportunity and dignity.

America is pursuing ambitious reductions in 
its carbon emissions, and we have increased our 
investments in clean energy. We will do our part and 
help developing nations do theirs. But the science tells 
us that we can succeed in combating climate change 
only if we are joined in that effort by every other nation, 
by every major Power. That is how we can protect the 
planet for our children and our grandchildren.

In other words, on issue after issue, we cannot rely 
on a rule book written for a different century. If we lift 
our eyes beyond our borders, if we think globally and 
if we act cooperatively, we can shape the course of this 
century as our predecessors shaped the post-World War 
Two age.

But as we look to the future, one issue risks starting 
a cycle of conflict that could derail so much progress. 
That is the cancer of violent extremism, which has 
ravaged so many parts of the Muslim world. Of course, 
terrorism is not new. Speaking before the Assembly, 
President Kennedy put it well:

“Terror is not a new weapon. Throughout 
history it has been used by those who could not 
prevail either by persuasion or by example.” 
(A/PV.1013, para. 96)
In the twentieth century, terror was used by all 
manner of groups who failed to come to power through 
public support. But in this century, we have faced a 
more lethal and ideological brand of terrorists who have 
perverted one of the world’s great religions. With access 
to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, 
they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would 
divide the world into adherents and infidels — killing 
as many innocent civilians as possible and employing 
the most brutal methods to intimidate people within 
their communities.

I have made it clear that America will not base its 
entire foreign policy on reacting to terrorism. Instead, 
we have waged a focused campaign against Al-Qaida 
and its associated forces — taking out their leaders 
and denying them the safe havens they rely on. At the 
same time, we have reaffirmed again and again that the 
United States is not and never will be at war with Islam. 
Islam teaches peace. Muslims the world over aspire to 
live with dignity and a sense of justice. And when it 
comes to America and Islam, there is no us and them, 
there is only us, because millions of Muslim Americans 
are part of the fabric of our country.

So we reject any suggestion of a clash of 
civilizations. Belief in permanent religious war is the 
misguided refuge of extremists who cannot build or 
create anything and therefore peddle only fanaticism 
and hate. And it is no exaggeration to say that the future 
of humankind depends on our uniting against those 
who would divide us along the fault lines of tribe or 
sect, race or religion.

But this is not simply a matter of words. Collectively, 
we must take concrete steps to address the danger posed 
by religiously motivated fanatics and the trends that 
fuel their recruitment. Moreover, the campaign against 
extremism goes beyond a narrow security challenge. 
For while we have worked methodically to degrade 
Al-Qaida at its core and have supported a transition to 
a sovereign Afghan Government, extremist ideology 
has shifted to other places, particularly in the Middle 
East and North Africa, where a quarter of the young 



people have no job, where food and water could grow 
scarce, and where corruption is rampant and sectarian 
conflicts have become increasingly hard to contain.

As an international community, we must meet this 
challenge with a focus on four areas. First, the terrorist 
group known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) must be degraded and ultimately destroyed. It 
has terrorized all those whom it has come across in Iraq 
and Syria. Mothers, sisters and daughters have been 
subjected to rape as a weapon of war. Innocent children 
have been gunned down. Bodies have been dumped into 
mass graves. Religious minorities have been starved to 
death. In the most horrific crimes imaginable, innocent 
human beings have been beheaded, with videos of 
the atrocity distributed to shock the conscience of the 
world.

No god condones such terror. No grievance 
justifies such actions. There can be no reasoning or 
negotiation with that brand of evil. The only language 
understood by killers of that kind is the language of 
force. So the United States of America will work with 
a broad coalition to dismantle that network of death. In 
this effort, we do not act alone, nor do we intend to send 
United States troops to occupy foreign lands. Instead, 
we will support Iraqis and Syrians fighting to reclaim 
their communities. We will use our military might to 
roll back ISIL in a campaign of air strikes. We will train 
and equip forces fighting those terrorists on the ground. 
We will work to cut off their financing and stop the flow 
of fighters into and out of the region. And more than 
40 nations have already offered to join the coalition. 
Today, I ask the world to join in this effort. Those who 
have joined ISIL should leave the battlefield while they 
can. Those who continue to fight for a hateful cause 
will find that they are increasingly alone. For we will 
not succumb to threats, and we will demonstrate that 
the future belongs to those who build, not to those who 
destroy. So that is an immediate challenge, the first one 
we must meet.

The second challenge is that it is time for the 
world, especially Muslim communities, to explicitly, 
forcefully and consistently reject the ideology of 
organizations such as Al-Qaida and ISIL. It is one of 
the tasks of all great religions to accommodate devout 
faith with a modern, multicultural world. No children 
are born hating, and no children anywhere should be 
educated to hate other people. There should be no 
further tolerance of so-called clerics who call on people 
to harm innocents because they are Jewish or Christian 
or Muslim. It is time for a new compact among the 
civilized peoples of this world to eradicate war at its 
most fundamental source, and that is the corruption of 
young minds by violent ideology.

That means cutting off the funding that fuels such 
hatred. It is time to end the hypocrisy of those who 
accumulate wealth through the global economy and 
then siphon funds to those who teach children to tear 
it down. That means contesting the space that terrorists 
occupy, including the Internet and social media. Their 
propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad 
to fight their wars and has turned students — young 
people full of potential — into suicide bombers. We 
must offer an alternative vision. That means bringing 
people of different faiths together. All religions have 
been attacked by extremists from within at some point, 
and all people of faith have a responsibility to lift up the 
value at the heart of all great religions. Do unto your 
neighbour as you would do — as you would have others 
do — unto yourself.

The ideology of ISIL or Al-Qaida or Boko 
Haram will wilt and die if it is consistently exposed 
and confronted and refuted in the light of day. Look 
at the new Forum for Promoting Peace in Muslim 
Societies, whose purpose Sheikh Abdallah Bin Bayyah 
has described as “We must declare war on war, so 
the outcome will be peace upon peace”. Look at the 
young British Muslims who have responded to terrorist 
propaganda by starting the #notinmyname campaign, 
declaring that ISIL is hiding behind a false Islam. Look 
at the Christian and Muslim leaders who came together 
in the Central African Republic to reject violence; listen 
to the imam there who said that, while politics may try 
to divide the religious in that country, religion should 
not be a cause of hate, war, or strife.

Later today, the Security Council will adopt a 
resolution that underscores the responsibility of States 
to counter violent extremism. But resolutions must 
be followed by tangible commitments, so that we are 
accountable when we fall short. Next year, we should 
all be prepared to announce the concrete steps that 
we have taken to counter extremist ideologies in our 
own countries — by getting intolerance out of schools, 
stopping radicalization before it spreads and promoting 
institutions and programmes that build new bridges of 
understanding.

Thirdly, we must address the cycle of conflict, 
especially sectarian conflict, that creates the conditions 
that terrorists prey upon. There is nothing new about 



wars within religions. Christianity endured centuries of 
vicious sectarian conflict. Today it is violence within 
Muslim communities that has become the source 
of so much human misery. It is time to acknowledge 
the destruction wrought by proxy wars and terror 
campaigns between Sunni and Shia across the Middle 
East. And it is time that political, civic and religious 
leaders rejected sectarian strife. So let us be clear. This 
is a fight that no one is winning. A brutal civil war in 
Syria has already killed nearly 200,000 people and has 
displaced millions. Iraq has come perilously close to 
plunging back into the abyss. The conflict has created 
a fertile recruiting ground for terrorists, who inevitably 
export such violence.

The good news is that we also see signs that the tide 
can be reversed. We have a new, inclusive Government 
in Baghdad and a new Iraqi Prime Minister welcomed 
by his neighbours; we see Lebanese factions that reject 
those who try to provoke war. Such steps must be followed 
by a broader truce. Nowhere is that more necessary 
than in Syria. Together with our partners, America is 
training and equipping the Syrian opposition to be a 
counterweight to the terrorists of ISIL and the brutality 
of the Al-Assad regime. But the only lasting solution 
to Syria’s civil war is political — an inclusive political 
transition that responds to the legitimate aspirations of 
all Syrian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, regardless 
of creed.

Cynics may argue that such an outcome can never 
come to pass. But there is no other way for the madness 
in Syria to end, whether one year from now or 10. And it 
points to the fact that it is time for a broader negotiation 
in the region, in which major Powers address their 
differences directly, honestly and peacefully across 
the table from one another, rather than through gun-
wielding proxies. I can promise the international 
community that America will remain engaged in the 
region, and we are prepared to engage in that effort.

My fourth and final point is a simple one. The 
countries of the Arab and Muslim world must focus on 
the extraordinary potential of their people, especially 
the youth. And here I would like to speak directly to 
young people across the Muslim world. You come 
from a great tradition that stands for education, not 
ignorance; innovation, not destruction; the dignity of 
life, not murder. Those who call you away from that 
path are betraying that tradition, not defending it. You 
have demonstrated that when young people have the 
tools to succeed — good schools, education in math 
and science, an economy that nurtures creativity and 
entrepreneurship — then societies will flourish. So, 
America will partner with those who promote that 
vision.

Where women are full participants in a country’s 
politics or economy, societies are more likely to 
succeed. And that is why we support the participation of 
women in parliaments and peace processes, schools and 
the economy. If young people live in places where the 
only option is between the dictates of a State or the lure 
of an extremist underground, then no counterterrorism 
strategy can succeed. But where a genuine civil society 
is allowed to flourish — where people can express their 
views and organize peacefully for a better life — then 
you dramatically expand the alternatives to terror.

And such positive change need not come at the 
expense of tradition and faith. We see that in Iraq, where 
a young man started a library for his peers. “We link 
Iraq’s heritage to their hearts”, he said, and “give them 
a reason to stay”. We see it in Tunisia, where secular 
and Islamist parties worked together through a political 
process to produce a new constitution. We see it in 
Senegal, where civil society thrives alongside a strong 
democratic Government. We see it in Malaysia, where 
vibrant entrepreneurship is propelling a former colony 
into the ranks of advanced economies. And we see it in 
Indonesia, where what began as a violent transition has 
evolved into a genuine democracy.

Ultimately the task of rejecting sectarianism and 
rejecting extremism is a generational one, and a task 
for the people of the Middle East themselves. No 
external power can bring about a transformation of 
hearts and minds. But America will be a respectful 
and constructive partner. We will neither tolerate 
terrorist safe havens nor act as an occupying Power. 
We will take action against threats to our security and 
our allies, while building an architecture of counter-
terrorism cooperation. We will increase efforts to lift 
up those who counter extremist ideologies and who 
seek to resolve sectarian conflict. And we will expand 
our programmes to support entrepreneurship and civil 
society, education and youth, because ultimately those 
investments are the best antidote to violence.

We recognize as well that leadership will be 
necessary to address the conflict between Palestinians 
and Israelis. As bleak as the landscape appears, America 
will not give up on the pursuit of peace. Understand that 
the situation in Iraq and Syria and Libya should cure 
anybody of the illusion that the Arab-Israeli conflict 



is the main source of problems in the region. For far 
too long that has been used as an excuse to distract 
people from problems at home. The violence engulfing 
the region today has made too many Israelis ready to 
abandon the hard work of peace. And that is something 
worthy of reflection within Israel. Because let us be 
clear: the status quo in the West Bank and Gaza is not 
sustainable. We cannot afford to turn away from that 
effort — not when rockets are fired at innocent Israelis, 
or when the lives of so many Palestinian children are 
taken from us in Gaza. So long as I am President, we 
will stand up for the principle that Israelis, Palestinians, 
the region and the world will be more just and more 
safe with two States living side by side, in peace and 
security.

So this is what America is prepared to do: take 
action against immediate threats, while pursuing a 
world in which the need for such action is diminished. 
The United States will never shy away from defending 
our interests, but we will also not shy away from the 
promise of this institution and its Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights — the notion that peace is not merely 
the absence of war, but the presence of a better life.

I realize that America’s critics will be quick to point 
out that at times we too have failed to live up to our 
ideals and that America has plenty of problems within 
its own borders. That is true. In a summer marked by 
instability in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, I 
know the world also took notice of the small American 
city of Ferguson, Missouri, where a young man was 
killed and a community was divided. So, yes, we have 
our own racial and ethnic tensions. And, like every 
country, we continually wrestle with how to reconcile 
the vast changes wrought by globalization and greater 
diversity with the traditions that we hold dear.

But we welcome the scrutiny of the world, because 
what you see in America is a country that has steadily 
worked to address our problems, to make our union 
more perfect, to bridge the divides that existed at the 
founding of this nation. America is not the same as it 
was 100 years ago or 50 years ago or even a decade ago. 
We fight for our ideals and we are willing to criticize 
ourselves when we fall short. We hold our leaders 
accountable and insist on a free press and an independent 
judiciary. We address our differences in the open space 
of democracy, with respect for the rule of law, with a 
place for people of every race and every religion and 
with an unyielding belief in the ability of individual 
men and women to change their communities and their 
circumstances and their countries for the better.

After nearly six years as President, I believe that that 
promise can help light the world. I have seen a longing 
for positive change — for peace and for freedom and for 
opportunity and for an end to bigotry — in the eyes of 
young people whom I have met around the globe. They 
remind me that no matter who you are or where you 
come from or what you look like or what God you pray 
to or whom you love, there is something fundamental 
that we all share. 

Eleanor Roosevelt, a champion of the United 
Nations and America’s role in it, once asked, 

“Where, after all, do universal human rights 
begin? In small places, close to home — so close 
and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps 
of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual 
person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or 
college he attends; the factory, farm or office where 
he works.”
Around the world, young people are moving forward, 
hungry for a better world. Around the world, in small 
places, they are overcoming hatred and bigotry and 
sectarianism. And they are learning to respect each 
other, despite differences.
The people of the world now look to us, here, to 
be as decent and dignified and courageous as they are 
trying to be in their daily lives. And at this crossroads, 
I can promise the Assembly that the United States 
of America will not be distracted or deterred from 
what must be done. We are heirs to a proud legacy of 
freedom, and we are prepared to do what is necessary 
to secure that legacy for generations to come. I ask 
that the Assembly join us in this common mission, for 
today’s children and tomorrow’s.

I should like to congratulate you, 
Mr. President, and your country, Uganda, on assuming, 
on behalf of the continent of Africa, the responsibilities 
of President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth 
session. The theme that you have chosen for this general 
debate and the sixty-ninth session, namely, “Delivering 
on and implementing a transformative post-2015 
development agenda”, is timely and most appropriate.

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
galvanized and mobilized the international community 
and the United Nations in a manner never seen before. 
We have good stories to tell about the journey of the 
past 15 years of implementing the MDGS. In Africa, 
we seized the opportunity and adopted the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), our 
sociodevelopment blueprint. The African Union’s 
Vision 2063 will, together with NEPAD and other 
socioeconomic development programmes, be the 
cornerstone and foundation of Africa’s development 
agenda going forward. South Africa has also made 
significant progress in achieving the MDGs. Reducing 
by half the number of people earning less than a dollar 
a day has been achieved, while the proportion of those 
experiencing hunger has also been halved. South 
Africa has attained Goal 2, namely, to provide access 
to primary education for all.

By official international indicators, South Africa is 
also doing well on MDG 3 to promote and empower 
women. South Africa has recorded impressive progress 
through the expansion of its health infrastructure 
and improved access to health services for all South 
Africans.

On the reduction of child mortality, MDG 4, and the 
improvement of maternal health, MDG 5, significant 
progress has also been recorded, but more work remains 
to be done. In fact. more work remains worldwide to 
fully achieve those goals, especially in the developing 
world. We have to confront the underlying root causes 
that continue to make it impossible for our people to 
have a better life.

In spite of the progress that we have made thus far, 
reports continue to show that Africa is lagging behind 
in the attainment of some of the MDGs. It is for that 
reason that we appreciate the crafting of a post-2015 
global development agenda that will carry forward the 
unfinished business of the MDGs. The post-2015 global 

development agenda will provide a frame of reference 
for our collective agreement on what has to be done. 
We reiterate that developed countries should be reliable 
partners and meet their commitments to development 
goals, such as contributing 0.7 per cent of their 
gross national income towards official development 
assistance. We say that because it does not matter 
what the great Organization has achieved in the past 
six decades if we do not deal comprehensively with the 
scourge of poverty, unemployment and diseases. The 
poor of the world will then consider everything done 
to have been a failure. Indeed, we would have failed in 
our duty if we succeed in preventing another world war 
but continue to have children dying of malnutrition and 
treatable diseases.

The recent outbreak of Ebola in some West 
African States and the number of lives that have 
been unnecessarily lost provide a clear example of 
the challenges that developing countries continue to 
contend with. We believe that Ebola would have been 
contained within a few days had the outbreak been in 
the developed world. But now it has become a pandemic 
that threatens the economies of affected African States.

The outbreak has thus exposed the challenges 
resulting from lack of capacity, lack of infrastructure 
and other limited resources in Africa. We are pleased 
that the United Nations, under the leadership of the 
Secretary-General, is deploying a mission to coordinate 
efforts to combat the virus. South Africa stands ready to 
continue to provide whatever resources we have at our 
disposal to assist the people and Governments of our 
sister countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. 
We add our voice in calling for more resources to be 
deployed so as to ensure that the virus is contained.

The role of the United Nations in supporting the 
struggles of self-determination and freedom has been 
remarkable. South Africa is a shining example. Twenty 
years ago, President Nelson Mandela thanked all 
nations for support from this very podium when South 
Africa was readmitted to the United Nations as a free 
and democratic State. We are reminded of that fact on 
this important day, which is National Heritage Day in 
my country.

Since 1994, South Africa has made significant 
progress in transforming the apartheid State into a 
democratic one, founded on the values of human dignity, 
non-discrimination, non-racialism and non-sexism, the 
rule of law and universal adult suffrage, as enshrined in 
the Constitution. Given our history and heritage, we are 
mindful of our historic and moral responsibility in the 
global struggle against racism, racial discrimination 
and other intolerances. We will, in this regard, continue 
to be at the forefront of efforts to eliminate all forms of 
racism, racial discrimination and any other intolerance, 
including xenophobia and anti-Semitism.

The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
remain the primary framework adopted by a United 
Nations conference in the fight against racism. We 
will continue to support the struggles for freedom 
and self-determination, including the struggles of the 
peoples of Palestine and Western Sahara, who continue 
to experience occupation and colonialism of different 
forms. The people of Cuba also hold a special place 
in our hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for 
African freedom. We will therefore continue to support 
their struggle for economic liberation.

While the United Nations has done remarkably well 
in supporting self-determination, when it celebrates 70 
years of existence next year, this body may be found 
wanting by the people of Palestine. The Israeli-Palestine 
question is one of the oldest items on the United 
Nations agenda, but progress remains elusive. In the 
past few months in particular, the world has witnessed 
a devastating conflict that left a humanitarian crisis 
of shocking proportions. People in Palestine were left 
homeless, with no medical facilities, no safe drinking 
water, bereaved and having to care for the wounded 
after a trail of destructive military actions by Israel.

South Africa has condemned the actions of both 
Israel and Hamas, and we have called for an immediate 
cessation of hostilities. Our strongly held view is 
that there can be no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian question. We should all remain committed 
to the two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, 
with Palestine and Israel coexisting side by side in 
peace.

Of concern in this matter has been the helplessness 
displayed by the United Nations, especially the Security 
Council during the current conflict. The United 
Nations has the moral authority and legitimacy to unite 
the world in promoting the quest for peace, justice and 
self-determination for the people of Palestine, while 
addressing whatever security concerns Israel may have. 
This body must play its role without fear or favour and 
be a beacon for all who suffer oppression in the world.


Let me reiterate that the seventieth anniversary of 
the United Nations next year provides an opportunity 
for us seriously to reflect on the need to reform this 
august body, moving beyond words to action. Ten years 
ago, world leaders celebrating the sixtieth anniversary 
of the United Nations agreed on the need for reform 
of the Security Council in particular. The decision 
remains valid and must be implemented. When we 
convene here next year, in the seventieth year of the 
United Nations, we should be able to adopt a concrete 
programme that will guide us towards a strengthened 
United Nations and a reformed Security Council. Some 
contentious aspects of the United Nations system, 
including the power of veto and the exclusion of regions 
such as Africa from the Security Council, are some of 
the critical matters that cannot be ignored in the quest 
for transformation.

Among the achievements of the Organization in its 
recent history is the cooperation between the African 
Union and the United Nations, particularly since the 
formation of the African Union Peace and Security 
Architecture. In this regard, the full implementation 
of Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 
(2012), on cooperation between the United Nations 
and regional organizations, particularly the African 
Union, remains crucial. Progress has been made in a 
number of areas where this cooperation is in place, for 
example in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
two affected subregional organizations, the Southern 
African Development Community and the International 
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, continue to 
take significant strides with the support of the United 
Nations.

This body celebrated the formation of a new State 
of South Sudan not long ago. Recent developments and 
the ongoing conflict in South Sudan have resulted in 
loss of life and other dire humanitarian consequences. 
We will continue to contribute as much as we can to 
finding solutions working with the African Union and 
this body. South Sudan should not be allowed to regress.

Next year marks 20 years since the the Fourth 
World Conference on Women adopted the Beijing 
Platform for Action. The anniversary provides an 
opportunity for the United Nations and the international 
community to reflect and take forward the struggle 
for the emancipation of women from all forms of 
discrimination.

Last December, the world descended on South 
Africa to pay last respects to our beloved Madiba. 
Those who did not come to South Africa honoured 
Madiba in various ways. We will continue to work with 
the world to promote Madiba’s legacy and passion for 
justice, freedom, equality and human rights. We are 
grateful to the General Assembly and the President of 
the Assembly at the sixty-eighth session for the decision 
to establish the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela Prize that will be awarded to an outstanding 
individual who will have demonstrated a commitment 
to the aims, objectives and principles of the United 
Nations Charter. The Prize is a great testament to the 
outstanding individual that Madiba was and will always 
be.

As we recommit to the Millennium Development 
Goals, let me once again borrow from the words of 
Madiba uttered on his historic inauguration day in 1994 
when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
This year 
marks the centenary of the outbreak of the First World 
War. A distinguished thinker in modern China, Yan Fu, 
described the devastation caused by the war: “How sad 
that the air is heavy with the stench of war”.

Next year will be the seventieth anniversary of the 
end of the Second World War. Over 2 billion people 
across the world were affected by that calamity. In 
China alone, the aggression committed by Japanese 
militarists left more than 35 million Chinese soldiers 
and civilians dead or injured.

The United Nations was established to keep the 
scourge of the two World Wars from occurring again, 
and it embodies the fervent hope of all countries for 
peace and stability. To achieve that goal, the Charter 
of the United Nations presented a grand vision of joint 
efforts to build a better world.

In this world, we should treat each other as equals. 
The principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity 
must be upheld. The pursuit by different countries of 
economic and social development must be respected. 
Their right to independently choose their own social 
systems and development paths must be safeguarded. 
We should be open and inclusive. Only in that way 
can we open the door of dialogue and exchange and 
achieve harmony among countries with different social 
systems, religions and cultural traditions. We should 
pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. Each country 
should align its own interests with those of others and 
work to maximize areas where their interests converge.

Only by helping one another can countries prosper. 
We should jointly initiate a new thinking for win-win 
and all-win progress and reject the old notion of a zero-
sum game, or the winner takes all. We should uphold 
justice. It is imperative to promote greater democracy 
and the rule of law in international relations, to apply 
fair and just rules to tell right from wrong and settle 
disputes, and to pursue peace and development within 
the framework of international law. All parties should 
jointly uphold the authority and effectiveness of the 
United Nations and reform and improve the global 
governance structure.

As we have seen in Gaza, Iraq, the Central African 
Republic and South Sudan, our world is far from 
peaceful. In the face of all those who have been killed 
in war, we must ask ourselves how we can keep the 
tragedies from recurring. In the face of women and 
children displaced by fighting, we must ask ourselves 
when they can return home. In the face of incessant 
conflicts, we must ask ourselves how we can open the 
door to lasting peace. To address those problems, China 
believes that we should do the following.

First, we should seek political solutions. To beat 
swords into ploughshares may take time and effort, but 
history and reality have repeatedly demonstrated that 
to meet violence with violence will not lead to enduring 
peace, and the use of force will only create more 
problems than solutions. Coercive action should be 
authorized by the Security Council. If a country places 
its domestic law above international law and interferes 
in other countries’ internal affairs at will, or even seeks 
regime change, the international community cannot but 
question the legitimacy of its actions.

Secondly, we should accommodate the interests 
of all parties. Parties to a conflict should reject the 
zero-sum approach, address each other’s concerns in 
negotiations and endeavour to meet each other half 
way. They should seek to meet their legitimate concerns 
through consultations in a mutually accommodating 
way. When conducting mediation, the international 
community should uphold justice and take an objective 
and balanced position. Countries should not be partial 
to any party in the conflict. Still less should they avail 
themselves of the opportunity to pursue their own 
agenda.

Thirdly, we should promote national reconciliation. 
The ongoing armed conflicts are largely caused by 
ethnic and sectarian tensions. The process of national 
reconciliation and the process of political settlement 
should be advanced in tandem with each other. All 
parties should uphold the Charter of the United 
Nations, develop and practice a culture of inclusion and 
tolerance and uproot the seeds of hatred and retaliation, 
so that the fruit of inclusion and amity will grow on 
post-conflict land.

Fourthly, we should uphold multilateralism. We 
should give full play to the role of the United Nations 
and observe international law and the basic norms 
governing international relations. Chapter VII of the 
Charter is not the only means for the Security Council 
to maintain international peace and security. We should 
make better and full use of the means of prevention, 
mediation and conciliation stipulated in Chapter VI.

Given their familiarity with local developments, we 
should leverage the strengths of regional organizations 
and countries and support them in addressing regional 
issues in ways suited to their regions.

The conflicts in Ukraine remain a cause of 
concern. We welcome and support the Minsk ceasefire 
agreement and urge all parties in Ukraine to strictly 

implement it and seek a comprehensive, sustained 
and balanced political solution through political 
dialogue and negotiation. China hopes that the various 
ethnic groups in Ukraine will live in harmony and 
that Ukraine will live in peace with other countries. 
That is the fundamental way for Ukraine to achieve 
long-term stability and security. China hopes that 
the United Nations will play its due role in finding a 
proper solution to the Ukrainian crisis and supports the 
international community’s constructive efforts to ease 
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine.

China supports Iraq in upholding its sovereignty, 
independence and territorial integrity. The formation of 
the new Iraqi Government has provided an important 
opportunity. We hope that the Iraqi Government will 
lead its people in a joint endeavour to develop their 
country in the spirit of inclusion and reconciliation. 
China calls for providing more humanitarian assistance 
to support Iraq. To help the Iraqi people overcome 
difficulties and to achieve peace and stability in their 
country is the shared responsibility of the international 
community.

China firmly opposes all terrorist acts and supports 
the international community in responding to the 
threat posed by terrorist forces in a coordinated and 
concerted way in accordance with the relevant Security 
Council resolutions. China believes that in conducting 
international counter-terrorism cooperation, we should 
take a multipronged approach and address both the 
symptoms and root causes of terrorism, and that the 
United Nations and the Security Council should fully 
play leading roles. There should be no double standard 
when it comes to fighting terrorism; still less should 
terrorism be identified with any particular ethnic group 
or religion.

As new developments emerge in the global fight 
against terrorism, the international community should 
take new measures to address them. In particular, it 
should focus on combating religious extremism and 
cyberterrorism, resolutely eliminate the root causes of 
terrorism and extremism, block channels that spread 
them and crack down hard and effectively on the use of 
the Internet and other new means of communication by 
terrorists to instigate, recruit, finance or plot terrorist 
attacks.

The Syrian crisis has continued for nearly four 
years. It is negotiation, not fighting, that offers 
solutions. China urges all parties in Syria to end the 
fighting and violence immediately, cooperate fully with 
United Nations humanitarian assistance operations and 
help bring an end to the suffering of innocent civilians 
as soon as possible. We urge all the parties to act in the 
overall interests of the future and fate of their country 
and people, demonstrate the necessary political will, 
actively support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, and follow a middle 
way that draws on workable practices from other 
countries and regions, suits Syria’s national conditions 
and accommodates the interests of various parties, in 
order to give peace a chance.

The Palestinian issue is an open wound on the 
conscience of humankind. China calls on Israel 
and Palestine to agree on a durable ceasefire, and it 
urges Israel to lift its blockade of the Gaza Strip and 
stop building settlements. At the same time, Israel’s 
legitimate security concerns should be respected. We 
hope that Israel and Palestine will choose the way of 
peace and resume and advance the peace talks as soon 
as possible. The aspirations and legitimate demands of 
the Palestinian people for an independent nation must 
not remain unmet indefinitely. Advancing peace in the 
Middle East calls for the concerted efforts of many, not 
of one or two countries alone. The Security Council 
should play its rightful role, and we support its efforts 
to take action in response to the demands of Palestine 
and the League of Arab States.

Negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue have 
entered a crucial stage. All the parties should display 
good faith, continue their efforts in a spirit of mutual 
respect, equality, collaboration and accommodation, 
and work hard on the most difficult issues, so that a 
win-win agreement that is comprehensive, fair and 
balanced is arrived at as soon as possible.

The two sides of the conflict in South Sudan 
should establish a ceasefire immediately, organize an 
active political dialogue that addresses the interests 
of the people in South Sudan in general and, through 
the mediation of the Intergovernmental Authority 
on Development, work with all the country’s ethnic 
groups and parties to speedily reach a fair and balanced 
solution and achieve national reconciliation and ethnic 
unity. South Sudan is the youngest Member of the 
United Nations. The South Sudanese people deserve a 
life of hope and vitality, not the devastation caused by 
conflicts and wars.


China welcomes the election of Mr. Ashraf Ghani 
as the new President of Afghanistan and Mr. Abdullah 
Abdullah as its Chief Executive, and will continue to 
support the Afghan people in their work to achieve a 
smooth political, security and economic transition and 
to build jointly with them an Afghanistan that enjoys 
unity, stability, development and amity. We support 
an Afghan-led and -owned peace process, with the 
international community fulfilling its commitment and 
responsibility to Afghanistan and its people. China will 
host the Fourth Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul 
Process so that we can give Afghanistan fresh support 
as it stands on the threshold of a new era.

On the issue of the Korean peninsula, China calls 
on all the parties to act objectively and impartially, 
remain committed to the goal of denuclearizing the 
peninsula, firmly uphold its peace and stability, and 
endeavour to resolve the issues through dialogue and 
consultation. The Six-Party Talks remain the only 
viable and effective way to resolve the nuclear issue on 
the Korean peninsula, and we now have the pressing 
task of restarting the talks as soon as possible. The issue 
should be tackled through a sustainable, irreversible 
and effective dialogue process that addresses all the 
parties’ concerns in a comprehensive and balanced 
way. Since there are still many uncertainties on the 
peninsula today, all the parties concerned should 
exercise restraint, refrain from provocative acts, work 
harder to help ease tensions and jointly uphold peace 
and stability.

While the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) established by the United Nations in 2000 
have contributed greatly to improving human survival 
and development, global development is still a task for 
the long term. The international community is not only 
dealing with the formidable challenges of reducing 
poverty, eradicating hunger and improving education 
and the health of women and children, it is also facing 
new challenges in the form of the environment, climate 
change and energy and resource security.

Next year is the deadline for meeting the MDGs, 
and the post-2015 development agenda will take 
over this historic mission. Building on past progress 
and also breaking new ground, the international 
community should formulate more effective plans 
and take more robust action to advance humankind’s 
shared development. As we see it, the development 
agenda should have three goals. First, it should advance 
people’s well-being, with a focus on eradicating 
poverty and encouraging development. Secondly, 
it should promote inclusiveness, in the interests of 
supporting social equity and justice. Thirdly, it should 
ensure the implementation of all these things. Based 
on the principles of diversity in development models 
and shared but differentiated responsibilities, the 
agenda should aim to enhance global partnerships for 
development and improve implementation tools and 
mechanisms.

Climate change is a challenge that all humankind 
is facing. Mr. Zhang Gaoli, Vice Premier of the State 
Council, led the Chinese delegation to this year’s 
Climate Summit at the United Nations as a special 
envoy of China’s President. We congratulate the 
United Nations on the Summit’s success and hope that 
the political momentum it generated will translate 
into effective actions for improving international 
cooperation on climate change. All parties should 
work to conclude negotiations on a new post-2020 
climate-change regime as scheduled, by the end of 
2015, in accordance with the principles of shared but 
differentiated responsibilities, equity and respective 
capabilities, with the aim of creating fairer and more 
equitable and effective arrangements for international 
cooperation on climate change.

The Ebola epidemic, which is raging in some 
African countries, has once again sounded the alarm 
on global health security. As a good brother and partner 
of Africa, with whom it shares the good and the bad, 
China will continue to stand firmly with the African 
people and to support and assist them to the best of its 
ability. We will also take an active part in the relevant 
international assistance efforts. China calls on the 
World Health Organization, the United Nations and 
other international agencies to work closely with the 
international community, come up with new initiatives 
for strengthening global health security and provide 
more assistance to developing countries, particularly in 
Africa.

Next year is one of special historic significance, 
as it marks the seventieth anniversary of victory in 
the anti-fascist world war, the founding of the United 
Nations and victory in the Chinese people’s war against 
Japanese aggression. Remembering the past makes us 
cherish peace, and recalling history will help to guide 
us as we embrace the future. China welcomes the 
inclusion of the seventieth anniversary of the end of the 
Second World War on the agenda of this session of the 
General Assembly as an important opportunity.

When we look back on what happened 70 years 
ago, the historical facts are clear, and a final verdict 
has been pronounced on what was right and what was 
wrong. History should not be falsified or truth distorted. 
Today, 70 years later, let us jointly uphold human 
justice and conscience so that those who attempt to 
deny aggression and distort history will have nowhere 
to hide. Let us jointly defend the Charter of the United 
Nations and the outcomes of the Second World War, 
so that that vision of a world free of war, with lasting 
peace, will take deep root in our hearts and pass from 
one generation to the next.
The year 
2014 is a special one for Europeans — a special year 
of commemoration. In the summer 100 years ago, 
European diplomacy failed and the world slid into the 
First World War. Seventy-five years ago, Germany 
attacked its neighbour Poland, plunging the world into 
the Second World War. Twenty-five years ago, the 
Berlin Wall fell, bringing an end to the world’s decades-
long division into East and West.

However, merely to look back and remember would 
not be enough in this year of commemoration. On the 
contrary, we must ask ourselves: what have we learned 
for the future? The most important lesson learned 
from that history was the establishment of the United 
Nations, for the United Nations embodies the world’s 
hope for peace. That hope derives from an idea which 
is as simple as it is revolutionary: there is peace when 
the world sets rules for itself and replaces the law of 
force with the force of law, when conflicts are resolved 
at the negotiating table and not on the battlefield, when 
the world renounces, step by step, the cynical logic of 
violence.

To date, the United Nations has provided a universal 
foundation for the hope for peace. But that universality 
is under threat from the ghosts of the past and from new 
demons.

In 2014 our world seems to be unraveling. Crises are 
coming at us thick and fast. That is why it is not enough 
simply to call upon the United Nations. No, we need to 
breathe life into that call. Hope will remain but a hope, 
an unattainable goal, unless States are prepared to take 
on responsibility. The United Nations is not a forum 
onto which we can shrug off responsibility. The United 
Nations is a forum whereby we assume responsibility.

Germany, embedded in a united Europe, is prepared 
to take on responsibility in and with the United Nations. 
First and foremost we have a responsibility to the people 
bearing the brunt of the suffering in the crises.

Next month Germany will host a conference in 
Berlin to mobilize urgently needed humanitarian 
assistance for the millions of Syrian refugees. My 
country will play its part, and I sincerely hope that 
many others will follow suit. Support is needed above 
all by Syria’s neighbours. They are doing a tremendous 
job but are also under tremendous strain due to the huge 
influx of displaced persons and refugees from Syria.

The Ebola epidemic is raging in West Africa. 
It is bringing suffering and death into the homes of 
individual families. It is endangering the cohesion 
of entire societies. That is why we are sending 
humanitarian and medical assistance and setting up an 
airlift to the region. I am delighted that many volunteers 
in my country have responded to the call, saying, “I 
want to go there to help on the spot”.

Above and beyond the immediate solidarity, 
however, we need a long-term commitment. We need 
the expertise of the World Health Organization and 
the coordinating umbrella of the United Nations, 
particularly in the long term as we try to strengthen 
States and health-care systems. Germany will contribute 
to both of those goals. We cannot bring the dead back to 
life, but we may be able to prevent far too many more 
people dying of Ebola who ought not to be dying if they 
were treated. And we must certainly make sure that the 
next epidemic does not have consequences as deadly as 
the one we are still fighting.

If we are to move towards the hope of peace, we need 
many small steps — the commitment of individuals, 
bilateral diplomacy and regional initiatives. But none 
of that can replace the United Nations. Only the United 
Nations can provide a universal foundation for the hope 
of peace. That foundation is international law, to which 
everyone who belongs to the community of nations in 
the United Nations, and those who want to belong, has 
subscribed. That is what must be preserved; that is the 
core of our hope for peace.

That is why I must here mention the conflict 
in Ukraine. Some people in the Hall may regard it 
as nothing more than a regional conflict in Eastern 
Europe. But I am convinced that that view is incorrect. 
I believe that that conflict affects each and every one of 
us. Not just any State, but a permanent member of the 
Security Council — Russia — has, with its annexation 
of Crimea, unilaterally altered existing borders in 
Europe and has thus violated international law. We 
must counter that dangerous sign, because we must not 
allow the power of international law to be eroded from 
the inside. We must not allow the old divisions between 
East and West to re-emerge in the United Nations.

Because so much is at stake in that conflict, not 
only for the people of Ukraine but also for the future of 
international law, Germany and its partners have taken 
on responsibility and committed themselves vigorously 
to defusing the conflict. I am under no illusion: a 
political solution is still a long way off. However, just a 
few weeks ago we were on the brink of a direct military 
confrontation between Russian and Ukrainian armed 
forces. I am happy to say that diplomacy prevented the 
worst. Now the priority must be to bring about a lasting 
ceasefire and achieve a political solution, one based on 
the principles of the United Nations and preserving the 
unity of Ukraine.

I am not discussing only Ukraine. As long as that 
conflict is simmering and as long as Russia and the 
West are in a dispute over Ukraine, there is a threat 
of paralysing the United Nations. We therefore need a 
Security Council that is able and willing to act to tackle 
the new and, in the long term, far more important tasks 
we are facing. The world of 2014 is plagued not only by 
the old ghost of division, but also by new demons.

We are all shocked by the unspeakable brutality of 
the terrorists who misuse the name of God in carrying 
out their evil deeds. My question is, ought we not to 
be particularly worried that the preachers of hate are 
drawing in young people who have grown up in the 
midst of our own societies?

That is why that, too, is not exclusively a regional 
conflict — a problem in Iraq or in Syria or in Africa, 

where terrorists are stamping on the fundamental rights 
of women and girls in particular. That barbarity is 
directed against every one of us, and against everything 
for which the United Nations stands.

Precisely for that reason, our response needs 
to go much further than the immediately necessary 
humanitarian and military response. Germany is 
making substantial contributions to both, including 
militarily. But all that must be part of a political alliance 
against the terror of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. 
My country is strongly committed to that alliance, and 
I very much hope in particular that the societies of the 
Middle East, realizing that far more is at stake than just 
their security, will also join.

In a world haunted both by old ghosts and new 
demons, we have to be able to pursue both paths. On the 
one hand, we must steadfastly continue to work towards 
political solutions in Ukraine, in the Middle East, in 
Syria, but at the same time we must tackle the huge 
tasks of the twenty-first century.

I am referring to the fight against climate change. 
Germany is contributing $1 billion dollars to the Green 
Climate Fund. And we will support our closest partner, 
France, on the road to a successful Paris climate summit 
in 2015 and to a universal and legally binding climate 
convention, which we urgently need.

I am also referring to the digital age. Yes, the 
Internet should be a global, free, open and safe space. 
But that is not a matter solely for Government agencies 
or big companies. That global, free, open and safe space 
must be shaped by society as a whole. If we fail to act, 
the vast technological possibilities will sweep aside the 
human dimension. We need an international law for the 
digital world. Resolution 68/167, which we introduced 
together with Brazil, has made a start in that direction, 
I hope, at the United Nations.

I am also referring to the post-2015 agenda, because 
the fight against poverty begins with asking how we 
actually create value. How do we create prosperity? 
That question is not only directed at a few countries 
in need of help. Rather, it is a call to the whole world 
for more sustainable economic activity. With its shift to 
renewable energies, Germany has set out on a path that, 
although not easy, is one the world must take if we want 
to preserve our natural resources and if the fight for 
scarce resources, water and arable land is not to become 
the major conflict of the twenty-first century.

Our children will judge us by those huge tasks. 
They will look back, just as we are looking back at 
our forebears in this year of commemoration. Having 
learned from two World Wars, our forebears established 
the United Nations as their lesson to us. If we want to 
continue that lesson, if we want to master the tasks 
facing us, then we must further develop this institution. 
The United Nations is not a finished product. Perhaps it 
will never be a finished product. It must evolve further, 
so that in all its parts, including the Security Council, it 
reflects today’s world.

I believe that the United Nations is worth every 
effort, for in it lives the world’s hope for peace and a 
legal order. I assure the Assembly that my country will 
play its part in making that hope a reality, step by step.
The 
Assembly will understand that I am speaking today 
with particular emotion, because one of my compatriots 
has just been the subject of a cowardly assassination in 
Algeria by a terrorist group linked to Daesh. His name 
was Hervé Gourdel. He was a man full of enthusiasm 
who loved mountains and thought that he would be able 
to pursue his passion by going to the Djurdjura area in 
Algeria. He was captured, and he was decapitated. That 
is what terrorism does. And it does not do that only to 
France. Several days ago it was American and British 
individuals subjected to the same barbarity.

That group — Daesh — does not strike only those 
who think differently from themselves; they also strike 
Muslims, they strike civilian populations, and they 
strike minorities. They rape, they kill. That is why 
the battle that the international community must wage 
against terrorism knows no borders. The same flag must 
be carried, that of the United Nations, that of the values 
for which this Organization was founded — human 
dignity, freedom, the vision we must have of a world of 
tomorrow, a world of justice.

France is fully engaged in this battle. That was 
the case in Africa when it was called to Mali, where, 
fortunately, it was joined by many African and European 
countries and now by the United Nations. France has 
been engaged whenever there is a risk. But today it is 
in Iraq and Syria where that threat exists. But it does 
not concern that region alone, because the Daesh group 
has decided not only to conquer territory, imagining 
that it will found a State; it threatens the entire world 
by provoking attacks, organizing kidnappings and 
recruiting fighters from around the world to train them 
and show them the barbarity of which the group is 
capable, so they may reproduce that horrific terrorist 
movement in our own countries.

It is because this threat exists not only for the 
region but for the world that France responded to the 
Iraqi authorities’ appeal to provide them first with 
military aid through the delivery of weapons this past 
August and also with aerial support to keep the Daesh 
group from being able to continue its advance. We want 
to weaken it. We want to quash it.

But we also know that as long as there is no 
settlement of the Syrian crisis, all our efforts risk being 
undermined. So the challenge is not only to act against 
Daesh, but also to achieve a political solution. We in 
France support the democratic Syrian opposition. We 
consider it the sole legitimate representative of the 
Syrian people. In that case, too, we will not back down; 
we will not compromise because of threats. The Bashar 
Al-Assad regime deserves to be condemned because 
they are complicit in what has been going on for the 
past three years in Syria — 200,000 deaths and so 
many displaced persons.

This is a sad time for France, with the death — the 
murder — of one of our citizens, but France will never 
give in to blackmail, pressure or barbarous acts. On the 
contrary, France knows what is expected of it. France 
knows that it upholds values, France knows it has a role 
to play and will never abandon that role, and that the 
fight against terrorism will be continued and expanded 
as much as necessary within respect for the rule of law 
and the sovereignty of States, for we make no mistake 
when we act. We will always act with respect for the 
principles of the United Nations.

I also wanted to talk to about other things, but 
it must be understood that a great question is being 
asked of my country and also of the Assembly. When 
faced with barbarism, with terrorism, will we remain 
spectators, or will we be actors together in what should 
be a just international order? The question, if we do 
not respond to it, or if we respond too weakly, then 
terrorists will continue their business of recruitment 
and indoctrination. It is not weakness that will be the 
response to terrorism; it is force — the force of law, 
the force of the United Nations. At a certain point also, 
it will be the force of military action when it becomes 
necessary.

I also wanted to talk about other regions of the 
world that are facing threats that also affect our own 
security. I want to talk to the Assembly about the Ebola 
epidemic, because I know just how much it is affecting 
our African friends. But again, let us look beyond those 
who are affected. Who can imagine that the epidemic 
will remain confined to just a few countries if we do 
not intervene? It is also a global threat. Again, the 
response must be a global. Therefore, France, Europe 


and the world must provide to the countries affected by 
the epidemic the necessary medical care, indispensable 
protection and economic assistance that is expected. 
Because again, if there is the slightest weakness, the 
slightest failure to show solidarity, all of our countries 
will be affected.

I have also come here before the General Assembly 
to speak about what is happening in Europe and next to 
Europe, to speak about what occurred in Ukraine and 
the failures there to uphold principles of international 
law. But what is at stake today, even in Europe, is peace 
and ensuring that the ceasefire that was agreed can be 
transformed into a lasting solution to the conflict.

No continent has been spared from any threat. 
Everything is fragile, everything is precarious, 
everything is vulnerable. We have to have the same 
awareness of the risks, the dangers and the perils that 
we had right after the Second World War. We must not 
think that all we have to do is remember; we have to 
think of the future, of the world we want. The world 
that we want is the final subject I wish to address here.

The world that we want has to be one of profound 
change. The present disorder also threatens not only 
our generation but naturally those that will follow 
us. It threatens our very security, as there are more 
displaced persons resulting from climate imbalance 
than from wars, which are sadly so intense and deadly 
on our planet. France has lived up to its responsibilities 
in that area too. We decided to organize the climate 
conference in December 2015. I am pleased that thanks 
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, there was a summit 
here that mobilized awareness, States, financial 
institutions, businesses and civil society. Many events 
took place. We have to succeed at the Paris conference, 
not because it will take place in Paris, but because it is 
the world’s appointment with itself.

There are periods in history when we have the 
power to decide, and decide not just for ourselves but 
for humankind. This is one of those moments. Therefore 
in Paris, we have to do everything can be done to reach 
a comprehensive, binding agreement that differentiates 
according to levels of development, everything so that 
there can be that Green Climate Fund, to which France 
has contributed $1 billion for the coming years. I hope 
that other countries follow our example, because we 
need that Green Fund to allow less developed countries 
to grow and to succeed in their energy transition at the 
same time.

This is a sad moment that I am living today on 
behalf of France, that the French are experiencing, but 
it is also a moment of awakening and responsibility. For 
the world, for the planet, we must fight terrorism, we 
must act in favour of peace, we must reduce inequalities, 
we must also do our duty for future generations. We 
must ensure that the Paris conference is successful 
for the sake of the climate. We must make certain that 
the United Nations can remain faithful to the mandate 
given to it after a war — a terrible war. We are still 
facing challenges, but we are certain to meet them if we 
are united and come together to claim victory.This year we 
face extraordinary tests of our values and our resolve. 
In responding to the aggression against one of our 
Member States, Ukraine; in seeking peace in the Middle 
East; in dealing with the terrifying spread of the Ebola 
virus in West Africa; and in overcoming what I want to 
focus on today, which is the mortal threat we all face 

from the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) in Syria and Iraq. Deir ez-Zor is a province in 
eastern Syria. Home to the Al-Sheitaat tribe it was 
captured by ISIL last month. Seven hundred tribesmen 
were executed; many were beheaded. The vast majority 
were civilians, Muslims who refused to take an oath of 
allegiance to ISIL’s sick extremist world view and who 
paid for this with their lives. They are not alone. Across 
Syria and northern Iraq thousands have suffered the 
same fate — Muslims, both Sunni and Shia; Christians; 
Yazidis; people of every faith and none.

ISIL is not a problem restricted to just one region. It 
has murderous plans to expand its borders well beyond 
Iraq and Syria and to carry out terrorist atrocities right 
across the world. It is recruiting new fighters from all 
over the world. Five hundred have gone there from 
my country, Britain, and one of them almost certainly 
brutally murdered two American journalists and a 
British aid worker. This is a problem that affects us all 
and we must tackle it together.

There is not one person in this Hall who will view 
this challenge without reference to the past, whether in 
Iraq or in Afghanistan. Of course it is absolutely right 
that we should learn the lessons of the past, especially 
what happened in Iraq a decade ago. But we have to 
learn the right lessons — yes to careful preparation; 
no to rushing to join a conflict without a clear plan. 
But we must not be so frozen with fear that we do not 
do anything at all. Isolation and withdrawing from a 
problem like ISIL will only make matters worse.

We must not allow past mistakes to become an 
excuse for indifference or inaction. The right lesson is 
that we should act, but act differently. We should be 
comprehensive, defeating the ideology of extremism 
that is the root cause of this terrorism, so that we win the 
battle of ideas and not just the battle of military might. 
We should be intelligent, supporting representative and 
accountable Governments and working with them at 
their request, not going in over their heads. We should 
be inclusive, working with partners in the region who 
are prepared to be part of the solution, potentially 
including Iran. We should be uncompromising, using 
all the means at our disposal, including military force, 
to hunt down these extremists. Let me take each of 
these in turn.

The root cause of this terrorist threat is a poisonous 
ideology of Islamist extremism. This has nothing 
to do with Islam, which is a peaceful religion that 
inspires countless acts of generosity every day. Islamist 
extremism on the other hand believes in using the most 
brutal forms of terrorism to force people to accept a 
warped world view and to live in a quasi-mediaeval 
state. To defeat ISIL, and organizations like it, we must 
defeat this ideology in all its forms.

As evidence emerges about the backgrounds of 
those convicted of terrorist offences, it is clear that 
many of them were initially influenced by preachers 
who claim not to encourage violence but whose world 
view can be used as a justification for it. We know 
this world view. The peddling of lies — that 9/11 was 
somehow a Jewish plot, or that the 7/7 London attacks 
were staged; the idea that Muslims are persecuted all 
over the world as a deliberate act of Western policy; and 
the concept of an inevitable clash of civilizations.

We must be clear. To defeat the ideology of 
extremism we need to deal with all forms of extremism, 
not just violent extremism. For governments there 
are some obvious ways we can do this. We must ban 
preachers of hate from coming to our countries. We must 
proscribe organizations that incite terrorism against 
people at home and abroad. We must work together 
to take down illegal online material like the recent 
videos of ISIL murdering hostages. We must stop the 
so-called non-violent extremists from inciting hatred 
and intolerance in our schools, universities and even 
our prisons. Of course, some will argue that this is not 
compatible with free speech and intellectual inquiry. 
But I ask “Would we sit back and allow right-wing 
extremists, Nazis or Ku Klux Klansmen to recruit on 
our university campuses?” No, so we should not stand 
by and just allow any form of non-violent extremism.

We need to argue that prophecies of a global war 
of religion pitting Muslims against the rest of the world 
are nonsense. We need Muslims and their Governments 
throughout the world to reclaim their religion from 
these sick terrorists as so many are doing, and quite 
rightly doing, today. We all need to help them with 
programmes that channel young people away from 
these poisonous ideologues, and we need the strongest 
possible international focus on tackling this ideology, 
which is why here at the United Nations the United 
Kingdom is calling for a new Special Representative 
on extremism.

But fighting extremism will never be enough. 
Communism was defeated not simply by pointing out its 
flaws, but by showing that the alternative of economic 
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law could build a 
better society and a better world. Young people need 


to see the power of a different, better, more open, 
more democratic path. The twentieth century taught 
us the vital role of representative and accountable 
Governments in offering their people opportunity, hope 
and dignity.

Of course we should not be naïve. Not every 
country can move at the same speed or even reach the 
same destination. We should respect different cultures, 
traditions and histories. But let us be clear — the failure 
to meet people’s aspirations can create a breeding 
ground where extremist and even terrorist insurgency 
can take root. Governments that only govern for some 
of their people cause deep resentment. In Iraq, the 
failure of the Al-Maliki Government to represent all of 
the people has driven some of them into the arms of the 
extremists.

Too often, people have been faced with a false choice 
between an autocratic and unrepresentative government 
on the one hand and a brutal insurgency, with religion 
misused as its rallying call, on the other. To combat this 
we must support the building blocks of free and open 
societies. In Iraq this means supporting the creation of 
a new and genuinely inclusive Government capable of 
uniting all Iraqis — Sunnis, Shia, Kurd, Christians and 
others. In Syria, it must mean a political transition and 
an end to Al-Assad’s brutality.

I know there are some who think that we should 
do a deal with Al-Assad in order to defeat ISIL. But I 
think this view is dangerously misguided. Our enemies’ 
enemy is not our friend; it is another enemy. Doing a 
deal with Al-Assad will not defeat ISIL because the 
bias and the brutality of the Al-Assad regime were and 
are one of the most powerful recruiting tools for the 
extremists. Syria needs what Iraq needs — an inclusive, 
representative, democratic Government that can look 
after the interests of all its peoples.

To those who have backed Al-Assad or who have 
stood on the sidelines, I would say this: “We are ready 
to join with you in a new political effort to secure 
a representative and accountable Government in 
Damascus that can take the fight to ISIL”. It is simply 
not credible for Al-Assad to lead such a government 
although we are prepared to look at every practical 
option to find a way forward.

We must be inclusive, engaging the widest possible 
coalition of countries in this international effort. ISIL is 
a threat to us all, but the greatest threat is to the region. 
It is very welcome that a number of Arab countries 
have already taken part in the action to degrade ISIL. 
They have shown courage and leadership. Iran should 
also be given the chance to show it can be part of the 
solution, not part of the problem. Earlier today I met 
with President Rouhani. We have severe disagreements. 
Iran’s support for terrorist organizations, its nuclear 
programme, and its treatment of its people all need to 
change. But Iran’s leaders could help in defeating the 
threat from ISIL. They could help to secure a more 
stable, inclusive Iraq, and a more stable and inclusive 
Syria. If they are prepared to do this, we should 
welcome their engagement.

Finally, when the safety and security of our 
people are at stake, we must be uncompromising in 
our response. That starts at home. For our part, in 
the United Kingdom we are introducing new powers 
to strengthen our ability to seize passports and stop 
suspects from travelling; to allow us to strip British 
identity from dual nationals and temporarily prevent 
some British nationals getting back into our country; 
to ensure that airlines comply with our no fly lists 
and security screening requirements; and to enable 
our police and security services to apply for stronger 
locational constraints on those in the United Kingdom 
who pose a risk. Here at the United Nations we have 
led in the adoption of a Security Council resolution to 
disrupt the flows of finance to ISIL, to sanction those 
who are seeking to recruit to ISIL and to encourage 
countries to do all they can to prevent foreign fighters 
joining the extremist cause.

What about the role of our military? I do not believe 
that the treat of Islamist extremism will best be solved 
by Western ground troops directly trying to pacify or 
reconstruct Middle Eastern or African countries. But, 
pursuing an intelligent and comprehensive approach 
should include a place for our military. Our military 
can support the enormous humanitarian efforts that 
are necessary, as our Royal Air Force did in helping 
the millions of people who fled from ISIL. We should, 
together, do more to build the capability of the legitimate 
authorities that are fighting the extremists. That can 
mean training, equipping and advising, and providing 
technology and the other assets necessary for success. 
Whether it is supporting action against Boko Haram in 
Nigeria, against Al-Shabaab in Somalia, against Ansar 
al-Sharia in Libya, or against Al-Qaida in Yemen, it is 
right to help those who are fighting on the front line for 
their societies, their countries and their freedom.


Along with our European partners, we have already 
been supplying equipment directly to Kurdish forces. 
We are strengthening the resilience of the military 
forces in neighbouring Lebanon and Jordan, and 
British Tornado and surveillance aircraft have already 
been helping with intelligence gathering and logistics 
support to help those taking on ISIL in Iraq.

We now have a substantial international coalition in 
place, including Arab nations, committed to confronting 
and defeating ISIL. We have a comprehensive strategy 
to do that, with the political, diplomatic, humanitarian 
and military components that are needed to succeed 
over time. The Security Council has now received a 
clear request from the Iraqi Government to support it 
in its military action against ISIL. So we have a clear 
basis in international law for action, and we have a need 
to act in our own national interest to protect our people 
and our society. It is right that Britain should now move 
to a new phase of action. I am therefore recalling the 
British Parliament on Friday to secure approval for the 
United Kingdom to take part in international air strikes 
against ISIL in Iraq.

My message today is simple. We are facing an evil 
against which the whole world should unite. As ever, in 
the cause of freedom, democracy and justice, Britain 
will play its part.

At the outset, I would like 
to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President 
of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.

It is a truly a great honour for me to address the 
Assembly for the first time as Prime Minister of India. 
I am humbled by the hopes and expectations of the 
people of India. I am also mindful of the expectations 
of the world from our 1.25 billion people.

My country, India, is home to one sixth of 
the world’s population. It is a nation experiencing 
economic and social transformation on a scale rarely 
seen in the history of the world. Every country’s world 
view is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
traditions. India’s ancient wisdom sees the world as one 
family, and when I say this, I wish to make it clear that 
each country has its philosophy. I am not talking about 
ideology. With the inspiration of that philosophy, a 
country marches ahead. India is a country that since its 
Vedic times, has been saying that the world, the entire 
globe, is a family. India is a country where, beyond 
nature, we have a communication, a dialogue, with 
nature. We never struggle with nature. That is a part 
of Indian life. The reason is that with that philosophy, 
India has been moving forward. Each country and each 
nation is shaped by its civilization and its philosophical 
tradition. India’s ancient wisdom, as I have said, sees 
the world as one family. India is a country that not only 
speaks for itself but for worldwide justice, dignity, 
opportunity and prosperity. We have always spoken out 
in support of such issues.

Owing to our ideology, we have a firm belief in 
multilateralism. Today, as I stand here, I am equally 
aware of the hopes and expectations that are pinned on 
the General Assembly. I am struck by the sacred belief 
that brought us together. We established the Organization 
on the basis of great principles and perspectives, in the 
belief that if our futures are connected, we will have to 
work together for peace and security, for human rights 
and for the economic development of all. We must work 
together to those ends. At that time, there were only 
51 countries. Today, 193 sovereign flags fly in front of 
this building. Each new country enters on the basis of 
the same belief and expectation.

In the past six decades, we have been able to achieve 
a great deal. We have ended many wars. We have 
established and maintained peace. We have assisted 
economic development in many places. We have helped 
to build a future for poor children. We have contributed 
towards the elimination of starvation and strived to 
save our planet. The 69 United Nations peacekeeping 
missions have made the Blue Helmet a symbol of peace 
in the world.

Today, there is a surge of democracy across the 
world. The peaceful democratic transformation in 
Afghanistan shows that the Afghan people’s aspiration 
for peace will definitely triumph over violence. We 
have seen Nepal emerge from war towards peace and 
democracy. Bhutan’s young democracy is flourishing. 
There are also efforts towards democracy in West Asia 
and North Africa. Tunisia’s success shows that such a 
path of democracy is possible. In Africa, there is a new 
momentum for stability, peace and progress, and a new 
awareness is on the horizon.

We have seen unprecedented prosperity in Asia and 
beyond founded on strengthened peace and stability. 
Latin America, a continent of enormous potential, is 
coming together in the shared pursuit of stability and 
prosperity. That continent may prove to be an important 
anchor for the global community. India looks forward to 
a peaceful and stable environment for its development. 
Our future is linked to our neighbourhood. That is why, 
from the very first day, my Government gave the highest 
priority to promoting friendship and cooperation with 
our neighbouring countries.

I have the same policy towards Pakistan. I want 
to hold serious bilateral talks with Pakistan in order 
to improve friendship and cooperation in a peaceful 
atmosphere, without the shadow of terrorism. I want 
to hold bilateral talks with that country. However, it 
is also Pakistan’s responsibility to come forward and 
to genuinely establish the appropriate atmosphere for 
bilateral talks. In raising that issue in this forum, I do 
not know how successful our efforts will be. Some 
people are doubtful.

Today, we need to assist the victims of the floods 
in Kashmir. In India, we have organized large-scale 
assistance. We have not stopped at only India helping 
Kashmir. We have also asked Pakistan to assist, since 
that area was also affected by the floods. We have told 
Pakistan that just as we were helping the flood victims 
in India, we would also like to help those in Pakistan. 
We have proposed that. We are a part of the developing 
world but have limited resources. We would like to 
share our modest resources with all those who are in 
dire need of assistance.

Today, the world is witnessing a high level of 
tension and turmoil. There are no major wars, but 
tension and conflict abound. There is an absence of 
peace and uncertainty about the future. Even today, 
there is rampant poverty everywhere. The Asia-Pacific 

region, which is integrating, is still concerned about 
maritime security. That is fundamental to its future. 
Europe faces a new threat of division. In West Asia, 
the dividing lines and terrorism are increasing. In our 
own region, we are still struggling to combat terrorism 
and instability. For the past four decades, we have faced 
such a threat.

Terrorism emerges in new forms and under new 
names. Be it small or large, in the North, the South, 
the East or the West, no country is free from threats. 
I remember when I met with world leaders 20 years 
ago, and we talked about terrorism. They did not quite 
understand it and stated that it was a law-and-order 
problem. Today, the entire world is witness to the slow 
spread of terrorism far and wide.

Are we really making integrated efforts at the 
international level to fight against those powerful 
groups? I know that terrorism is a very serious problem 
for discussion. Even today, some countries are giving 
refuge to international terrorists, and they consider 
terrorism a tool of their policy. Good terrorism and bad 
terrorism — that is what we hear these days. At this 
time, there is a question mark regarding our struggle to 
fight against terrorism. The brutal return of terrorism 
in West Asia and its impact on countries far and near 
has elicited a concerted effort, which we welcome. 
However, the effort should involve all the countries of 
the region. If we want to overcome terrorism, then they 
must all contribute towards its eradication. We strongly 
emphasize this.

Oceans, seas, space and cyberspace, besides 
contributing to our common wealth and prosperity, are 
becoming new theatres of conflict. In the same oceans 
that used to connect us, we are today hearing news of 
disputes. We once saw space as holding out potential 
for our achievements. Today, in cyberspace, which 
connects us in important areas, new dangers are being 
seen. International harmony and cooperation — on 
which the United Nations was founded — are needed 
now more than ever before. Today, we talk about an 
interdependent world, but have we become more united 
as nations? We need to think about that.

Why, when we have a good forum like the United 
Nations, do we keep creating so many different groups? 
There is the Group of Four, the Group of Seven and 
the Group of 20 — and the numbers keep changing. 
Whether or not we really want to do so, we, including 
India, become members of them. Is it not the time to 
move on and leave behind those groups? When the 
United Nations celebrates its seventieth anniversary, 
how do we create a Group-of-All atmosphere? How can 
the General Assembly create an opportunity to solve 
all our problems? How can people begin to be more 
trustful? How can we become less competitive? We talk 
about unity, but then we divide the whole into different 
parts and pieces. Can we prevent ourselves from doing 
so?

On the one hand, we say that our policies are 
interconnected; on the other, we think in terms of 
zero-sum gains. We think that if the other benefits, I 
stand to lose. Who receives the benefit and who suffers 
the loss? That is what we appear to be weighing. The 
pessimists are cynical. Like them, we are inclined to 
say nothing will change. It is easy to be cynical and 
to say nothing will change. But if we do that, we run 
the risk of shirking our responsibilities and putting our 
collective future in danger.

We must unite and prepare to meet the needs of our 
times. We must really work for global peace. No one 
country or group of countries can determine the course 
of the world or its policies. It is imperative to have 
genuine international participation and partnership. We 
should try to promote positive dialogue and cooperation 
among countries. Our efforts must begin at the United 
Nations.

It is important that we improve the Security Council 
by making it more democratic and participative. 
Institutions that reflect the imperatives of the twentieth 
century will not be effective in the twenty-first century. 
They face the risk of irrelevance. I would like to 
emphasize that the policies and rules we made in the 
twentieth century may no longer be applicable. The 
speed of change is very fast. It is therefore essential 
that, in tune with the times, we adapt and reformulate, 
making the necessary changes and introducing new 
ideas. Only when we have done that will we be relevant.

We should set aside all our differences and mount 
a concerted international effort to combat terrorism 
and extremism. Towards that end, we should adopt a 
comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 
That is something which is long overdue. It must be 
emphasized that our combined strength to fight against 
terrorism should be reflected in the convention. Our 
country, which has endured so many terrorist attacks, 
knows that, so long as the United Nations fails to take 
the initiative in that effort, and so long as we do not 
adopt a convention, we cannot be successful. In such 
work, we must not forget to make provision for peace, 

stability and order in outer space and cyberspace. We 
must work together to ensure that all countries observe 
international rules and norms.

We must include the host countries and troop-
contributing countries in our decision-making on 
United Nations peacekeeping. If they are included, their 
confidence will increase considerably. They are ready 
to make major sacrifices and to give their time and 
energy. But if they are excluded from decision-making, 
then how can United Nations peacekeeping become 
more vital and urgent? We need to seriously consider 
that. Today, let us redouble our efforts in pursuit of 
global disarmament. Let us also spare no effort to 
ensure that we work tirelessly towards those goals.

Globalization has created new industries and 
sources of employment. At the same time, billions live 
in the shadow of poverty. A great many countries are 
suffering economic deprivation, barely keeping their 
heads above water. What seems so difficult today was 
never so difficult in the past. Technology has made many 
things possible. Reduction in the cost of technology has 
made it more widely available. If we think of the speed 
with which Facebook or Twitter have spread around the 
world and cell-phone use has proliferated, then we must 
also believe that development and empowerment can 
spread with the same speed.

It is up to each country to make its own efforts 
at the national level. Each Government must fulfil its 
responsibilities. International participation is also very 
important. At one level, it requires better coordination 
of policy, so that our efforts become mutually 
supportive, not mutually damaging. It also means that, 
when we craft agreements on international trade, we 
accommodate one another’s concerns and interests.

Let us think about the scale of the need. Today, 
basic sanitation is out of the reach of 2.5 billion people; 
1.3 billion have no access to electricity and 1.1 billion 
no access to drinking water. That makes it clear that 
more comprehensive and concerted international action 
is required. We cannot keep waiting for economic 
development. In India, the most important aspects of 
my development agenda are focused precisely on those 
very issues, which should also be at the core of the post-
2015 development agenda, as they deserve our utmost 
attention.

A world that is more habitable and sustainable is an 
objective we must work towards. There has been much 
debate and much written about that, but it takes only a 
brief glance around our countries to become concerned. 
We are very concerned indeed about issues relating to 
forests, wildlife, birds, rivers, water sources and the 
blue sky above.

I would like to address three points. First, if we 
are to meet all of the challenges, we must fully uphold 
our responsibilities. The global community has 
agreed to work together on the basis of common but 
differentiated responsibility. That must continue to be 
the foundation of future action. That also means that 
developed countries must fulfil their commitments in 
terms of funding and technology transfer.

Secondly, national action is imperative. Technology 
has made many things possible, such as renewable 
energy. We need imagination and commitment. India 
stands ready to share its technology and capabilities, as 
for example through the recently announced free access 
to a satellite.

Thirdly, we need to change our lifestyles. Avoiding 
energy use is the cleanest option and would give a 
new direction to our economy. For us in India, respect 
for nature is fundamental and an integral part of 
spiritualism. It is part of our ideology.

I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to 
another idea. When we talk of climate change, we are 
also talking about holistic health care, connecting with 
nature and going back to basics. Today, I would like 
to underscore that yoga is an invaluable gift from our 
ancient tradition. Yoga embodies unity of mind and 
body, thought and action. It is important to coordinate 
all of those aspects. Such a holistic approach is valuable 
to our health and our well-being. Yoga is not just about 
exercise; it is a way to discover the sense of oneness 
with yourself, the world and nature. By changing our 
lifestyle and creating consciousness, it can also help us 
deal with climate change. Let us work towards adopting 
an international yoga day.

Finally, we are at a historic moment. Every age is 
defined by its character and remembered for how it 
rose to meet its challenges. Today, we are responsible 
to rise and meet those challenges. Next year, the United 
Nations will be 70 years old. We should ask ourselves 
whether we should wait until we are 80 or 100 years 
old to take action. I believe that next year will provide 
an opportunity for the United Nations. After a voyage 
spanning 70 years, we shall be able to look back and 
review what we have achieved, whence we began, 
why we left certain places, what motivated us, how 

we proceeded and what we have attained. What are 
the challenges facing us in the twenty-first century? If 
we can keep all of that in mind, through exchanges of 
views, dialogue with universities, and intergenerational 
discussions with young people, who can contribute 
ideas, then we will find the ways to connect all of those 
things for future generations.

That is why I say that arriving at the milestone 
of 70 years presents us with a great opportunity that 
we should not waste. By taking full advantage of this 
moment, we could achieve a new consciousness, a new 
life, with new ambitions and aspirations. We could 
give the journey of the United Nations a new form. I 
therefore feel that 70 years is a great opportunity for 
us. Let us come together and fulfil our promise to bring 
improvements to the Security Council. That issue has 
been before us for a long time, yet there has not been 
much progress. We need to think very seriously about 
it.

In preparing and implementing the post-2015 
development agenda, let us come together to keep our 
promises. For 2015, let us come together to give a new 
direction and make the moment memorable by giving 
the world a new lease on development. The year 2015 
should be a banner year in history — a turning point 
in history. I hope that we will all live up to its promise.
I come here from 
Jerusalem to speak on behalf of my people, the people 
of Israel. I have come to speak about the dangers we 
face and about the opportunities we seek. I have come 
to expose the brazen lies spoken from this very rostrum 
about my country and the brave soldiers who defend it.

The people of Israel pray for peace, but our hopes 
for peace, and those of the world, are in danger, because 
everywhere we look militant Islam is on the march. It 
is not militants; it is not Islam; it is militant Islam, and 
typically, its first victims are other Muslims. But it 
spares no one. Christians, Jews, Yazidis, Kurds — no 
creed, no faith, no ethnic group is beyond its sights, 
and it is rapidly spreading in every part of the world. 
We know the famous American saying “All politics is 
local”. For the militant Islamists, all politics is global, 
because their ultimate goal is to dominate the world.

Now that threat might seem exaggerated to some, 
since it starts out small, like a cancer that attacks a 
particular part of the body. But left unchecked, the 
cancer grows, metastasizing over wider and wider 
areas. To protect the peace and security of the world, 
we must remove that cancer before it is too late. Last 
week, many of the countries represented here rightly 
applauded President Obama for leading the effort 
to confront the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham 
(ISIS); and yet weeks before, some of those same 
countries — the same countries that now support 
confronting ISIS — opposed Israel for confronting 
Hamas. Evidently, they do not understand that ISIS and 
Hamas are branches of the same poisonous tree.

ISIS and Hamas share a fanatical creed that they 
both seek to impose well beyond the territory under their 


control. Let us listen to what ISIS’s self-declared Caliph, 
Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, said two months ago. He said 
that the day would soon come when the Muslim would 
walk everywhere as a master, and that Muslims would 
cause the world to hear and understand the meaning of 
terrorism, and destroy the idol of democracy. Now let 
us listen to Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas. He 
proclaims a similar vision of the future. “We say this to 
the West”, he says. “By Allah it will be defeated, and 
tomorrow our nation will sit on the throne of the world”.

As its Charter makes clear, Hamas’s immediate 
goal is to destroy Israel; but it has a broader objective. 
It also wants a caliphate. Hamas shares the global 
ambitions of its fellow militant Islamists, and that is 
why its supporters cheered wildly in the streets of Gaza 
when thousands of Americans were murdered on 9/11. 
That is why its leaders condemned the United States 
for killing Osama Bin Laden, whom they praised as a 
holy warrior. When it comes to their ultimate goals, 
therefore, Hamas is ISIS and ISIS is Hamas.

And what they share in common, all militant 
Islamists share in common — Boko Haram in Nigeria, 
Al-Shabaab in Somalia, Hizbullah in Lebanon, Al-Nusra 
in Syria, the Al-Mahdi Army in Iraq and the Al-Qaida 
branches in Yemen, Libya, the Philippines, India and 
elsewhere. Some are radical Sunnis, some are radical 
Shiites. Some want to restore a pre-medieval caliphate 
from the seventh century. Others want to trigger the 
apocalyptic return of an imam from the ninth century.

They operate in different lands. They target 
different victims. They even kill each other in their 
battle for supremacy. But they all share a fanatic 
ideology. They all seek to create ever expanding 
enclaves of militant Islam, where there is no freedom 
and no tolerance, where women are treated as chattel, 
Christians are decimated and minorities are subjugated, 
and sometimes given the stark choice: convert or die. 
For them, anyone can be consider an infidel, including 
fellow Muslims.

Militant Islam’s ambition to dominate the world 
seems mad, but so too did the global ambitions of 
another fanatic ideology that swept into power eight 
decades ago. The Nazis believed in a master race. The 
militant Islamists believe in a master faith. They just 
disagree as to who among them will be the master of 
the master faith. That is what they truly disagree about. 
Therefore, the question before us is whether militant 
Islam will have the power to realize its unbridled 
ambitions.

There is one place where that could soon 
happen — the Islamic State of Iran. For 35 years, Iran 
has relentlessly pursued the global mission that was set 
forth by its founding ruler, Ayatollah Khomeini, with 
the following words:

“We will export our revolution to the entire world, 
until the cry ‘There is no God but Allah’ will echo 
throughout the world over”.
Ever since, the regime’s brutal enforcers, Iran’s 
Revolutionary Guards, have done exactly that. Let us 
listen to its current commander, General Mohammad 
Ali Jafari, who clearly stated that goal:
“Our Imam did not limit the Islamic Revolution to 
this country. Our duty is to prepare the way for an 
Islamic world Government.”
Iran’s president, Mr. Rouhani, stood here last 
week and shed crocodile tears over what he called the 
globalization of terrorism. Maybe he should spare us 
those phony tears and have a word instead with the 
commanders of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards. He could 
ask them to call off Iran’s global terror campaign, 
which has included attacks in two dozen countries 
on five continents since 2011 alone. To say that Iran 
does not practice terrorism is like saying Derek Jeter 
never played shortstop for the New York Yankees. The 
bemoaning by the Iranian President of the spread of 
terrorism has got to be one of history’s greatest displays 
of double talk.

Some argue that Iran’s global terror campaign — its 
subversion of countries throughout the Middle East 
and well beyond the Middle East — is the work of the 
extremists. They say that things are changing. They 
point to last year’s election in Iran. They claim that 
Iran’s smooth-talking President and Foreign Minister 
have changed not only the tone of Iran’s foreign policy 
but also its substance. They believe that Rouhani and 
Zarif generally want to reconcile with the West, that 
they have abandoned the global mission of the Islamic 
Revolution. Really?

Let us look at what Foreign Minister Zarif wrote in 
his book just a few years ago:

“We have a fundamental problem with the West, 
and especially with America. This is because we 
are heirs to a global mission which is tied to our 
raison d’être”. 
A global mission which is tied to our very 
reason for being? Then Zarif asks a question — an 
interesting question, in my view. He says, “How come 
Malaysia” — referring to an overwhelmingly Muslim 
country — “does not have similar problems?” Then he 
answers: “Because Malaysia is not trying to change the 
international order”. That is our moderate.
Let us not be fooled by Iran’s manipulative charm 
offensive. It is designed for one purpose and one purpose 
only — to have the sanctions lifted and the obstacles to 
Iran’s path to the bomb removed. The Islamic Republic 
is now trying to bamboozle its way to an agreement 
that will remove the sanctions it still faces and leave it 
with the capacity of thousands of centrifuges to enrich 
uranium. That would effectively cement Iran’s place as 
a threshold military nuclear Power. In the future, at the 
time of its choosing, Iran, the world’s most dangerous 
regime, in the world’s most dangerous region, would 
obtain the world’s most dangerous weapons. Allowing 
that to happen would pose the gravest threat to us all.

It is one thing to confront militant Islamists on 
pickup trucks armed with Kalashnikov rifles. It is 
another thing to confront militant Islamists armed with 
weapons of mass destruction. I remember that last year 
everyone here was rightly concerned about the chemical 
weapons in Syria, including the possibility that they 
would fall into the hands of terrorists. Well, that did 
not happen, and President Obama deserves great 
credit for leading the diplomatic effort to dismantle 
virtually all of Syria’s chemical weapons capability. 
We can only imagine how much more dangerous 
the Islamic State — ISIS — would be if it possessed 
chemical weapons. Now, let us imagine how much 
more dangerous the Islamic State of Iran would be if it 
possessed nuclear weapons.

Would you let ISIS enrich uranium? Would you let 
ISIS build a heavy-water reactor? Would you let ISIS 
develop intercontinental ballistic missiles? Of course 
you would not. Then you must not let the Islamic 
State of Iran do those things either, because if you do, 
here is what will happen. Once Iran produces atomic 
bombs, all the charm and all the smiles will suddenly 
disappear — they will just vanish. It is then that the 
ayatollahs will show their true face and unleash their 
aggressive fanaticism on the entire world.

There is only one responsible course of action to 
address this threat. Iran’s nuclear military capabilities 
must be fully dismantled. Make no mistake — ISIS 
must be defeated, but to defeat ISIS and leave Iran as 
a threshold nuclear Power is to win the battle and lose 
the war.

The fight against militant Islam is indivisible. When 
militant Islam succeeds anywhere, it is emboldened 
everywhere. When it suffers a blow in one place, it is set 
back in every place. That is why Israel’s fight against 
Hamas is not just our fight; it is everyone’s fight. Israel is 
fighting a fanaticism today that other countries may be 
forced to fight tomorrow. For 50 days this past summer, 
Hamas fired thousands of rockets at Israel, many of 
them supplied by Iran. I want members to think about 
what their countries would do if thousands of rockets 
were fired at their cities. Let them imagine millions 
of their citizens having seconds at most to scramble to 
bomb shelters, day after day. Members would not let 
terrorists fire rockets at their cities with impunity, nor 
would they let terrorists dig dozens of terror tunnels 
under their borders to infiltrate their towns in order to 
murder and kidnap their citizens. Israel justly defended 
itself against both rocket attacks and terror tunnels.

Yet Israel faced another challenge. We faced a 
propaganda war because, in an attempt to win the world’s 
sympathy, Hamas cynically used Palestinian civilians 
as human shields. It used schools — not just schools, 
United Nations schools — private homes, mosques 
and even hospitals to store and fire rockets at Israel. 
As Israel surgically struck at the rocket launchers and 
at the tunnels, Palestinian civilians were tragically but 
unintentionally killed. There are heartrending images 
that resulted, and these fuelled libellous charges that 
Israel was deliberately targeting civilians. We were not. 
We deeply regret every single civilian casualty.

And the truth is, Israel was doing everything to 
minimize Palestinian civilian casualties. Hamas was 
doing everything to maximize Israeli civilian casualties 
and Palestinian civilian casualties. Israel dropped 
flyers, made phone calls, sent text messages, broadcast 
warnings in Arabic on Palestinian television — all 
this to enable Palestinian civilians to evaluate targeted 
areas. No other country and no other army in history 
have gone to greater lengths to avoid casualties among 
the civilian population of their enemies.

Such concern for Palestinian life was all the more 
remarkable given that Israeli civilians were being 

bombarded by rockets, day after day, night after 
night. And as their families were being rocketed by 
Hamas, Israel’s citizen army, the brave soldiers of 
the Israel Defense Forces, our young boys and girls, 
upheld the highest moral values of any army in the 
world. Israel’s soldiers deserve not condemnation 
but admiration — admiration from decent people 
everywhere.

Here is what Hamas did. Hamas embedded 
its missile batteries in residential areas and told 
Palestinians to ignore Israel’s warnings to leave. 
And just in case people did not get the message, they 
executed Palestinian civilians in Gaza who dared to 
protest. And, no less reprehensible, Hamas deliberately 
placed its rockets where Palestinian children live and 
play.

Let me show the Assembly a photograph. It was 
taken by a France 24 crew during the recent conflict. 
It shows two Hamas rocket launchers, which were used 
to attack us. Three children can be seen playing next to 
them. Hamas deliberately put its rockets in hundreds 
of residential areas like this — hundreds of them. That 
is a war crime. I say to President Abbas, these are the 
crimes — the war crimes — committed by his Hamas 
partners in the national unity Government which he 
heads and for which he is responsible. These are the 
real war crimes he should have investigated or spoken 
out against from this rostrum last week.

As Israel’s children huddle in bomb shelters and 
Israel’s Iron Dome missile defence knocked Hamas 
rockets out of the sky, the profound moral difference 
between Israel and Hamas could not have been clearer. 
Israel was using its missiles to protect its children; 
Hamas was using its children to protect its missiles.

By investigating Israel rather than Hamas for war 
crimes, the United Nations Human Rights Council has 
betrayed its noble mission to protect the innocent. In 
fact, what it is doing is to turn the laws of war upside 
down. Israel, which took unprecedented steps to 
minimize civilian casualties, is condemned; Hamas, 
which both targeted and hid behind civilians — that is a 
double war crime — is given a pass. The Human Rights 
Council is thus sending a clear message to terrorists 
everywhere: “Use civilians as a human shield. Use 
them again and again and again.” And you know why? 
Because, sadly, it works. By granting international 
legitimacy to the use of human shields, the Human 
Rights Council has become a terrorist rights council, 
and it will have repercussions — it probably already 
has — in terms of the use of civilians as human shields. 
It is not just our interests and values that are under 
attack: it is the interests and values of all of us.

We live in a world steeped in tyranny and terror, 
where gays are hanged from cranes in Tehran, political 
prisoners are executed in Gaza, young girls are abducted 
en masse in Nigeria and hundreds of thousands are 
butchered in Syria, Libya and Iraq, yet nearly half of 
the Human Rights Council’s resolutions focusing on a 
single country have been directed against Israel — the 
one true democracy in the Middle East; Israel, where 
issues are openly debated in a boisterous Parliament, 
where human rights are protected by independent 
courts, and where women, gays and minorities live in a 
genuinely free society.

The biased treatment of Israel by the Human Rights 
Council — that is a misnomer, but I will use it just the 
same — is only one manifestation of the return of one 
of the world’s oldest prejudices. We hear mobs today in 
Europe calling for the gassing of Jews. We hear some 
national leaders compare Israel to the Nazis. This is 
not a function of Israel’s policies; it is a function of 
diseased minds, and that disease has a name. It is called 
anti-Semitism. It is now spreading in polite society 
where it masquerades as legitimate criticism of Israel. 
For centuries, the Jewish people have been demonized 
with blood libels and charges of deicide. Today, the 
Jewish State is demonized with the apartheid libel and 
charges of genocide.

In what moral universe does genocide include 
warning the enemy civilian population to get out 
of harm’s way or ensuring that they receive tons of 
humanitarian aid each day, even as thousands of rockets 
are being fired at us, or setting up a field hospital 
to aid their wounded? I suppose it is the same moral 
universe in which a man who wrote a dissertation of 
lies about the Holocaust and who insists on a Palestine 
free of Jews — Judenrein — can stand at this rostrum 
and shamelessly accuse Israel of genocide and ethnic 
cleansing. In the past, outrageous lies against the Jews 
were the precursors to the wholesale slaughter of our 
people. But no more; today, we the Jewish people have 
the power to defend ourselves. We will defend ourselves 
against our enemies on the battlefield and we will expose 
their lies against us in the court of public opinion. Israel 
will continue to stand proud and unbowed.

Despite the enormous challenges facing Israel, I 
believe we have a historic opportunity. After decades of 
seeing Israel as their enemy, leading States in the Arab 
world increasingly recognize that together we and they 
face many of the same dangers. Principally, that means 
a nuclear-armed Iran and militant Islamist movements 
gaining ground in the Sunni world. Our challenge is to 
transform those common interests in order to create a 
productive partnership that would build a more secure, 
peaceful and prosperous Middle East. Together we can 
strengthen regional security. We can advance projects 
in water, agriculture, transportation, health care, energy 
and so many other fields.

I believe that the partnership between us can also 
help facilitate peace between Israel and the Palestinians. 
Many have long assumed that an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace can help facilitate a broader rapprochement 
between Israel and the Arab world. But I believe that, 
these days, it may work the other way around, namely, 
that a broader rapprochement between Israel and the 
Arab world may help facilitate an Israeli-Palestinian 
peace. Therefore, to achieve that peace, we must look 
not only to Jerusalem and Ramallah but also to Cairo, 
Amman, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh and elsewhere. I believe 
that peace could be realized with the active involvement 
of Arab countries that are willing to provide political, 
material and other indispensable support.

I am ready to make a historic compromise, and not 
because Israel occupies a foreign land. The people of 
Israel are not occupiers in the land of Israel. History, 
archaeology and common sense all make clear that we 
have had a singular attachment to this land for over 
3,000 years. I want peace because I want to create a 
better future for my people. But it must be a genuine 
peace, one that is anchored in mutual recognition and 
enduring security arrangements — rock-solid security 
arrangements — on the ground. Israel’s withdrawal 
from Lebanon and Gaza created two militant Islamic 
enclaves on our borders from which tens of thousands 
of rockets have been fired at Israel. Those sobering 
experiences heighten Israel’s security concerns 
regarding potential territorial concessions in the future.

Those security concerns are even greater today. Let 
us just look around. The Middle East is in chaos. States 
are disintegrating, and militant Islamists are filling 
the void. Israel cannot have territories from which it 
withdraws taken over by Islamic militants yet again, 
as happened in Gaza and Lebanon. That would place 
the likes of ISIS within mortar range, a few miles of 
80 per cent of our population. Think about that. The 
distance between the 1967 lines and the suburbs of 
Tel Aviv is similar to the distance between United 
Nations Headquarters and Times Square. Israel is a tiny 
country. That is why in any peace agreement, which 
will obviously necessitate a territorial compromise, I 
will always insist that Israel be able to defend itself, by 
itself, against any threat.

Yet despite everything that has happened, some still 
do not take Israel’s security concerns seriously, but I do 
and I always will. That is because as Prime Minister of 
Israel I am entrusted with the awesome responsibility 
of ensuring the future of the Jewish people and the 
future of the Jewish State. No matter what pressure is 
brought to bear, I will never waver in fulfilling that 
responsibility.

I believe that with a fresh approach on the part 
of our neighbours, we can advance peace despite the 
difficulties we face. In Israel, we have a record of making 
the impossible possible. We have made a desolate land 
flourish, and with very few natural resources we have 
used the fertile minds of our people to turn Israel into 
a global centre of technology and innovation. Peace 
would enable Israel to realize its full potential and to 
bring a promising future not only to our people and not 
only to the Palestinian people, but to many, many others 
in our region. But the old template for peace must be 
updated. It must take into account new realities and 
new roles and responsibilities for our Arab neighbours.

There is a new Middle East. It presents new dangers 
but also new opportunities. Israel is prepared to work 
with Arab partners and the international community to 
confront those dangers and to seize those opportunities. 
Together, we must recognize the global threat of 
militant Islam, the primacy of dismantling Iran’s 
nuclear weapons capability, and the indispensable role 
of Arab States in advancing peace with the Palestinians. 
All that may fly in the face of conventional wisdom, but 
it is the truth. And the truth must always be spoken, 
especially in the United Nations. Isaiah, a great prophet 
of peace, taught us nearly 3,000 years ago in Jerusalem 
to speak truth to power. He said:

“For the sake of Zion, I will not be silent. For the 
sake of Jerusalem, I will not be still until her justice 
shines bright and her salvation glows like a flaming 
torch”.
Let us light a torch of truth and justice to safeguard 
our common future.

It is an honour to 
address the General Assembly today on behalf of the 
Prime Minister and Government of New Zealand. Our 
general election took place in the past week. Our Prime 
Minister, the Right Honourable John Key, is engaged in 
forming a Government, and that is why he is unable to 
be in New York today.

I want to begin by acknowledging the success of 
the recent third International Conference on Small 
Island Developing States, held in Samoa. The success 
of the Conference was the result of the extraordinary 
work Samoa put into preparing for the Conference and 
the ownership of the agenda that was demonstrated by 
the small island developing States (SIDS). While it is 
undoubtedly true that small island developing States 
have placed great value on the opportunity to talk, it 
is also true that there was an undertone of frustration, 
born of the fact that too often in the past talk has not 
been followed by action. I strongly identify with that 
view. The multilateral world is awash with talk of plans 
and strategies and funds, while out there in the real 
world of small island developing States, not enough is 
happening on the ground. My country, New Zealand, is 
intent on avoiding that shortcoming, especially in our 
own region, the Pacific.

Renewable energy featured strongly in the SIDS 
Conference agenda, as it had at the Secretary-General’s 
2014 Climate Summit in the past week. Pacific nations 
spend 10 per cent of their gross domestic product and up 
to 30 per cent of their entire import bills on importing 
diesel fuel for electricity generation. Sustainable 
economic development therefore simply cannot happen 
in our region without renewable energy.

Significant progress is being achieved, especially 
since the Pacific Energy Summit 2013 that we co-hosted 
with the European Union in Auckland in March 2013, 
at which $635 million in funding was committed for 
over 50 projects. The Tokelau Islands have moved from 
100 per cent dependence on fossil fuels to 93 per cent 
renewable. During the SIDS Conference itself, we 
opened a 2.2-megawatt plant, a solar array in Samoa. 
A year earlier we opened a 1.2-megawatt plant in 
Tonga. Next month, we will open a 1-megawatt array in 
Rarotonga. And in the next 12 months, all of the outer 
islands of Tuvalu and all but one of the outer Cook 
Islands will be close to 100 per cent renewable. 

We are making real progress towards converting 
our Pacific neighbourhood to renewable energy, 
bringing significant environmental benefits and 
greatly enhancing prospects for sustainable economic 
development. My country has committed over 
$100 million to that process. We are not waiting for a 
new multilateral agreement or a new green fund. We 
are simply getting ahead with robust partnerships and 
making it happen.

Another key topic at the SIDS Conference was 
sustainable fisheries. For our region, that is critically 
important. The biggest economic asset in the Pacific 
is its fisheries. In the past year, over $3.3 billion worth 
of tuna was harvested from Pacific waters, yet only 
14 per cent of that value, about $460 million, made 
its way back to Pacific nations. New Zealand has 
committed over $70 million over the next five years 
to advance a comprehensive approach that includes 
enhanced surveillance, training of monitors, training 
in commercial fishing practices, research and science 
initiatives and improving management practices. Our 
objective is to see the owners of the Pacific tuna resource 
receive a significantly greater share of the value of that 
resource, and to ensure that it is sustainably managed 
for the future.

A key message from the SIDS Conference is the need 
to share experiences and skills among the SIDS regions. 
That is starting to happen. Fisheries management is a 
prime candidate for greater cooperation. We have also 
commenced a process of interregional cooperation in 
renewable energy by supporting the development of 
geothermal energy in the Caribbean and Africa.

While small island developing States are showing 
real leadership in addressing climate change and 
shifting to renewable energy, those issues require action 
on a global scale. We therefore commend the Secretary-
General for convening the Climate Summit here in 
New York last week. We are participating actively in 
those negotiations and hope they will pave the way for 
a successful conclusion in Paris next year. We have 
made an initial commitment to the Green Climate 
Fund to show our support for the global effort, but we 
will unashamedly continue to prioritize making real 
progress with real projects in our own region, which 
will continue to consume the bulk of our resources.

The other major event that has recently taken place 
in the Pacific is the election in Fiji. We congratulate the 
Prime Minister, his party and the people of Fiji on their 
successful return to democratic rule. Fiji’s successful 
elections are hugely important for the region. I am 
delighted that following the preliminary report of the 
multinational observers group, both the Pacific Islands 
Forum and the Commonwealth have commenced the 
process of lifting Fiji’s suspension. We look forward to 
rebuilding and strengthening the connections between 
us. Neither New Zealand nor Fiji can contemplate a 
future that does not entail close and continuing links 
with the other. We also welcomed the safe return of the 
Fiji peacekeepers who were held hostage in the Golan 
Heights. That incident again underlined the great 
challenges and the dangers faced by United Nations 
peacekeepers and the responsibilities we all have to 
ensure the safety and security of peacekeeping and 
other United Nations personnel.

It is as well that we are able to note some bright 
spots for our region, because the situation in other parts 
of the world does look bleak. 

What happened over the past few months in 
Gaza was an affront to humanity. No good was done 
for the cause of Palestine by Hamas firing rockets 
indiscriminately into Israel. No good was done for peace 
in the Middle East by Israel pounding Gaza with such 
intensity and at such cost of civilian lives. We welcome 
the ceasefire that was agreed after so many false starts 
and are thankful that so far it endures. We call on all 
sides not only to keep the guns and rockets silent but to 
refrain from actions that may destabilize what can only 
be described as an uneasy peace. In that connection, we 
express our profound regret at Israel’s appropriation of 
400 hectares of privately owned Palestinian land near 
Bethlehem for settlements. That act itself is profoundly 
unhelpful.

The problems of the Middle East are deep and 
difficult. They go back to the earliest days of the 
Organization and beyond. But what happened over 
the past months in and in relation to Gaza was a 
modern failure — a failure of leadership, of purpose 
and of vision. We urge the leaders of Israel and of 
Palestine, both West Bank and Gaza, to live up to their 
responsibilities to their peoples and to their positions.

In Syria and Iraq, we see the truly frightening 
consequences when leadership, both internally and 
in the Security Council, has failed. Syria has been a 
weeping sore for over three years. Thousands of Syrians 
have died, millions have become refugees and all 
Syrian people have suffered terribly from the multiple 
conflicts engulfing the country. And now the tragedy 
of Syria has spilled over into Iraq, which was already 
wrestling with its own deep-seated problems. Many 
actors, in both the recent past and over a longer time 
frame, have had a hand in contributing to the situation 
we now confront, but now it is time for action.

We need to find a way to contain the madness that 
is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to address 
the humanitarian tragedy and to help the people of Syria 
and Iraq craft a better future. By any objective standard, 


that is a situation that cries out for Security Council 
attention, and that is true of both sides of the border. 
We need the Council members and the Governments 
concerned to move past the ideological stalemate that 
has kept the Council largely impotent for the past three 
years. The challenge we all face in Syria and Iraq is 
unlike any the United Nations has faced before. The 
political circumstances in which it is being played out 
are about as bad as they get. Yet somehow we must find 
a way of coming together to defeat that shared problem.

Paralysis has also prevailed in the Security Council 
over Ukraine. The Council has been essentially 
a bystander as one of its permanent members has 
undermined the integrity of another Member State. We 
recognize the difficulties of managing ethnic tensions 
that straddle borders and the risks of local fires being 
stoked into wider national and international crises. But 
with the strong shared histories of cooperation and 
achievement between Russia and Ukraine, there is no 
excuse for leaders allowing matters to unravel as they 
have, to the point where international peace and security 
may be at risk. Already hundreds of innocent civilians 
on Flight MH-17 lost their lives through an associated 
mistake and miscalculation. We welcome the ceasefire 
agreed earlier this month, which has held, for the most 
part. We call on all involved to step back, think about 
what is at stake and start rebuilding the trust essential 
to finding a lasting solution.

Events in the Middle East and Ukraine have 
dominated the headlines in recent months and have 
diverted attention from the serious situations that 
continue to play out in Africa, particularly in Libya, 
Mali, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, 
Somalia and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
United Nations is directly involved in those crises, 
and they continue to challenge the capacity of the 
Organization and of the African Union to respond 
to the sheer scale of human suffering and to the 
continuing need for external assistance to restore and 
keep the peace, keep civilian populations safe and 
deliver humanitarian assistance. Those issues, no less 
than those in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, 
will continue to require constant attention from the 
Security Council and the coordinated efforts of the 
broader United Nations family. They show that for all 
its failings and structural inequalities, the Council still 
has a vital role to play in maintaining international 
peace and security.

But there is one lesson that we must learn from 
all those recent crises — the United Nations must 
fundamentally improve its performance in preventing 
conflict. Once fighting is in full spate, the options for 
peace disappear. Prevention is critical, not just in new 
conflicts, but also in the cases on the agenda where 
conflict has been frozen or where peacebuilding has 
not really taken hold.

We are deeply troubled by the unprecedented scale 
of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. We recognize 
the huge challenges it poses to the economies and 
the political and security cohesion in the region. We 
have contributed and will continue to contribute to the 
humanitarian work under way, and on the formation of 
a new Government, we will look at further practical 
steps to support the international effort.

In 18 days’ time, the United Nations membership 
will decide who will be on the Security Council for the 
next two-year term. New Zealand has been a candidate 
for that position since 2004. It has been 20 years since 
we were last on the Council. It has been a long and 
demanding campaign, and it will continue right up to 
the elections on 16 October. With tough competitors, 
such as our good friends Spain and Turkey, that has to 
be the case. The campaign has been a great opportunity 
for us to engage with nations around the world. We 
greatly value the new relationships we have forged 
and the enhanced character of existing relationships. 
Whatever the outcome, we are determined to maintain 
them. 

In the past, New Zealand has demonstrated that as 
a member of the Council it acts strongly, effectively and 
independently. It champions the rights of small States 
and for the voices of all to be heard. In short, as my 
Prime Minister said from this rostrum last year, there 
is no point in joining the Council simply to make up the 
numbers. Sometimes one has to speak up and shine a 
light on what is going on, or not going on, even when it 
is embarassing or inconvenient to others to do so.

Above all, I can assure the Assembly that if we 
are elected, New Zealand will be a credible, positive 
influence on the Security Council. At our core, New 
Zealand is an optimistic country and New Zealanders 
are an optimistic people. We believe that things can be 
better than they are and are prepared, as a people, to 
work hard to achieve that. Despite the many challenges 
on the international agenda, my hope is that the 
membership of the United Nations will give us an 

opportunity to prove that by serving on the Security 
Council from next year.
There is growing evidence today of a contradiction 
between the need for collective and partnership efforts 
in order to develop adequate responses to the challenges 
common to us all, on the one hand, and, on the other, 
the aspiration of a number of States to domination and 
a revival of the archaic bloc thinking based on military 
drill discipline and the erroneous logic of friend or foe.

The United States-led Western alliance, which 
portrays itself as a champion of democracy, the rule of 
law and human rights within individual countries, acts 
from a directly opposite position in the international 
arena, rejecting the democratic principles of the 
sovereign equality of States enshrined the Charter of 
the United Nations and trying to decide for everyone 
what is good or evil.

Washington has openly declared its right to the 
unilateral use of military force anywhere to advocate 
its own interests. Military interference has become a 
norm, despite the dismal outcome of all the operations 
involving the use of force that the United States has 
carried out in recent years.

The sustainability of the international system has 
been severely shaken by the NATO bombardment of 
Yugoslavia, the intervention in Iraq, the attack against 
Libya and the failure in Afghanistan. It was due only 
to intensive diplomatic efforts that aggression against 
Syria was prevented in 2013. The various colour 
revolutions and other schemes aimed at changing 


unsuitable regimes inevitably give the impression that 
their goal is to create chaos and instability.

Today Ukraine has fallen victim to that policy. 
The situation there has revealed the deep-rooted and 
systemic flaws remaining in the existing Euro-Atlantic 
architecture. The West has embarked on a course 
towards a vertical structuring of humankind tailored to 
its own standards, which are hardly inoffensive.

After the West declared victory in the Cold War 
and the so-called end of history, the United States and 
the European Union opted to expand the geopolitical 
area under their control without taking into account 
the balance of legitimate interests of all the peoples 
of Europe. The Western partners did not heed our 
numerous warnings with regard to the unacceptable 
violations of the principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and time and again 
they have avoided serious joint work to establish a 
common space of equal and indivisible security and 
cooperation from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans.

The Russian proposal to draft a European security 
treaty was rejected. We were told directly that only the 
members of the North Atlantic Alliance can have legally 
binding security guarantees, and the NATO expansion 
to the East continued in spite of the promises to the 
contrary given earlier. NATO’s instant switch to hostile 
rhetoric and the reduction of its cooperation with Russia, 
even to the detriment of the West’s own interests, and 
the additional build-up of military infrastructure along 
Russia’s borders revealed the inability of the Alliance 
to change the genetic code embedded in it during the 
Cold War.

The United States and the European Union supported 
the coup d’état in Ukraine, recklessly justifying any 
acts by the self-proclaimed Kyiv authorities, who 
opted to suppress by force that part of the Ukrainian 
people who had rejected the attempts to impose an 
anti-constitutional order throughout the country and 
wanted to defend their rights to their native language, 
culture and history. It is precisely the aggressive assault 
on those rights that compelled the population of Crimea 
to take its destiny in its own hands and make a choice 
in favour of self-determination. That was an absolutely 
free choice, no matter what was invented by those 
who were responsible in the first place for the internal 
conflict in Ukraine.

There have been attempts to distort the truth and 
hide facts behind blanket accusations at all stages of the 
Ukrainian crisis. Nothing has been done to track down 
and prosecute those responsible for the bloody February 
events at Maidan and the massive loss of human lives 
in Odessa, Mariupol and other regions of Ukraine. The 
scale of the appalling humanitarian disaster provoked 
by the acts of the Ukrainian army in south-eastern 
Ukraine has been deliberately understated.

Recently, horrifying new facts came to light when 
mass graves were discovered near Donetsk. Despite 
Security Council resolution 2166 (2014), a thorough 
and independent investigation into the circumstances 
of the loss of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over 
Ukrainian territory has been delayed. Those guilty for 
all those crimes must be found and brought to justice. 
Otherwise, national reconciliation in Ukraine can 
hardly be expected.

Russia is sincerely interested in the restoration of 
peace in a neighbouring country, and that should be well 
understood by anyone even slightly acquainted with the 
deep-rooted and fraternal relations between the two 
peoples. The path to a political settlement is known. 
As early as this April, Kyiv made a commitment in the 
Geneva Statement on Ukraine — agreed upon by Russia, 
Ukraine, the United States and the European Union 
(EU) — to immediately start a nation-wide dialogue 
involving all of Ukraine’s regions and political forces 
to implement constitutional reforms. The fulfilment 
of that obligation would allow all Ukrainians to agree 
on how to live in accordance with their traditions and 
culture and would allow Ukraine to return to its organic 
role as a link between the different parts of the European 
space, which certainly implies the preservation and 
respect by everyone of its non-aligned, neutral status. 
We are convinced that with goodwill and the refusal 
to support the party of war in Kyiv, which is trying to 
push the Ukrainian people into the abyss of national 
catastrophe, a way out of the crisis is within reach.

A way to overcome the situation has opened with 
a ceasefire agreement for south-eastern Ukraine on 
the basis of initiatives of Presidents Poroshenko and 
Putin. With the participation of representatives of Kyiv, 
Donetsk, Luhansk, the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Russia, practical 
measures are being agreed on for the consecutive 
realization of those agreements, including the separation 
of the parties, the withdrawal of the heavy weapons of 
the Ukrainian military forces and of the militias, and 
the organization of monitoring through the OSCE.


Russia is ready to continue to actively promote a 
political settlement, both under the framework of the 
well-known recommendations of the Minsk process 
and in other formats. But it should be quite clear that 
we are doing this for the sake of peace, tranquillity 
and the well-being of the Ukrainian people, and not to 
appease someone’s ambitions. Attempts to put pressure 
on Russia to force it to abandon its values of truth and 
justice are absolutely futile.

I will allow myself a digression into recent history. 
As a condition for the establishment of diplomatic 
relations with the Soviet Union in 1933, the United 
States Government demanded from Moscow guarantees 
of non-interference in the internal affairs of the United 
States, obligations not to undertake any actions aimed at 
changing the political and social structure of America. 
At that time, Washington feared the revolutionary virus, 
and such guarantees were secured between America 
and the Soviet Union, on the basis of reciprocity.

Perhaps it makes sense to return to that subject 
and reproduce the then demand of the American 
Government on a universal scale. Why not adopt a 
General Assembly declaration about the inadmissibility 
of interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign 
States and non-recognition of coups d’état as a 
method of regime change? It is time to fully exclude 
from international interaction attempts at illegitimate 
pressure by some States against others. The meaningless 
and counterproductive nature of unilateral sanctions is 
obvious in the example of the American blockade of 
Cuba.

A policy of ultimatums and a philosophy of 
superiority and domination do not meet the needs 
of the twenty-first century; they are in conflict with 
the objective processes of forming a polycentric, 
democratic world order. Russia promotes a positive, 
unifying agenda. We have always been and will be open 
to discussing the most difficult questions, no matter 
how intractable they may seem at first. We will be 
ready to seek a compromise and a balance of interests 
and to agree to exchange concessions, provided only 
that the conversation is respectful and equitable.

The Minsk Agreement of 5 and 19 September about 
the ways out of the Ukrainian crisis and the compromise 
about the dates of entry into force of the Association 
Agreement between Kyiv and the European Union are 
good examples to emulate, as is the readiness, at last, 
of Brussels to begin negotiations on establishing a free 
trade area between the EU and the Customs Union of 
Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, as Mr. Putin suggested 
back in January.

Russia has consistently advocated the harmonization 
of integration projects in Europe and Eurasia. 
Agreement on political benchmarks and terms such 
as “convergence of integration” would be a real 
contribution to the work of the OSCE on the topic 
of Helsinki+40. Another important aspect of that 
work would be to launch a pragmatic, de-ideologized 
conversation on politico-military architecture in the 
Euro-Atlantic area, so that not only members of NATO 
and of the Collective Security Treaty Organization but 
all the countries of the region, including Ukraine, the 
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, would enjoy equal 
and indivisible security and not have to make a false 
choice of “either with us, or against us”. New dividing 
lines must not be allowed in Europe, especially because 
in the context of globalization they could become a 
watershed between the West and the rest of the world.

It must be stated honestly that no one has a 
monopoly on the truth; no one can forcibly tailor global 
and regional processes to suit their needs. Today there 
is no alternative to developing consensus on the rules 
of sustainable global governance in the new historical 
conditions, with full respect for the cultural and 
civilizational diversity of the world and the multiplicity 
of development models. To attain such a consensus 
on every issue will be difficult, perhaps tedious. But 
recognizing that in every State democracy is “the worst 
form of Government except for all the others” also took 
a long time, not until Churchill issued his verdict. It 
is time to recognize the inevitability of that axiom in 
international affairs, which currently suffer from a huge 
deficit of democracy. Of course, someone will have to 
break the age-old stereotypes, to abandon claims to 
eternal exceptionalism. But there is no other way.

United efforts can be built only on the principles of 
mutual respect and mutual consideration of interests, as 
is done, for example, within the Security Council, the 
Group of 20, the BRICS States of Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa, and the Shanghai Cooperation 
Council.

The theory of the advantages of collective work 
are confirmed in practice, for instance, the progress 
in settling the situation concerning the Iranian 
nuclear programme and the successful completion of 
the chemical demilitarization of Syria. By the way, 
speaking of chemical weapons, I would like to obtain 
honest information on the state of Libya’s chemical 


arsenals. We understand that our NATO colleagues, 
having bombed the country in violation of Security 
Council resolutions, do not want to stir up the disorder 
they created. However, the problem of uncontrolled 
Libyan chemical arsenals is too serious to turn a blind 
eye to. We believe the Secretary-General must show his 
responsibility in that matter.

The main thing today is to see the global priorities 
and avoid making them hostage to a one-sided agenda. 
There is an urgent need to refrain from double 
standards in approaches to conflict resolution. By 
and large, everybody agrees that the key task is to 
resolutely counter the terrorists, who are trying to 
gain control of increasingly larger areas of Iraq, Syria, 
Libya, Afghanistan and the Sahel-Sahara region. That 
being the case, that problem cannot be sacrificed to 
ideological schemes or to settle a score. Terrorists, 
whatever slogans they hide behind, must be outlawed.

At the same time, of course, the fight against 
terrorism should be based on the solid foundation of 
international law. An important stage in that fight 
was the unanimous adoption of a series of Security 
Council resolutions, including those on the issue of 
foreign terrorist fighters. On the other hand, attempts 
to act contrary to the Charter of our Organization 
do not contribute to the success of joint efforts. The 
fight against terrorists in Syria should be built on 
cooperation with the Syrian Government, which has 
clearly stated its willingness in that regard. Damascus 
has already demonstrated its ability to cooperate with 
the international community and to fulfil its obligations 
in the framework of the programme for eliminating its 
chemical weapons.

From the very outset of the Arab Spring, Russia 
urged that it not be abandoned to the control of 
extremists, that a united front be created to counter the 
growing terrorist threat. We have warned against the 
temptation to take as allies almost anyone who declared 
himself an enemy of Bashar Al-Assad, whether 
Al-Qaida, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other fellow travellers 
of regime change, including the Islamic State of Iraq 
and the Levant (ISIL), which today is the focus of 
attention. As they say, better late than never. This is not 
the first time that Russia is making a real contribution 
to the fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups in 
the region. We are delivering large-scale supplies of 
arms and military equipment to Iraq, Syria and other 
Middle Eastern and North African countries, and we 
will continue to support their efforts to suppress the 
terrorists.

The terrorist threat requires a comprehensive 
approach if we want to eradicate its causes and not 
be doomed to reacting to the symptoms. ISIL is only 
part of the problem. We propose to organize, under the 
auspices of the Security Council, an in-depth study of 
the threat of extremism and terrorism in all of their 
aspects throughout the Middle East and North African 
region. That integrated approach also presupposes 
that chronic conflicts should be considered, above 
all the Arab-Israeli conflict. The failure to settle the 
Palestinian issue over several decades remains, as is 
widely recognized, one of the main factors of instability 
in the region, and that helps extremists to recruit more 
and more new jihadists.

Another area of our common work together 
demanding attention is uniting our efforts to implement 
the decisions of the General Assembly and Security 
Council to combat the Ebola virus. Our doctors are 
already working in Africa. There are plans to send 
additional humanitarian assistance, medical equipment 
and instruments, medicine and teams of experts to assist 
the United Nations programmes in Guinea, Liberia and 
Sierra Leone.

The United Nations was established on the ruins 
of the Second World War, and it is entering the year 
of its seventieth anniversary. We all have an obligation 
to celebrate in an appropriate manner the anniversary 
of the great victory and to pay tribute to the memory 
of all who perished for freedom and the right of each 
people to determine their own destiny. The lessons 
of that terrible war and the entire course of events in 
today’s world require us to join efforts and forget about 
unilateral interests and national electoral cycles when 
it comes to countering global threats to all humankind. 
National egoism should not be allowed to prevail over 
collective responsibility.
We come together at a 
crossroads between war and peace, between disorder 
and integration, between fear and hope. Around the 
globe, there are signposts of progress. The shadow of 
the Second World War that existed at the founding of 
this institution has been lifted, and the prospect of war 
between major Powers reduced. The ranks of Member 
States have more than tripled, and more people live 
under Governments that they elected. Hundreds of 
millions of human beings have been freed from the 
prison of poverty, with the proportion of those living 
in extreme poverty cut in half. And the world economy 
continues to strengthen after the worst financial crisis 
of our lives.

Today, whether you live in downtown Manhattan or 
in my grandmother’s village more than 200 miles from 
Nairobi, you can hold in your hand more information 
than the world’s greatest libraries. Together, we have 
learned how to cure disease and harness the power 
of the wind and the sun. The very existence of this 
Organization is a unique achievement, with the people 
of the world committing to resolve their differences 
peacefully and to solve their problems together. I often 
tell young people in the United States that, despite 
the headlines, this is the best time in human history 
to be born, for you are more likely than ever before to 
be literate, to be healthy and to be free to pursue your 
dreams.

And yet there is a pervasive unease in our world — a 
sense that the very forces that have brought us together 
have created new dangers and made it difficult for any 
single nation to insulate itself from global forces. As we 
gather here, an outbreak of Ebola overwhelms public 
health systems in West Africa and threatens to move 
rapidly across borders. Russian aggression in Europe 
recalls the days when large nations trampled small 
ones in pursuit of territorial ambitions. The brutality 
of terrorists in Syria and Iraq forces us to look into the 
heart of darkness.

Each of those problems demands urgent attention. 
But they are also symptoms of a broader problem: 
the failure of our international system to keep pace 
with an interconnected world. We, collectively, have 
not invested adequately in the public health capacity 
of developing countries. Too often, we have failed 
to enforce international norms when it has been 



inconvenient to do so. And we have not confronted 
forcefully enough the intolerance, sectarianism and 
hopelessness that feeds violent extremism in too many 
parts of the globe.

Fellow representatives, we come together as 
United Nations with a choice to make. We can renew 
the international system that has enabled so much 
progress, or we can allow ourselves to be pulled back 
by an undertow of instability. We can reaffirm our 
collective responsibility to confront global problems, or 
be swamped by more and more outbreaks of instability. 
And for America, the choice is clear — we choose hope 
over fear. We see the future not as something out of our 
control, but as something we can shape for the better 
through concerted and collective effort. We reject 
fatalism or cynicism when it comes to human affairs. 
We choose to work for the world as it should be, as our 
children deserve it to be.

There is much that must be done to meet the test 
of this moment. But today I would like to focus on 
two defining questions at the root of so many of our 
challenges. Will the nations represented here today 
be able to renew the purpose of the United Nations 
founding, and will we come together to reject the cancer 
of violent extremism?

First, all of us — big nations and small — must meet 
our responsibility to observe and enforce international 
norms. We are here because others realized that we 
gain more from cooperation than from conquest. One 
hundred years ago, a World War claimed the lives of 
many millions, proving that with the terrible power of 
modern weaponry, the cause of empire ultimately leads 
to the graveyard. It would then take another World War 
to roll back the forces of fascism, the notions of racial 
supremacy, and form the United Nations to ensure that 
no nation can subjugate its neighbours and claim their 
territory.

Recently, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have 
challenged that post-war order. Here are the facts. After 
the people of Ukraine mobilized popular protests and 
calls for reform, their corrupt President fled. Against 
the will of the Government in Kyiv, Crimea was annexed 
by Russia. Russia poured arms into eastern Ukraine, 
fuelling violent separatists and a conflict that has killed 
thousands. When a civilian airliner was shot down from 
areas that those proxy forces controlled, those forces 
refused to allow access to the crash site for days. When 
Ukraine started to reassert control over its territory, 
Russia gave up the pretence of merely supporting the 
separatists and moved troops across the border.

That reflects a vision of a world in which might 
makes right; a world in which one nation’s borders 
can be redrawn by another and civilized people are 
not allowed to recover the remains of their loved ones 
because of the truth that might be revealed.

America stands for something different. We believe 
that right makes might, that bigger nations should not 
be able to bully smaller ones and that people should 
be able to choose their own future. Those are simple 
truths, but they must be defended. America and our 
allies will support the people of Ukraine as they develop 
their democracy and economy. We will reinforce our 
NATO allies and uphold our commitment to collective 
self-defence. We will impose a cost on Russia for its 
aggression, and we will counter falsehoods with the 
truth. And we call upon others to join us on the right 
side of history, for while small gains can be won at the 
barrel of a gun, they will ultimately be turned back if 
enough voices support the freedom of nations and the 
right of peoples to make their own decisions.

Moreover, a different path is available — the path of 
diplomacy and peace, and the ideals that this institution 
is designed to uphold. The recent ceasefire agreement in 
Ukraine offers an opening to achieve those objectives. 
If Russia takes that path — a path that for stretches of 
the post-Cold War period resulted in prosperity for the 
Russian people — then we will lift our sanctions and 
welcome Russia’s role in addressing common challenges. 
That is, after all, what the United States and Russia 
have been able to do in past years — from reducing our 
nuclear stockpiles to meeting our obligations under the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to cooperating to 
remove and destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons. 
That is the kind of cooperation we are prepared to 
pursue again, if Russia changes course.

That speaks to a central question of our global 
age — will we solve our problems together in a spirit of 
mutual interest and mutual respect, or will we descend 
into the destructive rivalries of the past? When nations 
find common ground — not simply based on power, but 
on principle — then we can make enormous progress. 
And I stand before the Assembly today committed to 
investing American strength and to working with all 
nations to address the problems we face in the twenty-
first century.

As we speak, America is deploying our doctors and 
scientists, supported by our military, to help contain 
the outbreak of Ebola and pursue new treatments. But 
we need a broader effort to stop a disease that could 
kill hundreds of thousands, inflict horrific suffering, 



destabilize economies and move rapidly across borders. 
It is easy to see that problem as a distant problem, 
until it is not. And that is why we will continue to 
mobilize other countries to join us in making concrete 
commitments, significant commitments to fight the 
outbreak and enhance our system of global health 
security for the long term.

America is pursuing a diplomatic resolution to the 
Iranian nuclear issue, as part of our commitment to stop 
the spread of nuclear weapons and pursue the peace 
and security of a world without them. But that can take 
place only if Iran seizes this historic opportunity. My 
message to Iran’s leaders and people has been simple 
and consistent: do not let this opportunity pass. We can 
reach a solution that meets Iran’s energy needs while 
assuring the world that Iran’s nuclear programme is 
peaceful.

America is and will continue to be a Pacific 
Power, promoting peace, stability, and the free flow 
of commerce among nations. But we will insist that 
all nations abide by the rules of the road and resolve 
their territorial disputes peacefully, consistent with 
international law. That is how the Asia-Pacific region 
has grown. And that is the only way to protect the 
progress going forward.

America is committed to a development agenda that 
eradicates extreme poverty by 2030. We will do our part 
to help people feed themselves, power their economies 
and care for their sick. If the world acts together, we 
can make sure that all of our children enjoy lives of 
opportunity and dignity.

America is pursuing ambitious reductions in 
its carbon emissions, and we have increased our 
investments in clean energy. We will do our part and 
help developing nations do theirs. But the science tells 
us that we can succeed in combating climate change 
only if we are joined in that effort by every other nation, 
by every major Power. That is how we can protect the 
planet for our children and our grandchildren.

In other words, on issue after issue, we cannot rely 
on a rule book written for a different century. If we lift 
our eyes beyond our borders, if we think globally and 
if we act cooperatively, we can shape the course of this 
century as our predecessors shaped the post-World War 
Two age.

But as we look to the future, one issue risks starting 
a cycle of conflict that could derail so much progress. 
That is the cancer of violent extremism, which has 
ravaged so many parts of the Muslim world. Of course, 
terrorism is not new. Speaking before the Assembly, 
President Kennedy put it well:

“Terror is not a new weapon. Throughout 
history it has been used by those who could not 
prevail either by persuasion or by example.” 
(A/PV.1013, para. 96)
In the twentieth century, terror was used by all 
manner of groups who failed to come to power through 
public support. But in this century, we have faced a 
more lethal and ideological brand of terrorists who have 
perverted one of the world’s great religions. With access 
to technology that allows small groups to do great harm, 
they have embraced a nightmarish vision that would 
divide the world into adherents and infidels — killing 
as many innocent civilians as possible and employing 
the most brutal methods to intimidate people within 
their communities.

I have made it clear that America will not base its 
entire foreign policy on reacting to terrorism. Instead, 
we have waged a focused campaign against Al-Qaida 
and its associated forces — taking out their leaders 
and denying them the safe havens they rely on. At the 
same time, we have reaffirmed again and again that the 
United States is not and never will be at war with Islam. 
Islam teaches peace. Muslims the world over aspire to 
live with dignity and a sense of justice. And when it 
comes to America and Islam, there is no us and them, 
there is only us, because millions of Muslim Americans 
are part of the fabric of our country.

So we reject any suggestion of a clash of 
civilizations. Belief in permanent religious war is the 
misguided refuge of extremists who cannot build or 
create anything and therefore peddle only fanaticism 
and hate. And it is no exaggeration to say that the future 
of humankind depends on our uniting against those 
who would divide us along the fault lines of tribe or 
sect, race or religion.

But this is not simply a matter of words. Collectively, 
we must take concrete steps to address the danger posed 
by religiously motivated fanatics and the trends that 
fuel their recruitment. Moreover, the campaign against 
extremism goes beyond a narrow security challenge. 
For while we have worked methodically to degrade 
Al-Qaida at its core and have supported a transition to 
a sovereign Afghan Government, extremist ideology 
has shifted to other places, particularly in the Middle 
East and North Africa, where a quarter of the young 



people have no job, where food and water could grow 
scarce, and where corruption is rampant and sectarian 
conflicts have become increasingly hard to contain.

As an international community, we must meet this 
challenge with a focus on four areas. First, the terrorist 
group known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 
(ISIL) must be degraded and ultimately destroyed. It 
has terrorized all those whom it has come across in Iraq 
and Syria. Mothers, sisters and daughters have been 
subjected to rape as a weapon of war. Innocent children 
have been gunned down. Bodies have been dumped into 
mass graves. Religious minorities have been starved to 
death. In the most horrific crimes imaginable, innocent 
human beings have been beheaded, with videos of 
the atrocity distributed to shock the conscience of the 
world.

No god condones such terror. No grievance 
justifies such actions. There can be no reasoning or 
negotiation with that brand of evil. The only language 
understood by killers of that kind is the language of 
force. So the United States of America will work with 
a broad coalition to dismantle that network of death. In 
this effort, we do not act alone, nor do we intend to send 
United States troops to occupy foreign lands. Instead, 
we will support Iraqis and Syrians fighting to reclaim 
their communities. We will use our military might to 
roll back ISIL in a campaign of air strikes. We will train 
and equip forces fighting those terrorists on the ground. 
We will work to cut off their financing and stop the flow 
of fighters into and out of the region. And more than 
40 nations have already offered to join the coalition. 
Today, I ask the world to join in this effort. Those who 
have joined ISIL should leave the battlefield while they 
can. Those who continue to fight for a hateful cause 
will find that they are increasingly alone. For we will 
not succumb to threats, and we will demonstrate that 
the future belongs to those who build, not to those who 
destroy. So that is an immediate challenge, the first one 
we must meet.

The second challenge is that it is time for the 
world, especially Muslim communities, to explicitly, 
forcefully and consistently reject the ideology of 
organizations such as Al-Qaida and ISIL. It is one of 
the tasks of all great religions to accommodate devout 
faith with a modern, multicultural world. No children 
are born hating, and no children anywhere should be 
educated to hate other people. There should be no 
further tolerance of so-called clerics who call on people 
to harm innocents because they are Jewish or Christian 
or Muslim. It is time for a new compact among the 
civilized peoples of this world to eradicate war at its 
most fundamental source, and that is the corruption of 
young minds by violent ideology.

That means cutting off the funding that fuels such 
hatred. It is time to end the hypocrisy of those who 
accumulate wealth through the global economy and 
then siphon funds to those who teach children to tear 
it down. That means contesting the space that terrorists 
occupy, including the Internet and social media. Their 
propaganda has coerced young people to travel abroad 
to fight their wars and has turned students — young 
people full of potential — into suicide bombers. We 
must offer an alternative vision. That means bringing 
people of different faiths together. All religions have 
been attacked by extremists from within at some point, 
and all people of faith have a responsibility to lift up the 
value at the heart of all great religions. Do unto your 
neighbour as you would do — as you would have others 
do — unto yourself.

The ideology of ISIL or Al-Qaida or Boko 
Haram will wilt and die if it is consistently exposed 
and confronted and refuted in the light of day. Look 
at the new Forum for Promoting Peace in Muslim 
Societies, whose purpose Sheikh Abdallah Bin Bayyah 
has described as “We must declare war on war, so 
the outcome will be peace upon peace”. Look at the 
young British Muslims who have responded to terrorist 
propaganda by starting the #notinmyname campaign, 
declaring that ISIL is hiding behind a false Islam. Look 
at the Christian and Muslim leaders who came together 
in the Central African Republic to reject violence; listen 
to the imam there who said that, while politics may try 
to divide the religious in that country, religion should 
not be a cause of hate, war, or strife.

Later today, the Security Council will adopt a 
resolution that underscores the responsibility of States 
to counter violent extremism. But resolutions must 
be followed by tangible commitments, so that we are 
accountable when we fall short. Next year, we should 
all be prepared to announce the concrete steps that 
we have taken to counter extremist ideologies in our 
own countries — by getting intolerance out of schools, 
stopping radicalization before it spreads and promoting 
institutions and programmes that build new bridges of 
understanding.

Thirdly, we must address the cycle of conflict, 
especially sectarian conflict, that creates the conditions 
that terrorists prey upon. There is nothing new about 



wars within religions. Christianity endured centuries of 
vicious sectarian conflict. Today it is violence within 
Muslim communities that has become the source 
of so much human misery. It is time to acknowledge 
the destruction wrought by proxy wars and terror 
campaigns between Sunni and Shia across the Middle 
East. And it is time that political, civic and religious 
leaders rejected sectarian strife. So let us be clear. This 
is a fight that no one is winning. A brutal civil war in 
Syria has already killed nearly 200,000 people and has 
displaced millions. Iraq has come perilously close to 
plunging back into the abyss. The conflict has created 
a fertile recruiting ground for terrorists, who inevitably 
export such violence.

The good news is that we also see signs that the tide 
can be reversed. We have a new, inclusive Government 
in Baghdad and a new Iraqi Prime Minister welcomed 
by his neighbours; we see Lebanese factions that reject 
those who try to provoke war. Such steps must be followed 
by a broader truce. Nowhere is that more necessary 
than in Syria. Together with our partners, America is 
training and equipping the Syrian opposition to be a 
counterweight to the terrorists of ISIL and the brutality 
of the Al-Assad regime. But the only lasting solution 
to Syria’s civil war is political — an inclusive political 
transition that responds to the legitimate aspirations of 
all Syrian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, regardless 
of creed.

Cynics may argue that such an outcome can never 
come to pass. But there is no other way for the madness 
in Syria to end, whether one year from now or 10. And it 
points to the fact that it is time for a broader negotiation 
in the region, in which major Powers address their 
differences directly, honestly and peacefully across 
the table from one another, rather than through gun-
wielding proxies. I can promise the international 
community that America will remain engaged in the 
region, and we are prepared to engage in that effort.

My fourth and final point is a simple one. The 
countries of the Arab and Muslim world must focus on 
the extraordinary potential of their people, especially 
the youth. And here I would like to speak directly to 
young people across the Muslim world. You come 
from a great tradition that stands for education, not 
ignorance; innovation, not destruction; the dignity of 
life, not murder. Those who call you away from that 
path are betraying that tradition, not defending it. You 
have demonstrated that when young people have the 
tools to succeed — good schools, education in math 
and science, an economy that nurtures creativity and 
entrepreneurship — then societies will flourish. So, 
America will partner with those who promote that 
vision.

Where women are full participants in a country’s 
politics or economy, societies are more likely to 
succeed. And that is why we support the participation of 
women in parliaments and peace processes, schools and 
the economy. If young people live in places where the 
only option is between the dictates of a State or the lure 
of an extremist underground, then no counterterrorism 
strategy can succeed. But where a genuine civil society 
is allowed to flourish — where people can express their 
views and organize peacefully for a better life — then 
you dramatically expand the alternatives to terror.

And such positive change need not come at the 
expense of tradition and faith. We see that in Iraq, where 
a young man started a library for his peers. “We link 
Iraq’s heritage to their hearts”, he said, and “give them 
a reason to stay”. We see it in Tunisia, where secular 
and Islamist parties worked together through a political 
process to produce a new constitution. We see it in 
Senegal, where civil society thrives alongside a strong 
democratic Government. We see it in Malaysia, where 
vibrant entrepreneurship is propelling a former colony 
into the ranks of advanced economies. And we see it in 
Indonesia, where what began as a violent transition has 
evolved into a genuine democracy.

Ultimately the task of rejecting sectarianism and 
rejecting extremism is a generational one, and a task 
for the people of the Middle East themselves. No 
external power can bring about a transformation of 
hearts and minds. But America will be a respectful 
and constructive partner. We will neither tolerate 
terrorist safe havens nor act as an occupying Power. 
We will take action against threats to our security and 
our allies, while building an architecture of counter-
terrorism cooperation. We will increase efforts to lift 
up those who counter extremist ideologies and who 
seek to resolve sectarian conflict. And we will expand 
our programmes to support entrepreneurship and civil 
society, education and youth, because ultimately those 
investments are the best antidote to violence.

We recognize as well that leadership will be 
necessary to address the conflict between Palestinians 
and Israelis. As bleak as the landscape appears, America 
will not give up on the pursuit of peace. Understand that 
the situation in Iraq and Syria and Libya should cure 
anybody of the illusion that the Arab-Israeli conflict 



is the main source of problems in the region. For far 
too long that has been used as an excuse to distract 
people from problems at home. The violence engulfing 
the region today has made too many Israelis ready to 
abandon the hard work of peace. And that is something 
worthy of reflection within Israel. Because let us be 
clear: the status quo in the West Bank and Gaza is not 
sustainable. We cannot afford to turn away from that 
effort — not when rockets are fired at innocent Israelis, 
or when the lives of so many Palestinian children are 
taken from us in Gaza. So long as I am President, we 
will stand up for the principle that Israelis, Palestinians, 
the region and the world will be more just and more 
safe with two States living side by side, in peace and 
security.

So this is what America is prepared to do: take 
action against immediate threats, while pursuing a 
world in which the need for such action is diminished. 
The United States will never shy away from defending 
our interests, but we will also not shy away from the 
promise of this institution and its Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights — the notion that peace is not merely 
the absence of war, but the presence of a better life.

I realize that America’s critics will be quick to point 
out that at times we too have failed to live up to our 
ideals and that America has plenty of problems within 
its own borders. That is true. In a summer marked by 
instability in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, I 
know the world also took notice of the small American 
city of Ferguson, Missouri, where a young man was 
killed and a community was divided. So, yes, we have 
our own racial and ethnic tensions. And, like every 
country, we continually wrestle with how to reconcile 
the vast changes wrought by globalization and greater 
diversity with the traditions that we hold dear.

But we welcome the scrutiny of the world, because 
what you see in America is a country that has steadily 
worked to address our problems, to make our union 
more perfect, to bridge the divides that existed at the 
founding of this nation. America is not the same as it 
was 100 years ago or 50 years ago or even a decade ago. 
We fight for our ideals and we are willing to criticize 
ourselves when we fall short. We hold our leaders 
accountable and insist on a free press and an independent 
judiciary. We address our differences in the open space 
of democracy, with respect for the rule of law, with a 
place for people of every race and every religion and 
with an unyielding belief in the ability of individual 
men and women to change their communities and their 
circumstances and their countries for the better.

After nearly six years as President, I believe that that 
promise can help light the world. I have seen a longing 
for positive change — for peace and for freedom and for 
opportunity and for an end to bigotry — in the eyes of 
young people whom I have met around the globe. They 
remind me that no matter who you are or where you 
come from or what you look like or what God you pray 
to or whom you love, there is something fundamental 
that we all share. 

Eleanor Roosevelt, a champion of the United 
Nations and America’s role in it, once asked, 

“Where, after all, do universal human rights 
begin? In small places, close to home — so close 
and so small that they cannot be seen on any maps 
of the world. Yet they are the world of the individual 
person; the neighbourhood he lives in; the school or 
college he attends; the factory, farm or office where 
he works.”
Around the world, young people are moving forward, 
hungry for a better world. Around the world, in small 
places, they are overcoming hatred and bigotry and 
sectarianism. And they are learning to respect each 
other, despite differences.
The people of the world now look to us, here, to 
be as decent and dignified and courageous as they are 
trying to be in their daily lives. And at this crossroads, 
I can promise the Assembly that the United States 
of America will not be distracted or deterred from 
what must be done. We are heirs to a proud legacy of 
freedom, and we are prepared to do what is necessary 
to secure that legacy for generations to come. I ask 
that the Assembly join us in this common mission, for 
today’s children and tomorrow’s.

I should like to congratulate you, 
Mr. President, and your country, Uganda, on assuming, 
on behalf of the continent of Africa, the responsibilities 
of President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth 
session. The theme that you have chosen for this general 
debate and the sixty-ninth session, namely, “Delivering 
on and implementing a transformative post-2015 
development agenda”, is timely and most appropriate.

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
galvanized and mobilized the international community 
and the United Nations in a manner never seen before. 
We have good stories to tell about the journey of the 
past 15 years of implementing the MDGS. In Africa, 
we seized the opportunity and adopted the New 
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), our 
sociodevelopment blueprint. The African Union’s 
Vision 2063 will, together with NEPAD and other 
socioeconomic development programmes, be the 
cornerstone and foundation of Africa’s development 
agenda going forward. South Africa has also made 
significant progress in achieving the MDGs. Reducing 
by half the number of people earning less than a dollar 
a day has been achieved, while the proportion of those 
experiencing hunger has also been halved. South 
Africa has attained Goal 2, namely, to provide access 
to primary education for all.

By official international indicators, South Africa is 
also doing well on MDG 3 to promote and empower 
women. South Africa has recorded impressive progress 
through the expansion of its health infrastructure 
and improved access to health services for all South 
Africans.

On the reduction of child mortality, MDG 4, and the 
improvement of maternal health, MDG 5, significant 
progress has also been recorded, but more work remains 
to be done. In fact. more work remains worldwide to 
fully achieve those goals, especially in the developing 
world. We have to confront the underlying root causes 
that continue to make it impossible for our people to 
have a better life.

In spite of the progress that we have made thus far, 
reports continue to show that Africa is lagging behind 
in the attainment of some of the MDGs. It is for that 
reason that we appreciate the crafting of a post-2015 
global development agenda that will carry forward the 
unfinished business of the MDGs. The post-2015 global 

development agenda will provide a frame of reference 
for our collective agreement on what has to be done. 
We reiterate that developed countries should be reliable 
partners and meet their commitments to development 
goals, such as contributing 0.7 per cent of their 
gross national income towards official development 
assistance. We say that because it does not matter 
what the great Organization has achieved in the past 
six decades if we do not deal comprehensively with the 
scourge of poverty, unemployment and diseases. The 
poor of the world will then consider everything done 
to have been a failure. Indeed, we would have failed in 
our duty if we succeed in preventing another world war 
but continue to have children dying of malnutrition and 
treatable diseases.

The recent outbreak of Ebola in some West 
African States and the number of lives that have 
been unnecessarily lost provide a clear example of 
the challenges that developing countries continue to 
contend with. We believe that Ebola would have been 
contained within a few days had the outbreak been in 
the developed world. But now it has become a pandemic 
that threatens the economies of affected African States.

The outbreak has thus exposed the challenges 
resulting from lack of capacity, lack of infrastructure 
and other limited resources in Africa. We are pleased 
that the United Nations, under the leadership of the 
Secretary-General, is deploying a mission to coordinate 
efforts to combat the virus. South Africa stands ready to 
continue to provide whatever resources we have at our 
disposal to assist the people and Governments of our 
sister countries of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. 
We add our voice in calling for more resources to be 
deployed so as to ensure that the virus is contained.

The role of the United Nations in supporting the 
struggles of self-determination and freedom has been 
remarkable. South Africa is a shining example. Twenty 
years ago, President Nelson Mandela thanked all 
nations for support from this very podium when South 
Africa was readmitted to the United Nations as a free 
and democratic State. We are reminded of that fact on 
this important day, which is National Heritage Day in 
my country.

Since 1994, South Africa has made significant 
progress in transforming the apartheid State into a 
democratic one, founded on the values of human dignity, 
non-discrimination, non-racialism and non-sexism, the 
rule of law and universal adult suffrage, as enshrined in 
the Constitution. Given our history and heritage, we are 
mindful of our historic and moral responsibility in the 
global struggle against racism, racial discrimination 
and other intolerances. We will, in this regard, continue 
to be at the forefront of efforts to eliminate all forms of 
racism, racial discrimination and any other intolerance, 
including xenophobia and anti-Semitism.

The Durban Declaration and Programme of Action 
remain the primary framework adopted by a United 
Nations conference in the fight against racism. We 
will continue to support the struggles for freedom 
and self-determination, including the struggles of the 
peoples of Palestine and Western Sahara, who continue 
to experience occupation and colonialism of different 
forms. The people of Cuba also hold a special place 
in our hearts because of that country’s sacrifice for 
African freedom. We will therefore continue to support 
their struggle for economic liberation.

While the United Nations has done remarkably well 
in supporting self-determination, when it celebrates 70 
years of existence next year, this body may be found 
wanting by the people of Palestine. The Israeli-Palestine 
question is one of the oldest items on the United 
Nations agenda, but progress remains elusive. In the 
past few months in particular, the world has witnessed 
a devastating conflict that left a humanitarian crisis 
of shocking proportions. People in Palestine were left 
homeless, with no medical facilities, no safe drinking 
water, bereaved and having to care for the wounded 
after a trail of destructive military actions by Israel.

South Africa has condemned the actions of both 
Israel and Hamas, and we have called for an immediate 
cessation of hostilities. Our strongly held view is 
that there can be no military solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian question. We should all remain committed 
to the two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, 
with Palestine and Israel coexisting side by side in 
peace.

Of concern in this matter has been the helplessness 
displayed by the United Nations, especially the Security 
Council during the current conflict. The United 
Nations has the moral authority and legitimacy to unite 
the world in promoting the quest for peace, justice and 
self-determination for the people of Palestine, while 
addressing whatever security concerns Israel may have. 
This body must play its role without fear or favour and 
be a beacon for all who suffer oppression in the world.


Let me reiterate that the seventieth anniversary of 
the United Nations next year provides an opportunity 
for us seriously to reflect on the need to reform this 
august body, moving beyond words to action. Ten years 
ago, world leaders celebrating the sixtieth anniversary 
of the United Nations agreed on the need for reform 
of the Security Council in particular. The decision 
remains valid and must be implemented. When we 
convene here next year, in the seventieth year of the 
United Nations, we should be able to adopt a concrete 
programme that will guide us towards a strengthened 
United Nations and a reformed Security Council. Some 
contentious aspects of the United Nations system, 
including the power of veto and the exclusion of regions 
such as Africa from the Security Council, are some of 
the critical matters that cannot be ignored in the quest 
for transformation.

Among the achievements of the Organization in its 
recent history is the cooperation between the African 
Union and the United Nations, particularly since the 
formation of the African Union Peace and Security 
Architecture. In this regard, the full implementation 
of Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) and 2033 
(2012), on cooperation between the United Nations 
and regional organizations, particularly the African 
Union, remains crucial. Progress has been made in a 
number of areas where this cooperation is in place, for 
example in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The 
two affected subregional organizations, the Southern 
African Development Community and the International 
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, continue to 
take significant strides with the support of the United 
Nations.

This body celebrated the formation of a new State 
of South Sudan not long ago. Recent developments and 
the ongoing conflict in South Sudan have resulted in 
loss of life and other dire humanitarian consequences. 
We will continue to contribute as much as we can to 
finding solutions working with the African Union and 
this body. South Sudan should not be allowed to regress.

Next year marks 20 years since the the Fourth 
World Conference on Women adopted the Beijing 
Platform for Action. The anniversary provides an 
opportunity for the United Nations and the international 
community to reflect and take forward the struggle 
for the emancipation of women from all forms of 
discrimination.

Last December, the world descended on South 
Africa to pay last respects to our beloved Madiba. 
Those who did not come to South Africa honoured 
Madiba in various ways. We will continue to work with 
the world to promote Madiba’s legacy and passion for 
justice, freedom, equality and human rights. We are 
grateful to the General Assembly and the President of 
the Assembly at the sixty-eighth session for the decision 
to establish the United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla 
Mandela Prize that will be awarded to an outstanding 
individual who will have demonstrated a commitment 
to the aims, objectives and principles of the United 
Nations Charter. The Prize is a great testament to the 
outstanding individual that Madiba was and will always 
be.

As we recommit to the Millennium Development 
Goals, let me once again borrow from the words of 
Madiba uttered on his historic inauguration day in 1994 
when he said:

“We understand it still that there is no easy 
road to freedom. We know it well that none of 
us acting alone can achieve success. We must 
therefore act together as a united people, for 
national reconciliation, for nation building, for the 
birth of a new world. Let there be justice for all. 
Let there be peace for all. Let there be work, bread, 
water and salt for all. Let each know that for each 
the body, the mind and the soul have been freed to 
fulfil themselves.”
