Just 70 years ago, an earlier generation fought heroically and secured victory in an anti-fascist war, thereby ending a dark chapter in the annals of human history. That victory was hard won. Seventy years ago, humankind, acting with vision and foresight, established the United Nations. That universal and most representative and authoritative international Organization has carried humankind’s hope for a new future and ushered in a new 
era of cooperation. It was a pioneering initiative never undertaken before. Seventy years ago, that generation pooled their wisdom to adopt the Charter of the United Nations, laying the cornerstone for the contemporary international order and establishing the fundamental principles of contemporary international relations. It was an achievement of profound impact.
On 3 September, the Chinese people, together with other peoples of the world, solemnly commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese aggression and fascism in the Second World War. In the main theatre in the East, China made a national sacrifice, suffering over 35 million casualties in its fight against the main troops of Japanese militarism. China not only saved itself and its people from subjugation, but also gave strong support to the forces fighting aggression in the European and Pacific theatres, thereby making a historic contribution to the victory in that anti-fascist world war.
History is like a mirror. Only by drawing on the lessons of history can the world avoid repeating past calamities. We should review history with respect and in full conscience. The past cannot be changed, but the future can be shaped. Bearing history in mind is not to perpetuate hatred. Rather, it is necessary so that humankind does not forget history’s lessons. Remembering history does not mean being obsessed with the past; rather, in doing so, we aim to create a better future and pass the torch of peace from generation to generation.
The United Nations has survived the test of time. Over the past seven decades, it has witnessed the efforts of all countries to uphold peace, build homelands and pursue cooperation. Having reached a historic new starting point, the United Nations needs to address the central issue of how to better promote world peace and development in the twenty-first century. The world is experiencing a historic process of accelerated evolution. The sunshine of peace, development and progress will be powerful enough to penetrate the clouds of war, poverty and backwardness. The movement towards a multipolar world and the rise of emerging markets and developing countries have become an irreversible historical trend. Economic globalization with the advent of the information age has unleashed and greatly boosted social productive forces that have both created unprecedented development opportunities and given rise to new threats and challenges that we must squarely face.
As an ancient Chinese goes, “Our greatest ideal is to create a world truly shared by all”. Peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom are the common values of humankind and the lofty goals of the United Nations. Yet those goals are far from having been achieved, and we must continue our endeavours to meet them. In today’s world, all countries are interdependent and share a common future. We should renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, so as to fashion a new kind of international relations with win-win cooperation at its core and to create an international community that realizes a shared positive future for all of humankind. To achieve that goal, we need to make the following efforts.
We should build partnerships in which countries treat each other as equals, engage in mutual consultation and show mutual understanding. The principle of sovereign equality underpins the Charter of the United Nations. The future of the world must be shaped by all countries. All countries are equals. Those who are big, strong and rich should not bully the small, weak and poor. The principle of sovereignty not only means that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries are inviolable and that their internal affairs are not subject to interference. It also means that the right of all countries to independently choose social systems and development paths should be upheld and that the endeavours of all countries to promote economic and social development and to improve their people’s lives should be respected.
We should be committed to multilateralism and reject unilateralism. We should adopt a new vision of seeking win-win outcomes for all and reject the outdated mindset that one’s gain means the other’s loss or that the winner takes all. Consultation is an important form of democracy, and it should also become an important means of exercising contemporary international governance. We should resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should forge a global partnership at both the international and regional levels, and embrace a new approach to State-to-State relations, one that features dialogue rather than confrontation and seeks partnership rather than alliance.
Major countries should follow the principles of no conflict, no confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation in handling their relations. Big countries should treat small countries as equals and take the right
approach to justice and interests by putting justice before interests.
We should create a security architecture featuring fairness, justice, joint contributions and shared benefits. In an age of economic globalization, the security of all countries is interlinked and has a mutual impact. No country can maintain absolute security by its own efforts alone, and no country can achieve stability on the basis of other countries’ instability. The law of the jungle leaves the weak at the mercy of the strong; that is not the way for countries to conduct their relations. Those who adopt the high-handed approach of using force will find that they are only lifting a rock to drop it on their own feet.
We should abandon the Cold War mentality in all its manifestations and foster a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should give full play to the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council in ending conflict and keeping peace, and adopt the dual approach of seeking peaceful solutions to disputes and taking the actions required to turn hostility into amity.
We should advance international cooperation in both the economic and social fields and take a holistic approach to addressing traditional and non-traditional security threats, so as to prevent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
We should promote open, innovative and inclusive development that benefits all. The 2008 international financial crisis taught us that allowing capital to blindly pursue profit can only create a crisis and that global prosperity cannot be built on the shaky foundation of a market without moral constraints. The growing gap between rich and poor is both unsustainable and unfair. It is important for us to use both the invisible hand and the visible hand to create synergy between market forces and Government function and strive to achieve both efficiency and fairness.
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable. Achieve this goal requires openness, mutual assistance and win-win cooperation. In today’s world, close to 800 million people still live in extreme poverty; nearly 6 million children die before the age of 5 each year; and nearly 60 million children are unable to go to school. The just-concluded United Nations sustainable development Summit adopted the post-2015 development Agenda (resolution 70/1). We must translate our commitments into action and work
together to ensure a bright future in which everyone is free from want, has access to development and lives with dignity.
We should increase inter-civilization exchanges so as to promote harmony, inclusiveness and respect for differences. The world is simply more colourful as a result of its cultural diversity. Diversity breeds exchanges, exchanges create integration, and integration makes progress possible. In their interactions, civilizations must accept their differences. Only through mutual respect, mutual learning and harmonious coexistence can the world maintain its diversity and thrive. Each civilization reflects the unique vision and contribution of its people, and no civilization is superior to any other. Different civilizations should have dialogue and exchanges instead of trying to exclude or replace one another. The history of humankind is a process of active exchanges, interactions and integration among different civilizations. We should respect all civilizations and treat one another as equals. We should draw inspiration from one another to boost the creative development of human civilization.
We should build an ecosystem that puts Mother Nature and green development first. Humankind may utilize nature and even try to transform it, but we are, after all, a part of it. We should care for nature and not place ourselves above it. We should reconcile industrial development with nature and pursue harmony between man and nature to achieve the sustainable development of the world and the all-round development of humankind.
To build a sound ecology is vital for humankind’s future. All members of the international community should work together to build a sound global eco-environment. We should respect nature, follow nature’s ways and protect nature. We should firmly pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable development. China will shoulder its share of responsibility and continue to play its part in this common endeavour. We also urge developed countries to fulfil their historical responsibilities, honour their emission-reduction commitments and help developing countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
The more than 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavouring to realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of the other peoples of the world. We cannot realize the Chinese dream without a peaceful international environment, a stable
international order and the understanding, support and help of the rest of the world. The realization of the Chinese dream will bring more opportunities to other countries and contribute to global peace and development.
China will continue to participate in building world peace. We are committed to peaceful development. No matter how the international landscape may evolve and how strong China may become, China will never seek hegemony or expansion or to establish a sphere of influence. We will continue to contribute to global development and to pursue common development and the win-win strategy of opening up. We are ready to share our development experience and opportunities with other countries, and we invite other countries to board China’s express train of development, so that all of us will achieve common development.
China will continue to uphold the international order. We will stay committed to the path of peaceful development through cooperation. China was the first country to put its signature on the Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to uphold the international order and system, underpinned by the purposes and principles of the Charter. China will continue to stand together with other developing countries. We firmly support the greater representation and voice of developing countries, especially African countries, in the international governance system. In voting at the United Nations, China will always side with the developing countries.
I take this opportunity to announce China’s decision to establish a 10-year, $1 billion peace and development fund to support the work of the United Nations, advance multilateral cooperation and promote world peace and development. I also wish to announce that China will join the new United Nations peacekeeping capabilities readiness system and has therefore decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent formed peacekeeping police force and a standby peacekeeping force of 8,000 troops. I also wish to announce that China will provide a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the development of the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
As the United Nations enters a new decade, let us unite even more closely to forge a new partnership of win-win cooperation and a community of shared future for humankind. Let the vision of beating our swords
into ploughshares and building a war-free world with lasting peace take root in our hearts. Let the aspirations for development, prosperity, fairness and justice spread throughout the world.The founding of the United Nations 70 years ago cast light on the dark twentieth century. That was a pivotal moment for our world. It came not against a backdrop of glorious sunshine and green pastures, but amid the ruins of the Second World War with its more than 50 million graves. As the winter of the Cold War spread its frosty fingers, the mothers and fathers of the United Nations forged the foundations of a new order — an order that is not perfect, and which may never be perfect, but which has often enough protected us from relapse into the old barbarism.
Today, 70 years on, it is clear that we are again living in turbulent times. Millions of people are gravely affected by wars and violence, and more than 60 million people have fled their homes — more than at any time since the end of the Second World War.
The foundations of the United Nations are still strong, but the world order built on them has come loose from its moorings. The old balance of power is under pressure. Powerful new players have emerged on the world stage. Most serious of all, non-State actors are now increasingly responsible for war and violence. They abide by no rules — not even the minimum standards enshrined in the international law of war.
We therefore urgently need new buttresses and pillars so that the order based on the United Nations can withstand the tempests of our times. What form could these new pillars take? How should the world order of tomorrow look?
I do not think that there is a theoretical answer to that question; the only answer is a practical one. Just as the Charter of the United Nations was adopted as a bold response to war and suffering, today new pillars will be built only if States are ready to assume responsibility and work together to find concrete answers to the crises of our times — to poverty and underdevelopment, to refugees and migration, to the devastating civil war in Syria and the failing States across the arc of crisis from Libya to Afghanistan, to religious extremism and terrorism and the murderous deeds of the people who call themselves the Islamic State.
There is, however, one major difference between now and the situation 70 years ago. The world of today
15-29658 37/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
is more closely interconnected than ever before. Borders are becoming blurred. In this age of globalization, some say, the world has become a village. If that is so, then we are all neighbours, and I would advise us to act as good neighbours. We come from very different backgrounds. We have different traditions, religions, values and world views. That diversity must be respected. No world view takes precedence over any other, but I can think of no culture in which people are unaware of what it means to be a good neighbour and in which people do not appreciate living in an atmosphere of good-neighbourliness.
Nobody is investing as much hope in that spirit of good-neighbourliness today than the millions of women, men and children who have fled their homes. My country has assumed its responsibility towards them over the past months. Since the beginning of the year, we have taken in 600,000 refugees. Currently, upwards of 10,000 new refugees are arriving every day. Those statistics show that even we cannot absorb such numbers by ourselves over the long term. We need to arrive at a European solution, together with our European neighbours, as well as with our neighbours around the Mediterranean, especially Turkey.
Secondly, the relief agencies of the United Nations system — the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — all help people in need, on the spot and with no intermediaries. It is scandalous that those organizations are underfunded to the point that they have to cut food rations and medical aid. Accordingly, I met with the members of the Group of Seven and other partners the day before yesterday, and I am delighted to report that together we have raised an additional $1.8 billion, of which over $100 million will come from Germany, intended for the United Nations relief agencies. That will also help relieve the burden on the neighbouring countries in which the huge majority of refugees arrive, especially Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan. They too need our help, so that one exodus does not trigger another.
But good-neighbourliness comprises more than just humanity and compassion. Good-neighbourliness also presupposes that we agree on joint rules that we all must obey. They include respecting each other’s borders and sovereignty. That fundamental norm is still being violated, even in Europe. The European
Union unanimously condemned Russia’s annexation of the Crimea and the actions in eastern Ukraine, and we responded, not only in terms of condemnation and isolation, but also by launching a political process to defuse the conflict. The Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE) has played an indispensable role in that process from the outset. We want to further strengthen the OSCE as an institution for our common security when we Germans assume its chairmanship next year.
Active political responsibility is also part and parcel of good-neighbourliness. A neighbourhood in which nobody looks beyond their garden gate will not be worth living in for long. People must be vigilant, because there are many conflicts that can only be solved in concert and by means of multilateral diplomacy. While that may take time and perseverance, it works.
This past summer, the five permanent members of the Security Council and Germany concluded an agreement with Iran. After more than 10 years of negotiations, we managed to agree that Iran will never have an atomic bomb and that we can verify this. The negotiations succeeded in bringing a number of actors to the same table, including Russia and the United States of America. The negotiations have therefore proved that while neighbours may not like one another, they can still solve problems together. Indeed they must do so, if living side by side is not to become unbearable for them both.
The agreement that was reached has created common ground on which greater security can be established in the Middle East, if we persevere in our joint efforts. However, the realities are still somewhat different. In Syria, in the fifth year of the war, the slaughter knows no end. We will only put an end to it by acting together. We have to halt the brutality of Al-Assad’s dictatorship, as evinced by its use of barrel bombs and torture. We have to break the control of the Islamic State. We have to silence the guns in Syria and provide the people who live there with access to humanitarian aid.
Moreover, we also share the commons goals of preserving the territorial integrity of Syria and restoring conditions in which all ethnic and religious groups can live in peace with each other, as well as in peace with neighbouring countries. Those are goals that all the actors must believe in, whatever differences may exist between the United States of America and Russia or between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
38/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
We already have a basis for joint action aimed at achieving those goals, as illustrated by Security Council resolution 2139 (2014). We must now implement it together with all the stakeholders as a first step towards defusing the conflict. I appeal to the stakeholders in Syria and Syria’s neighbours — but not only to them. Instead of multilateral decisions, such as those recently taken by Russia, regarding military action in Syria, we need Russia to now take political action that will advocate transition in Syria. That would be an important contribution to ending the stalemate. For that stalemate is a lethal one, which claims new lives every day.
At the risk of repeating myself, let me stress that when dealing with a humanitarian catastrophe as horrifying as the one in Syria, we are all neighbours. That is what must prompt us to crawl out of our diplomatic trenches, for there can be no military solution. Neither supposed eternal truths nor national interests must be allowed to obstruct efforts to take the first steps in defusing the conflict in Syria.
In these turbulent times, the idea of universal good- neighbourliness would be no more than a dream if there were not already an umbrella, a roof, under which universal good-neighbourliness has been practised for decades. Today we need the United Nations more than ever. We need a legitimate and responsive United Nations, and that is why Germany is campaigning for the reform of the United Nations and the Security Council. That is why we are working with others on the major global projects, on the ambitious 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals (resolution 70/1), which has just been adopted and on the equally, if not more, ambitious goals to combat climate change, which we hope to adopt together at the Conference of the Parties in Paris this December.
The United Nations provides a framework, a roof, for our global endeavours. But under that roof, the work must continue at many levels. We Germans believe, first, that the way forward lies in regional cooperation in the European Union and the OSCE and in cooperation with other regional organizations, such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the African Union, among others. Secondly, we are committed to re-establishing and stabilizing State structures across the arc of crisis from Libya to Iraq and Afghanistan. And thirdly, especially in our capacity as President of the Human Rights Council, we are championing the fundamental importance of human rights. For no political order can endure if the people are not secure in their rights.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the founding of the United Nations 70 years ago. As magnificent as that moment was, it also inspires a sense of great humility in me as a German, because the Charter of the United Nations was part of humankind’s response to the war and inhumanity that had originated in my country. In the seven decades that have passed since that time, Germany has been fortunate enough to be gradually and cautiously welcomed back into the heart of the international community. For that, we Germans are grateful, but we are also aware of our responsibility. When Mr. Willy Brandt became the Federal Chancellor of Germany in 1969, he said that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours. At the time, Germany was still divided, and those words were meant as a gesture of reconciliation towards Poland, France and the other European neighbours that had suffered greatly at German hands.
Today, when a Syrian family in Berlin tells me their tale of war and expulsion, Mr. Brandt’s words take on a new meaning. Now the world has become smaller, but the crises are no fewer. It is time for us to once again reaffirm that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours to others near and far.
Our Organization, the United Nations, is celebrating its seventieth anniversary. Immense progress has been made since it was established as an institution entrusted with the task of maintaining peace, which it has managed to do so on many an occasion. Yet, 70 years later dramas and tragedies, conflicts and wars continue to unfold, and the world must yet once again rise up to significant challenges. Among those of today is the flight of hundreds of thousands — even millions — of refugees from the Middle East and Africa, seeking protection or simply to save their lives. Terrorism strikes at civilian populations and no country is immune from this scourge. There are also conflicts, such as that in
the Middle East, that have remain unresolved for years and years, and that we all know could intensify at any moment.
In the meantime, there are disasters: tsunamis, earthquakes, islands on the verge of disappearing, coastlines washed away, and glaciers melting. That is the reality of climate change.
Faced with such challenges, we must all must shoulder our responsibilities at our respective levels. France, in many domains, has never refused its cooperation. France wished to host the Climate Change Conference, no doubt because we were aware of that terrible failure at Copenhagen and felt that this time we needed to make a good decision, one that can be taken only by the entire international community.
So in Paris, we must ask ourselves one question: is humankind capable of taking the decision to preserve life on the planet? Yes, that single question places us at a level that no one could ever imagine in our generation. Some will say, “But that can happen later, maybe at another conference”. I assure the Assembly here and I will say it quite plainly: if it does not happen in Paris, it will be too late for the world.
Matters have progressed well in recent months, and very strong declarations have been made by precisely those most responsible for global warming — the United States and China, which have made commitments that contribute to changing the current situation. Many calls have come from all continents, stressing the gravity and urgency of the situation and providing detailed testimony on what global warming is now, today. There are some countries that so far have been reluctant — here I am thinking of developing countries — and have asked themselves whether it is really useful to impose restrictions on themselves when the most developed countries have been free of such rules and obligations.
If asked today for a prognosis, and I often am, I will say that nothing has been settled in regard to winning an accord in Paris — nothing. But at the same time, everything remains possible. I see three conditions that must be met for us to be able to say that the Paris Conference was truly successful, worthy of us and of what was entrusted to us when we were asked to host the Conference.
The first condition is to be able to conclude a universal agreement applicable to all, one that is binding and differentiated so that everyone can do their own part, and not more. To date, 90 countries — half
of those sitting in the United Nations — have submitted their national contribution, which represents 80 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions — already a considerable figure. That means that half of the world has not yet responded. I therefore invite them to do so and to do so quickly so that we can determine as of now what, given the contributions from every State, we can assure the world will be the limit on global warming.
The second condition that will signify our success or failure is to be able to ensure that our resolution, our action, is long-lasting. The Paris accord must not be an end or a conclusion, but rather a starting point, the beginning of a process. Through incorporating a review mechanism into the agreement, we will be able to regularly review, periodically measure and even revise every five years our national contributions. That is what will allow us to be sure that at the end of the century, well beyond our time, the planet will not havewarmed by more than 2°C.
The third condition that will determine failure or success is developed countries making financial commitments. I am aware that already in Copenhagen the figure of $100 billion was announced to ensure the financing of energy transition, adaptation and technology transfer. We must collect $100 billion by 2020, but it must be said today so as to ensure that emerging countries, developing countries, can feel confident that they will be aided and supported so that this technological leap, the sharing of technology, will come about.
Yes, one hundred billion dollars. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is responsible for providing an initial estimate, to be presented at the Lima meeting. I wish here to thank the President of Peru for continuing the work he undertook at the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The OECD will provide the initial estimate, as we have not reached $100 billion yet. So we have two months before the Paris Conference to continue to mobilize the World Bank, major development banks, financial institutions, States and private stakeholders so that we can reach $100 billion. Everyone should set an example. France abides by the rule that when serving as the host country; we must perform better than our guests, or at least as well as them.
I am announcing here today that France’s annual climate funding, which is €3 billion today, will be more than €5 billion in 2020. That increase in aid will
not be merely through loans, but also in the form of grants, because it is with grants — funds transferred directly and that will not be reimbursed — that we can powerfully promote the adaptation of developing countries to the effects of climate change.
In brief, if we are in a position to meet those three requirements — that is, a universal agreement, one that can be revised and will be revised every 5 years, and funding sufficient to cover everything that we will have to cover in emerging needs and future technology — then in Paris in two months we will be able to say we have risen to the challenge; not just a rendez-vous with history, but with the future.
It is good that the international community is able to look to the future and to say what sort of world we want. We did it with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals, and we must do it for climate issues. But what is expected of the United Nations is not simply to ensure — though this is already considerable — that the world will be liveable at the end of the century, but that it is liveable today, when conflicts and wars confront us with tragedies that in 1945, when the United Nations system was founded, nobody imagined we would ever see again.
Today, it is Syria that once again calls on us to mobilize and to intervene, as many speakers have already stated. Everyone considers that this is a tragedy striking the Syrian population. Everyone has said that we must find a solution. Let us look for it together. But first, we should assess what has not been done.
Three years ago, when I stood at this rostrum to address the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.6), there had already been 30,000 victims of the Syrian tragedy. There are now 250,000, and 12,000 children have died, victims of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. The Syrian tragedy began with a revolution led by those who wanted to challenge the dictatorship of Bashar Al-Assad. At that time, there were no terrorists, there were no fundamentalist groups — there was a dictator who was massacring a people. And the refugees whom we are discussing today, the refugees in the camps, the displaced, 8 million of them — this mass of women, men and children — have not just fled a war. For more than three years they have been fleeing from the regime of Bashar Al-Assad. And still today that same regime is raining bombs on innocent civilians.
But it is not because there is a terrorist group that itself massacres, kills, rapes, destroys — including
destruction of the common heritage of humankind — that some form of pardon, of amnesty, should necessarily be accorded to the regime that created this situation, as if the existence of a terrorist group that commits the worst kinds of evil acts could furnish the regime with a way to share in what is good. No, all those women, men and children are victims of this tragedy, which is generated by the alliance between terrorism and dictatorship. No solution can be found outside of a political process.
France, which, due to its history and also its links that bind it to that part of the world, intends to shoulder its responsibilities. It has already done so recently, including through armed action, through force. France wants to work with everyone; it does not exclude any country — neighbouring countries, which are most affected, the Gulf countries, but also Iran, the permanent members of the Security Council, as well as Europeans. We want to work with everyone, with everyone who wants to work with us.
There is talk of a coalition. This broad coalition is possible; it is even desirable and necessary in order to put an end to what is happening in Syria. But this coalition must have a clear basis or it will never see the light of day. The basis was provided in Geneva more than three years ago. And what did the Geneva agreement say? It specified a transitional Government with full powers, including members of the present Government and the opposition, formed on the basis of mutual consent. That is the basis; let us use it to move forward.
But I can see, in the context of this ongoing adversity, that some are making every diplomatic effort to incorporate Bashar Al-Assad in that process. But one cannot make the victims and the executioner work together. Al-Assad is at the origin of the problem; he cannot be part of the solution. We have to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people, but we must also look beyond the political transition that has to be sought, the broad coalition that has to be formed, this condition that has to be laid down, to a new Government capable of uniting all those who have fought, but without the dictator.
We also have to be thinking about all the refugees. Until now, those refugees have been in neighbouring countries, but there too, the international community turned a blind eye because it was far away. Today those refugees, who can endure no more, are starting a long march. Yesterday, I recalled in the Assembly (see A/70/ PV.11) that 80 per cent of the world’s refugees — refugees
because of wars, conflicts, climate, poverty — are in the South. Solidarity with the South is coming from the South. Frequently, it is the most deprived who welcome the poorest. There comes a time when the refugees start to walk, and they can no longer be stopped. If we want to avoid what we have seen — tragedies, crossings that endanger the lives of passengers — if we want to prevent smugglers and criminals from using despair to further enrich the coffers of terrorism, then we must act.
Europe has hosted refugees coming not only from Syria, but also from Iraq, Eritrea and the Sudan. That was our duty, because Europe is based on values and principles, and the right to asylum is part of this common foundation that unites all the European countries, and which must continue uniting them. Otherwise, it is not the kind of Europe that we wanted.
But while Europe should discharge its duty, the world must help refugees. What have we learned those past days and weeks? That the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), due to lack of funds, no longer has the resources to ensure the necessary support and assistance to the populations in question. What have we learned? That the World Food Programme no longer has the means to provide all the refugees basic necessities and sufficient food. What have we learned? That in some neighbouring countries, refugees could not work.
This is the start of the cycle one would have imagined. If we want to reverse the flows, if we want to keep refugees as close as possible to their home countries, then we must fund UNHCR more, we must help neighbouring countries — Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey — but also countries in Africa, transit countries, countries where there is no migration. We need a major plan now, because tragedy is calling to act and to avert other tragedies. In that context, too, France is doing what it can, and must do what it should. And concerning the World Food Programme, France has decided to immediately increase by €100 million its support for United Nations agencies that are helping countries neighbouring Syria.
I want to end my speech by saying that the legitimacy of an Organization such as the United Nations rests on its credibility. If the United Nations does not have the capacity to resolve conflicts that have been going on for far too long, if the United Nations cannot resolve tragedies or ease the situation of civilian populations, then our helplessness will condemn us. If we want our
Organization — which is celebrating its seventieth anniversary — to have a future worthy of that which the founders imagined, we cannot avoid reform of the United Nations.
France calls for the enlargement of the Security Council. France calls for a different representation in the Security Council. France calls for continents to clearly bear responsibility for the world in the framework of the Security Council. France wants the permanent members of the Security Council to no longer resort to the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities. How can we tolerate that the United Nations, even today, remains paralysed when the worst is unfolding? There again, let us lead by example. I pledge here today that France will never use its right of veto in matters involving mass atrocities. The right of veto as it was introduced when the United Nations was founded was not the right to block; it was the right to act. We have to act. We can act. We have been showing that we can for 70 years. Here, today, we can act to settle the tragedies of today and to save the planet tomorrow. Let us act.Nearly 70 years ago, the first meetings of the General Assembly and the Security Council took place in London. They marked the point when the world came together to turn its back on war and to seek to institutionalize the conditions for peace. By that process, from the ashes of the Second World War, our predecessors embarked upon a shared quest for peace, development and human dignity.
And they succeeded where the League of Nations had failed. From 51 Members at its inception to 193 now, the United Nations has become a powerful and universally recognized expression of our collective will to find solutions to the most difficult challenges we face. It is the cornerstone of the rules-based international system and an affirmation of the value we attach to human dignity and hope.
Britain is proud to have played its role in the birth of the Organization. And proud too, 70 years later, of the active role we play in international affairs as the only Security Council member, indeed the only major economy in the world, that both meets the NATO 2 per cent target for defence spending and the United Nations 0.7 per cent target for development spending.
But seven decades on, the daily reality for millions of people is a very far cry from the ideals set out in the Charter of the United Nations. Despite the historic work delivered under the Millennium Development Goals, more than a billion people still live on less than $1.25 a day. Insecurity, extremism and conflict in the
Middle East have driven millions of people to abandon their homes, creating a humanitarian emergency on an unprecedented scale. And many millions more still live under regimes in which they have no say about how they are governed, and in which human rights and fundamental freedoms are denied.
At the same time, the rules-based international system that keeps the peace between nations is being undermined by States willing to violate the territorial integrity of others or to breach the most fundamental prohibitions on weapons of mass destruction. And alongside these challenges, we face the longer term threats of climate change, global pandemics and anti-microbial resistance — threats that we must tackle effectively now, if we are not to put the lives of future generations at risk.
But it is in Syria and Iraq, in the crucible of human civilization, that our collective values and our will to act are being most immediately challenged. The twin evils of Al-Assad’s murderous regime and the brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or Daesh, have inflicted suffering on the Syrian people on an almost unimaginable scale. The humanitarian crisis, the tide of refugees seeking sanctuary in neighbouring countries and in Europe, underscore the urgent need to end the conflict and represent huge tests of our resolve.
I want to pay tribute to the extraordinary generosity of Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan, which have given a temporary home to many millions of refugees and which have accepted this role stoically for years. It is incumbent upon all of us to support them as they bear that burden, and to ensure that the United Nations appeals for Syria are fully funded. And I am proud that the United Kingdom is making the second-largest contribution of any country to the humanitarian mission in the region.
We judge it important that we seek to support those who have been displaced as close as possible to their homes. Because there will be a new Syria to build, post-Al-Assad, and that country will need to draw on the talent of all the Syrian people. But a humanitarian response alone is not adequate. We share a responsibility to act to end the bloody civil war and create an inclusive political process, and to work together to crush ISIL and banish its twisted ideology from the face of the Earth. The United Kingdom will continue to be a leading member of the international coalition against ISIL, including in carrying out more air strikes in Iraq than any other country except the United States, for as
15-29595 19/23

A/70/PV.18 29/09/2015
long as it takes to prevail in what will ultimately be a generational struggle against the Islamist extremist ideology that drives it.
But the defeat of ISIL on its own will not bring peace to Syria. An inclusive political settlement is the only sustainable way to end the suffering of the Syrian people. We must redouble our efforts to build a political process under Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, and to hold to account those who have committed crimes during the conflict. Positive movement on this agenda is a crucial test for the United Nations. Progress at the Security Council has been blocked for too long. All parties must now put narrow interests aside and cooperate for the good of the Syrian people and to reassert the values of this Organization.
Urgent though the crisis in Syria is — and to that we could add the crises in Yemen, Somalia and Libya — we cannot neglect the need to act now to prevent future threats to global security from arising. But that collective action will truly work only if we have a shared analysis of the real causes of poverty, injustice, and the conflict that feeds upon it. We need a common recognition that strong, transparent and effective institutions, open economies and open societies, the rule of law, and freedom from corruption are the conditions that will allow development to flourish over the long term and so reduce the drivers that fuel conflict. They provide what Prime Minister David Cameron has called “the golden thread of development” and they are vital to the success of the Sustainable Development Goals. Each country must, of course, follow its own path to prosperity. But as we help the poorest countries overcome conflict, poverty and instability and to move up the development curve, it is in all our interests that that development be sustainable over the long term.
And the foundation for all sustainable development is security. As a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom places security as the prerequisite to good governance, strong institutions and economic development at the core of its approach. So, as the Prime Minister pledged yesterday, the United Kingdom will resume a significant role in enabling peacekeeping operations, particularly in Africa, where the United Kingdom will support efforts by the United Nations and the African Union to end some of the world’s most destabilizing conflicts, conflicts that are prompting mass migration from South Sudan and sustaining terrorist groups in Somalia.
But there is another important truth to understand — security within countries can deliver the benefits of economic growth only if it is matched by security among countries. Britain has always believed that the stability we seek in relations between nations is best realized through the framework of laws, norms and institutions that together constitute the rules- based international system that was developed after the Second World War, with the Charter of the United Nations at its heart.
Fundamental to that system is the fact that States should respect one another’s territorial integrity and political independence. When States challenge those rules, all of us have a duty to come swiftly and unambiguously to the defence of the victims. That is why we stand shoulder to shoulder with the Ukrainian people. Illegal actions and State aggression must have consequences, or the international order will be fatally undermined. We, the United Nations, insist that differences and disputes be resolved within the framework of international law, not outside it.
The collective will to tackle threats to our security must be extended to the threat we face from climate change. It represents not just a threat to the environment and to our prosperity, but to our security too. The impact of rising sea levels and rising global temperatures will be felt by all of us, but it will hit hardest many of the poorest countries and those who are least able to adapt. So the United Kingdom will not only cut its emissions at home but, as our Prime Minister announced on Monday, also increase its support to climate finance for vulnerable countries to $9 billion over the next five years. We must work for a strong and effective deal at the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris in December, built upon clear commitments from all nations to lower emissions targets still further, and a collective commitment to maintain the goal of limiting global warming to two degrees.
Seventy years after the first session of the General Assembly, the United Nations stands battered by the waves of international crises but unbowed, proudly at the heart of the international order. Over seven decades, it has played a critical role in addressing almost every challenge we have faced. And crucial to its future success will be further evolution, embracing change, and maintaining relevance in this twenty-first century. The United Nations must strive to represent the new realities of our age with a reformed Security
20/23 15-29595

29/09/2015 A/70/PV.18
Council. It must have the best possible leadership, with a transparent system for selecting the next Secretary-General. And he — or dare I suggest perhaps she? — will have to head a more efficient Organization ensuring that every cent it receives from its Member States is used to maximum effect.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, and as a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom will champion that reform agenda, and we will continue to promote the ideals that the United Nations represents. Seventy years ago, a generation resolved to shape their world on a vision for peace, security and universal values. Today, realizing that vision in its totality still eludes us, but we have demonstrated that when we work together collectively we can take great strides towards it. Now we must resolve to demonstrate that collective will; to recognize that it is not only our moral duty, but also in the enlightened national interests of all of us to act; to respond to the grave humanitarian crises we face; to tackle the causes of conflict, poverty and instability; and to uphold the rules-based international system.
The world is a better place because of the foundation of the United Nations by our predecessors 70 years ago. By holding firm to our ideals as United Nations Members in the face of all challenges and all temptations, we will preserve their legacy and continue to build the foundations for a better age, an age of peace, hope and dignity for all.
The United Nations is marking its seventieth anniversary this year, making this session of the General Assembly a historic one. I hope that this year will also be historic for the United Nations in terms of outcomes. I would like to assure the President that he will receive India’s full support in his efforts.
Seventy years ago, the foundations of the United Nations were laid at the San Francisco Conference, in a city on the west coast of this country. India was one of the signatory countries of the Charter of the United Nations, although at that time we were not independent. We obtained our independence two years later. When the United Nations was established, a rather diminutive-looking man with the powerful weapon of non-violence was writing the final act in a struggle that would become a symbol of hope for the colonized and the oppressed everywhere. I am grateful that the United Nations has proclaimed the birthday of this extraordinary man as the International Day of Non-Violence. It is a pleasing coincidence that tomorrow is 2 October, and
42/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that we will be celebrating his birthday then. Mahatma Gandhi said, “The difference between what we do and what we are capable of doing would suffice to solve most of the world’s problems”. His message is most fitting in the context of the United Nations.
The seventieth year of any human being’s life is a milestone from which to look back and reflect on what one has achieved and what one has lost. Similarly, for people associated with an institution, the seventieth year provides an opportunity to analyse whether the institution has fulfilled its purpose and achieved the goals set for it at its establishment. Today we need to ask ourselves whether we have fulfilled the purpose and achieved the goals for which the United Nations was established 70 years ago. When I ask myself that question, I receive an affirmative answer for some questions and a negative one for others. For example, the United Nations has been successful in preventing a third world war, assisting decolonization and dismantling apartheid. It has been successful in combating global epidemics, reducing global hunger and promoting democracy and human rights.
Yet, when we ask ourselves whether we have been able to prevent conflicts taking place in various parts of the world, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to find permanent solutions to those conflicts, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to show the path of peace to a world which is treading the path of violence, the answer is “no”. According to those parameters, the United Nations appears to be ineffective at maintaining international peace and security, an institution that has failed to effectively address new challenges in that area.
Today, the world is ravaged by war on three continents, with the Security Council powerless or unwilling to stem the f low of blood. Traditional solutions that rely on force have only exacerbated problems. We must ask ourselves if we have the political will to craft alternatives to conflict and to pursue them with commitment and single-minded dedication. Nowhere is such a goal more important than in peacekeeping. Under the blue flag, men and women are constantly working to prevent conflict, protect civilians and sustain peace processes. With 180,000 peacekeepers deployed so far, India has been the largest contributor to international security provided by the United Nations. Even today, about 8,000 Indian military and police personnel are participating in 10 peacekeeping missions, operating in highly challenging environments.
India remains committed to continuing its support to United Nations peacekeeping operations and even to enhancing its contributions, as announced by our Prime Minister at the leaders summit on peacekeeping. Our new contributions will cover all aspects of peacekeeping: personnel, enablers and training. At the same time, no dilution of the cardinal principles of peacekeeping must occur. The fact that troop-contributing countries have no role in the formulation of mandates, which are often amended without consultation, is a matter of concern. That is a clear violation of Article 44 of the Charter of the United Nations. We also believe that peacekeeping operations cannot be a substitute for political solutions, a fact that the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations underscored.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the more than 3,300 peacekeepers, including 161 from India, who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We stand ready to contribute to the memorial wall for United Nations peacekeepers, which was approved by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
The safety of our peacekeepers, the security of our nations, and indeed the future of the international community itself now depend on how we respond to the greatest threat that we face today: terrorism. It is a threat that India has lived with for more than a quarter of a century, and one that was tragically brought home to this very city in the autumn of 2001. Since then, we have not adequately countered the proliferation of terrorist acts, the rise of extremist ideologies and the impunity of States that back terrorism.
Only organized international action can defeat international terrorism. The world must demonstrate zero tolerance for terrorists who kill and maim innocent civilians and base its action on the principle of prosecute or extradite. The international community must make countries that provide financing to terrorists and safe havens for their training, arming and operations pay a heavy price.
Equally important, the establishment of an international legal regime, under a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, can no longer be held up. Nineteen years ago, in 1996, India proposed such a regime at the United Nations, but the Member States have been unable to adopt it and have become mired in the issue of definition. We have to understand that no such distinction exists as good terrorists and bad terrorists, and that terrorism cannot be linked
15-29658 43/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
to any religion. A terrorist is a terrorist, and anyone who commits crimes against humanity cannot have a religion. Therefore, I appeal to everyone to come together during this seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations and to pledge to unanimously adopt a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
While on the subject of terrorism, I take this opportunity to share the challenges that we face in our ties with Pakistan. None of us can accept that terrorism is a legitimate instrument of statecraft. The world shared our outrage at the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, in which citizens of many nations were helplessly butchered. That the mastermind behind the attack is walking free is an affront to the entire international community. Not only have past assurances in this regard not been honoured, but new cross-border terrorist attacks have taken place recently, and two terrorists from across the border have been captured alive. We all know that these attacks are meant to destabilize India and legitimize Pakistan’s illegal occupation of parts of the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir and its claim to the rest of it.
Let me use this occasion to spell out our approach clearly. India remains open to dialogue but finds talks and terrorism to be incompatible. Yesterday, the Prime Minister of Pakistan proposed what he termed a new four-point peace initiative. I would like to respond to this. We do not need four points. We need just one — give up terrorism and let us sit down and talk. This will solve all the problems. That was precisely what was discussed and decided by the two Prime Ministers in Ufa this July. Let us hold talks, at the level of national security advisers, on all issues connected to terrorism and arrange an early meeting of our Directors-General of Military Operations to address the situation on the border. If the response is serious and credible, India is prepared to address all outstanding issues through bilateral dialogue. Even as we counter the menace of terrorism, we must acknowledge that real social and economic progress remains a critical goal. The elimination of basic human want leads almost invariably to more peaceful societies, as is evidenced by a map of the conflicts that engulf parts of the world.
Just a few days ago, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), with the Sustainable Development Goals at its core. They constitute a blueprint that is more comprehensive and holistic than the Millennium Development Goals. However, their successful implementation will require political resolve and an inclination to
share both technology and financial resources, while simultaneously improving our delivery mechanisms. As a woman and an elected Member of Parliament, it has been my firm conviction that there is a shortcut to real social change, and that is empowering the girl child. Our Government’s policy and our Prime Minister’s programme of Educate the Girl Child to Empower Her was conceived with that vision.
Our future rests on our building a sustainable planet for our children and our children’s children. As we prepare to meet in two months’ time, in Paris, the world expects us to deliver an ambitious and credible agreement on climate change. We have a duty to take common action, but in doing so we must keep in mind the larger historical contributions of some and the differentiated responsibilities of others. If Mahatma Gandhi were among us today, he would ask if we have used the resources of the planet for our needs or for our greed. He would also ask if adapting our lifestyle choices and reducing extravagant consumption would help us to correct our course. For this reason, the agreement in Paris needs to be comprehensive and equitable, while delivering concrete action. Developing countries can do more if they are enabled in their efforts by support from developed countries in the areas of finance, technology transfer and capacity- building. India is and always has been a willing partner in global efforts towards this goal. We will play our due role in reaching a meaningful, equitable and effective agreement in Paris.
India’s reverence for the environment is based on our traditions, which have always held nature as sacred. The health of the planet is tied to our own well-being, and it is this holistic approach that guided us in our call for the First International Day of Yoga, which was celebrated with much fervour in 192 countries of the world, as well as in this hallowed institution. I thank the international community for its enthusiasm and support in this regard. I hope that the seed that has been planted will grow into a magnificent tree.
I also congratulate States for their prompt action in tackling the threat of global epidemics. By linking our efforts, we have managed to eradicate smallpox and nearly eradicate polio. HIV/AIDS has been controlled and, more recently, the Ebola outbreak was contained, although not before an unacceptably high price in lives had been paid. The Ebola epidemic is an important example of how national action and international support can resolve a global crisis. We are proud that
44/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
India played its due part in these efforts. Inspired by our successes, we must redouble our efforts to eradicate other diseases, whether it be tuberculosis or malaria.
Natural disasters and man-made conflicts also deserve our coordinated response. In recent months, the international community has been found wanting in its response to the refugee crisis caused by the conflict situations in Syria, Iraq and Libya. What is needed is a swift response backed by political will. Our own response to humanitarian crises in our neighbourhood has been quick, responsive and holistic. Whether in Nepal or Yemen, India has emerged as a net security provider, assisting not only our nationals but those of other countries that sought our help. India will be hosting the first Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in November 2016, when the topic will be the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Like the United Nations, India has walked a long way these past 70 years. As 1.25 billion of my countrymen would attest, we have done so happy in the knowledge that our democratic traditions are deeply embedded. Nonetheless, every once in a while, there is a need for transformative change — one that can reinvigorate the nation and redeem its spirit. Ever since the new Government of Prime Minister Modi took office a year and a half ago, we have committed ourselves to this renewal. It is one that has enabled India to play its rightful role in international affairs, while also becoming the fastest-growing major economy in the world. The driving force of this comprehensive renewal has been premised on the motto of sabka saath, sabka vikas, which places emphasis on the welfare of all our people.
At the same time, we have started to reach out enthusiastically to all our partners in the international community. Our efforts have focused, first and foremost, on our immediate neighbourhood and the results have been truly transformational. We have also reached out to our extended neighbourhood, renewing ancient linkages and constructing modern economic partnerships, including, most recently, a summit with 14 Pacific island nations. Our Act East policy has replaced the previous one, Look East, with a more vigorous and proactive engagement in an economically vibrant region, and complements our Link West engagement.
We remain committed to the Middle East peace process, which is key to preventing further radicalization of the region. We continue to hope that a
solution can be reached to the Palestinian question. We have also qualitatively upgraded our relations with all the major Powers.
Africa is a region with which we have historical bonds, a solidarity born out of a common struggle against colonialism and a belief in a future of shared prosperity. Later this month we will host the third India- Africa Forum Summit, the first time that the leaders of all 54 African countries have been invited.
As a nuclear-weapon State, India is aware of its responsibility, and its support for global, non-discriminatory and verifiable nuclear disarmament is undiminished.
As with nations, so it is with institutions. Only periodic renewal can provide an organization with meaning and purpose. In a world that continues to be dominated by wealthy and influential nations, the United Nations notion of sovereign equality has permitted the developing world to question some unfair norms. But it has not permitted a fundamental challenge to the inequity of a system built for a world that longer exists. If we are to preserve the centrality and legitimacy of the United Nations as the custodian of global peace, security and development, the most urgent and pressing need is reform of the Security Council. This is the need of the hour. How can we have a Security Council in 2015 that still reflects the geopolitical architecture of 1945? How can we have a Security Council that still does not give Africa and Latin America seats as permanent members?
We must include more developing nations in the decision-making structures of the Security Council. And we must change the way it does business by doing away with outdated and non-transparent working methods. Giving it more legitimacy and balance would restore its credibility and equip it to confront the challenges of our times. We are happy that during the past year, under the leadership of Their Excellences Mr. Sam Kutesa and Mr. Courtenay Rattray, we have achieved what we had been unable to do in two decades of discussions — a text for negotiations unanimously adopted by the General Assembly as decision 69/560. That first but critical step must be a springboard for action at this historic seventieth session.
For an organization such as the United Nations, 70 years has a unique significance. It is an occasion for revitalization and for renewal. I invite everyone in this Hall to contemplate the idea of the United Nations as
15-29658 45/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
a banyan tree. In the eastern tradition, the banyan tree connotes wisdom, and yet is non-judgemental and all- encompassing. It has not one trunk but many, growing outwards, each connected to the others as well as to the sky and the earth. Its expansive branches provide shade and relief, and its base has always been a place for discussion and debate.
At 70, unlike the men and women who might have planted its seed, the banyan is still young. But without constant regeneration and expansion, it withers away. That could be the fate that awaits the United Nations. Either we can take this historic opportunity to renew this critical institution or we can condemn it to irrelevance and tragic withering. We could easily lose ourselves in a labyrinth of our own creation, but if we seize the day, we will see a United Nations growing to its full potential, a United Nations that can reduce the gap between what it does and what it is capable of doing, a mighty banyan tree providing the canopy for a peaceful and prosperous humankind. I end my statement with the hope that the United Nations will grow into such a banyan tree.
I bring greetings from Jerusalem, the city in which the Jewish people’s hopes and prayers for peace for all of humanity have echoed throughout the ages.
Thirty-one years ago, as Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I stood at this rostrum for the first time. I spoke that day against a draft resolution sponsored by Iran to expel Israel from the United Nations. Then, as now, the United Nations was obsessively hostile towards Israel, the one true democracy in the Middle East. Then, as now, some sought to deny the one and only Jewish State a place among nations. I ended that first speech by saying, “Gentlemen, check your fanaticism at the door” (A/39/PV.32, para. 83).
More than three decades later, as the Prime Minister of Israel, I am again privileged to speak from this rostrum. And for me, that privilege has always come with a moral responsibility to speak the truth. So after three days of listening to world leaders praise the nuclear deal with Iran, I begin my speech today by saying, “Ladies and gentlemen, check your enthusiasm at the door”. The deal does not make peace more likely.
By fuelling Iran’s aggressions with billions of dollars in sanctions relief, it makes war more likely.
Just look at what Iran has done in the past six months alone, since the framework agreement was announced in Lausanne. Iran boosted its supply of devastating weapons to Syria. Iran sent more soldiers of its Revolutionary Guard into Syria. Iran sent thousands of Afghani and Pakistani Shiite fighters to Syria. Iran did all that to prop up Al-Assad’s brutal regime. Iran also shipped tons of weapons and ammunition to the Houthi rebels in Yemen, including another shipment just two days ago. Iran threatened to topple Jordan. Iran’s proxy, Hizbullah, smuggled into Lebanon SA-22 missiles to down our planes and Yakhont cruise missiles to sink our ships. Iran supplied Hizbullah with precision-guided surface-to-surface missiles and attack drones so it can accurately hit any target in Israel. Iran aided Hamas and Islamic Jihad in building armed drones in Gaza. Iran also made clear its plans to open two new terror fronts against Israel, promising to arm Palestinians in the West Bank and sending its Revolutionary Guard generals to the Golan Heights, from which its operatives recently fired rockets on northern Israel.
Israel will continue to respond forcefully to any attacks against it from Syria. Israel will continue to act to prevent the transfer of strategic weapons to Hizbullah from and through Syrian territory. Every few weeks, Iran and Hizbullah set up new terrorist cells in cities throughout the world. Three such cells were recently uncovered in Kuwait, Jordan and Cyprus. In May, security forces in Cyprus raided a Hizbullah agent’s apartment in the city of Larnaca. There they found five tons of ammonium nitrate — roughly the same amount of ammonium nitrate used to blow up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City. And that was just in one apartment, in one city, in one country. But Iran is setting up dozens of terrorist cells like that around the world. They are setting up those terror cells in this hemisphere as well.
I repeat, Iran has been doing all of this — everything that I have just described — just within the past six months, when it was trying to convince the world to remove the sanctions. Just imagine what Iran will do after those sanctions are lifted. Unleashed and unmuzzled, Iran will go on the prowl, devouring more and more prey. In the wake of the nuclear deal, Iran is spending billions of dollars on weapons and satellites. Does anyone here think that Iran is doing that to
15-29658 27/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
advance peace? Does anyone here think that hundreds of billions of dollars in sanctions relief and fat contracts will turn that rapacious tiger into a kitten? People who think so should think again.
In 2013, President Rouhani began his so-called charm offensive here at the United Nations. Two years later, Iran is executing more political prisoners, escalating its regional aggression and rapidly expanding its global terror net. They say that actions speak louder than words, but, in Iran’s case, their words speak as loudly as their actions. Just listen to the Deputy Commander of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Qods Force. In February, he said that “the Islamic Revolution is not limited by geographic borders”. He boasted that Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Yemen are among the countries being “conquered by the Islamic Republic of Iran”. He said “conquered”.
For those here who believe that the deal in Vienna will bring about a change in Iran’s policy, listen to what Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, said five days after the nuclear deal was reached: “Our policies towards the arrogant Government of the United States will not change”. The United States, he vowed, will continue to be Iran’s enemy. While giving the mullahs more money is likely to fuel more repression inside Iran, it will definitely fuel more aggression outside Iran.
As the leader of a country defending itself every day against Iran’s growing aggression, I wish that I could take comfort in the claim that this deal blocks Iran’s path to nuclear weapons, but I cannot, because it does not. This deal does place several constraints on Iran’s nuclear programme, and rightly so, because the international community recognizes that Iran is particularly dangerous. But, here is the catch. Under this deal, if Iran does not change its behaviour — in fact, even if it becomes more dangerous in the years to come — the most important constraints will still be automatically lifted by year 10 and by year 15. That would place a militant Islamic terror regime weeks away from having the fissile material for an entire arsenal of nuclear bombs. That just does not make any sense.
I have said that if Iran wants to be treated like a normal country, let it act like a normal country. This deal will treat Iran like a normal country even if it remains a dark theocracy that conquers its neighbours, sponsors terrorism worldwide and chants, “Death to Israel, death to America!” Does anyone seriously
believe that flooding a radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? Does anyone here really believe that a theocratic Iran with sharper claws and sharper fangs will be more likely to change its stripes? There is a general rule that I have learned — and that that those here must have learned it in their lifetime — which is that when bad behaviour is rewarded, it only gets worse.
I have long said that the greatest danger that the world faces is the coupling of militant Islam with nuclear weapons. I am gravely concerned that the nuclear deal with Iran will prove to be the marriage certificate of that unholy union. I know that some well-intentioned people sincerely believe that this deal is the best way to block Iran’s path to the bomb. However, one of history’s most important, yet least learned lessons, is that the best intentions do not prevent the worst outcomes. The vast majority of Israelis believe that this nuclear deal with Iran is a very bad deal. What makes matters even worse is that we see the world celebrating this bad deal, rushing to embrace and do business with a regime that is openly committed to our destruction.
Last week, Major General Salehi, the Commander of Iran’s Army, proclaimed
“We will annihilate Israel, for sure. We are glad that we are in the forefront of executing the Supreme Leader’s order to destroy Israel.”
As for the Supreme Leader himself, a few days after the nuclear deal was announced, he released his latest book. It is a 400-page screed detailing his plan to destroy the State of Israel. Last month, Khamenei once again made his genocidal intentions clear. Before Iran’s top clerical body, the Assembly of Experts, he spoke about Israel, which is home to over 6 million Jews. He pledged that “there will be no Israel in 25 years”. Seventy years after the murder of 6 million Jews, Iran’s rulers promise to destroy my country, murder my people, and the response from this body, the response from nearly every one of the Governments represented here, has been absolutely nothing — utter silence, deafening silence.
Perhaps members of the Assembly can now understand why Israel is not joining in the general celebration of the deal. If Iran’s rulers were working to destroy other members’ countries, perhaps they would be less enthusiastic about the deal. If Iran’s terror proxies were firing thousands of rockets at other members’ cities, perhaps they would be more measured in their praise. And if the deal were unleashing a nuclear
28/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
arms race in their neighbourhoods, perhaps they would be more reluctant to celebrate.
But no one should think that Iran is a danger only to Israel. Besides Iran’s aggression in the Middle East and its terror campaign around the world, Iran is also building intercontinental ballistic missiles whose sole purpose is to carry nuclear warheads. Now this fact needs to be remembered: Iran already has missiles that can reach Israel. So those intercontinental ballistic missiles that Iran is building are not meant for us. They are meant for others — for Europe, for America, for raining down mass destruction anytime, anywhere.
It is not easy to oppose something that is embraced by the greatest Powers in the world. Believe me, it would be far easier to remain silent. But throughout our history, the Jewish people have learned the heavy price of silence. And as the Prime Minister of the Jewish State, as someone who knows that history, I refuse to be silent. I will say it again. The days when the Jewish people remained passive in the face of genocidal enemies — those days are over. Not being passive means speaking up about those dangers. We have spoken up, we are speaking up, and we will continue to do so. Not being passive also means defending ourselves against those dangers. We have. We are. And we will.
Israel will not allow Iran to break in, to sneak in or to walk into the nuclear-weapons club. I know that preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons remains the official policy of the international community. But no one should question Israel’s determination to defend itself against those who seek our destruction. For in every generation, there have been those who sought to destroy our people. In antiquity, we faced destruction from the ancient empires of Babylon and Rome. In the Middle Ages, we faced inquisitions and expulsions. And in modern times, we faced pogroms and the Holocaust. Yet the Jewish people persevered.
And now another regime has arisen, swearing to destroy Israel. That regime would be wise to consider this fact: I stand here today representing Israel, a country that is 67 years young but is the nation State of a people nearly 4,000 years old. The empires of Babylon and Rome are not represented in this Hall of nations, nor is the 1,000-year Reich. Those seemingly invincible empires are long gone. But Israel lives. The people of Israel live.
The rebirth of Israel is a testament to the indomitable spirit of my people. For a hundred generations, the
Jewish people dreamed of returning to the land of Israel. Even in our darkest hours — and we had so many — even in our darkest hours, we never gave up hope of rebuilding our eternal capital, Jerusalem. The establishment of Israel made it possible to realize that dream. It has enabled us to live as a free people in our ancestral homeland. It has enabled us to embrace Jews who have come from the four corners of the Earth to find refuge from persecution. They have come from war-torn Europe, from Yemen, Iraq, and Morocco, from Ethiopia and the Soviet Union, from a hundred other lands. And today, as a rising tide of anti-Semitism once again sweeps across Europe and elsewhere, many Jews come to Israel to join us in building the Jewish future.
So here is my message to the rulers of Iran. Their plan to destroy Israel will fail. Israel will not permit any force on Earth to threaten its future. And here is my message to all the countries represented here. Whatever resolutions they may adopt in this building, whatever decisions they may take in their capitals, Israel will do whatever it must do to defend our State and to defend our people.
As the deal with Iran moves ahead, I hope it will be enforced — how can I put this? — with a little more rigour than was shown with the six Security Council resolutions that Iran has systematically violated and which now have been effectively discarded. I would call for ensuring that the inspectors actually inspect, that the snapback sanctions actually snap back, and that Iran’s violations not be swept under the Persian rug. There is one thing I can assure the Assembly of today that Israel will be watching closely.
What the international community now needs to do is clear: first, it must make Iran comply with all its nuclear obligations, and hold Iran’s feet to the fire. Secondly, Iran’s regional aggression must be put in check by supporting and strengthening those fighting Iran’s aggression, beginning with Israel. Thirdly, use sanctions and all the tools available to tear down Iran’s global terror network.
Israel is working closely with our Arab peace partners to address our common security challenges from Iran and also the security challenges from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and from others. We are also working with other States in the Middle East, as well as with countries in Africa, in Asia and beyond. Many in our region know that both Iran and ISIL are our common enemies. And when
15-29658 29/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
one’s enemies fight each other, one does not strengthen either one. One weakens both.
Common dangers are clearly bringing Israel and its Arab neighbours closer. As we work together to thwart the dangers that I have mentioned, I hope that we will build lasting partnerships for security, for prosperity and for peace. But in Israel, we never forget one thing. We never forget that Israel’s most important partner has always been, and will always be, the United States of America. The alliance between Israel and the United States is unshakeable.
President Obama and I agree on the need to keep arms out of the hands of Iran’s terror proxies. We agree on the need to stop Iran from destabilizing countries throughout the Middle East. Israel deeply appreciates President Obama’s willingness to bolster our security and to help Israel maintain its qualitative military edge in order to confront the enormous challenges we face. Israel is grateful that this sentiment is widely shared by the American people and its representatives in Congress — both by those who supported the deal and by those who opposed it.
President Obama and I have both said that our differences over the nuclear deal are a disagreement within the family. But we have no disagreement about the need to work together to secure our common future. And what a great future it could be. Israel is uniquely poised to take advantage of the promise of the twenty-first century. Israel is a world leader in science and technology, in cybertechnology, software, water, agriculture, medicine, biotechnology and so many other fields that are being revolutionized by Israeli ingenuity and Israeli innovation. Israel is the innovation nation. Israeli know-how is everywhere. It is in our computers’ microprocessors and flash drives. It is in our smart phones, when we send instant messages and navigate our cars. It is on our farms, when we drip-irrigate our crops and keep our grains and produce fresh. It is in our universities, when we study Nobel Prize-winning discoveries in chemistry and economics. It is in our medicine cabinets, when we use drugs to treat Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis. It is even on our plates, when we eat delicious cherry tomatoes. They were also perfected in Israel, in case someone did not know.
We are so proud in Israel of the long strides that our country has been able to take in a short time. We are so proud that our small country is making such a huge contribution to the entire world. Yet the dreams of
our people, enshrined for eternity by the great prophets of the Bible, will be fully realized only when there is peace.
As the Middle East descends into chaos, Israel’s peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan are two cornerstones of stability. Israel remains committed to achieving peace with the Palestinians as well. Israelis know the price of war. I know the price of war. I was nearly killed in battle. I lost many friends. I lost my beloved brother Yoni. Those who know the price of war can best appreciate what the blessings of peace would mean — for ourselves, our children and our grandchildren. I am prepared to immediately resume direct peace negotiations with the Palestinian Authority without any preconditions whatsoever. Unfortunately, President Abbas said yesterday that he is not prepared to do that. I hope he changes his mind, because I remain committed to a vision of two States for two peoples, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State.
As members know, the peace process began over two decades ago. Yet despite the best efforts of six Israeli prime ministers — Rabin, Peres, Barak, Sharon, Olmert and myself — the Palestinians have consistently refused to end the conflict and to make a final peace with Israel. Unfortunately, we heard that rejectionism again only yesterday from President Abbas. How can Israel make peace with a Palestinian partner who refuses to even sit at the negotiating table? Israel expects the Palestinian Authority to abide by its commitments. The Palestinians should not walk away from peace. I would like to tell President Abbas that I know it is not easy. I know it is hard. But we owe it to our peoples to try, to continue to try. If we actually sit down together, if we actually negotiate and stop negotiating about the negotiation, and if we actually sit down to try to resolve the conflict between us, recognizing each other and not using a Palestinian State as a stepping stone for yet another Islamist dictatorship in the Middle East but as something that will live at peace next to the Jewish State, we can do remarkable things for our peoples.
The United Nations can help advance peace by supporting direct, unconditional negotiations between the parties. The United Nations will certainly not help advance peace by trying to impose solutions or by encouraging Palestinian rejectionism, And the United Nations should do one more thing. The United Nations should finally rid itself of its obsessive bashing of Israel. Here is just one absurd example of
30/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that obsession. In the four years of horrific violence in Syria, more than a quarter of a million people have lost their lives. That is more than 10 times the number of Israelis and Palestinians combined who have lost their lives in a century of conflict between us. Yet last year, the Assembly adopted 20 resolutions against Israel and only one resolution about the savage slaughter in Syria. Talk about injustice. Talk about disproportionality. Count them: 20. And one against Syria. Well, frankly I am not surprised. To borrow a line from Yogi Berra, the late, great baseball player and part-time philosopher, when it comes to the annual bashing of Israel at the United Nations, it is déjà vu all over again.
Enough is enough. Today, 31 years after I stood here for the first time, I am still asking when the United Nations will finally check its anti-Israel fanaticism at the door, when the United Nations will finally stop slandering Israel as a threat to peace and when it will actually start helping Israel advance peace. The same question should be posed to Palestinian leaders. When will they start working with Israel to advance peace and reconciliation, stop libelling Israel and stop inciting hatred and violence?
Here is a good place for President Abbas to begin. He should stop spreading lies about Israel’s alleged intentions on the Temple Mount. Israel is fully committed to maintaining the status quo there. What President Abbas should be speaking out against are the actions of the militant Islamists who are smuggling explosives into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and who are trying to prevent Jews and Christians from visiting the holy sites. That is the real threat to those sacred sites.
A thousand years before the birth of Christianity, more than 1,500 years before the birth of Islam, King David made Jerusalem our capital, and King Solomon built the Temple on that Mount. Yet Israel will always respect the sacred shrines of all religions. In a region plagued by violence and by unimaginable intolerance, in which Islamic fanatics are destroying the ancient treasures of civilization, Israel stands out as a towering beacon of enlightenment and tolerance. Far from endangering the holy sites, Israel ensures their safety. Because, unlike the Powers that ruled Jerusalem in the past, Israel respects the holy sites and the freedom of worship of Jews, Muslims, Christians — everyone. And that will never change.
Because Israel will always stay true to its values. Those values are on display each and every day. They are on display when Israel’s feisty parliament
vigorously debates every issue under the sun; when Israel’s Chief Justice sits in her chair at our fiercely independent Supreme Court; when our Christian community continues to grow and thrive from year to year, whereas Christian communities elsewhere in the Middle East are decimated; when a brilliant young Israeli Muslim student gives her valedictorian address at one of our finest universities; and when Israeli doctors and nurses — doctors and nurses from the Israeli military — treat thousands of wounded from the killing fields of Syria and thousands more in the wake of natural disasters from Haiti to Nepal. That is the true face of Israel. Those are the values of Israel.
In the Middle East, those values are under savage assault by militant Islamists, who are forcing millions of terrified people to flee to distant shores. Just 10 miles from ISIS and a few hundred yards from Iran’s murderous proxies, Israel stands in the breach, proudly and courageously defending freedom and progress. Israel is civilization’s front line in the battle against barbarism. So here is a novel idea for the United Nations. Instead of continuing the shameful routine of bashing Israel, the international community should stand with Israel. The international community should stand with Israel as we work to check the fanaticism at its doors. It should stand with Israel as we prevent that fanaticism from even reaching its doors. The international community should stand with Israel because Israel is not just defending itself. More than ever, Israel is defending the world!
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity to reflect on the state of the Organization. For most of us, the United Nations has been one of the key international realities of our lives. It has been at the heart of what has shaped us in the significant developments of the post-Second World War era. But as we all know, it is not perfect. A lot can be said about the shortcomings of the United Nations. They are many and some are serious. But there are things this Organization can do that no other international body can. And it remains the key reference point for States when there is a problem. That is why New Zealand fought so hard for its current seat on the Security Council. We sought election because the Council is the primary body for the maintenance of international peace and security.
New Zealand is a small country at the bottom of the world. Despite being far from many of the world’s trouble spots, we are not immune to their consequences. This time last year, I pressed the case for New Zealand’s election to the Security Council. I would like to thank Member States for their faith in us. In the past nine months we have striven to repay them. Much of the debate in this Hall this week has been about where the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, has not performed. The conflicts and human suffering in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and a long list of other countries show how far we are from achieving the aspirations of our founders and of today’s Members. So, too, does the lack of progress in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Since we have been on the Council, we have found it as hard as many of those here warned. The Council’s agenda is lengthy and contentious. The dynamics within it are difficult. When Council members work together, as they did over the recent agreement on Iran’s nuclear capability, they can still deliver on the Council’s role as it is set out in the Charter of the United Nations. The Iran deal was a notable bright spot this year. Although it was negotiated in Vienna, only the Council had the power to implement it. New Zealand is proud that this occurred during our presidency of the Council in July. Now, the deal has to be implemented and its example followed. That is because this important agreement must become the basis for something wider — a fundamental resetting of relationships and a foundation for the resolution of other regional conflicts.
Nowhere is the resetting of relationships needed more than in Syria. Syria has been torn apart by internal divisions and a leader prepared to wage war on his own people to cling to power. External actors, from within the region and beyond, have tried to tilt the balance in pursuit of their own interests. And as the country descended into lawlessness, the evil nightmare that is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which first took hold in Syria, spread death and terror in the region and beyond. ISIL’s warped ideology and unprecedented use of social media to export its twisted message is a threat to all of us, even a country as distant as New Zealand.
That is why New Zealand has joined the international coalition against ISIL. We are doing what we can to help the victims of the Syrian conflict and combat the scourge of ISIL. New Zealand’s armed forces are helping the Government of Iraq to train its soldiers to
16/25 15-29664

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.23
defend its people. In response to the humanitarian crisis we are helping to fund programmes in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to assist their efforts to support thousands of displaced refugees. Like many other countries, we are implementing an emergency Syrian refugee resettlement programme.
None of that gets to the root of the problems in Syria. All Council members carry responsibility for ending the misery in Syria and beyond. The consequences of inaction are not theoretical. The human toll is real — a 3-year-old boy dead, washed up on a Turkish beach; hundreds of thousands killed and millions forced to flee their homes. We cannot ignore the huddled travellers in the railway stations of Europe or the reality of refugees scratching out a meagre existence in camps and makeshift homes in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. More than 160 leaders have shown up in New York this week to mark the enduring importance of the United Nations over the past 70 years. Yet we do so against the backdrop of the worst refugee crisis since the Second World War.
Every one of us sees the harrowing images daily. At the same time we see the consequences of the Security Council’s failure to act over the past four years. It is time for the Council to step up. It is time for it to stop talking about what is right and do what is right. It is time for the Council to do the job for which it was created. It is time for its members to set aside their vested interests and historical alliances in order to stop the violence and end the suffering. It is time for the Council to do its duty by those who have lost their lives and loved ones and the millions who have been displaced. We cannot afford to let the Council go from an institution with failures to a failed institution.
There must be a political solution to the conflict in Syria. And it must come soon. It should address all issues and involve all relevant actors, from within the region and beyond. The question is not Al-Assad or ISIL. Both need to be dealt with. A workable political solution will not be a perfect one. Indeed, it is a classic case of the perfect being the enemy of the good. It will require international cooperation and compromise, on all sides.
The Council also needs to engage in making progress on the Middle East peace process. Since being elected to the Council, New Zealand has made clear its view that the status quo is unsustainable. It puts at risk the achievement of the two-State solution that we all know is the best hope for a lasting peace. That is a
matter of urgency and another critical issue on which the Security Council should lead. We are told that the conditions are not right on the ground and that the parties are not ready, but we should not let conditions on the ground dictate our actions, if our actions can help bring a solution.
We stood for the Council because we believe small States have a positive contribution to make, and we wanted to provide a voice for those who go unheard too often. It was for that latter reason that we arranged the first open debate on the peace and security challenges of small island developing States during our presidency in July (see S/PV.7499). We were heartened by the level of participation of both those States and the broader membership.
The challenge for a small elected member to have its voice heard and its views taken into account is considerable. Part of the problem is structural. That the five permanent members of the Council have the right of veto creates an extraordinary power imbalance. That imbalance is exacerbated by their practices of prenegotiating outcomes before engaging with the 10 elected members and of taking no action when one of the five does not agree. That experience has reaffirmed to us that New Zealand was right to oppose the right of veto when the Charter of the United Nations was being drafted.
It is still our view that the right of veto is a constraint on the effectiveness of the Council and realizing the aspirations of the States Members of the United Nations. For that reason, New Zealand supports the two proposals being put forward this year — by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group of countries and by France and Mexico — to limit the use of the veto in mass atrocity situations. The fact that two permanent members are supportive represents progress, but part of the problem is also behavioural. The permanent members have become used to exercising power and are protective of their privileged position. They presume to control the Council’s agenda and to determine its processes. Despite that, we are doing what we can to ensure that the elected members have the information and the opportunity to contribute effectively to Council decision-making. And, in turn, that it makes effective decisions.
We want to contribute to a Council that is genuinely focused on finding practical solutions to political problems and not on preserving the status quo. We are well aware that the conflicts on the Council’s agenda
15-29664 17/25

A/70/PV.23 01/10/2015
are complex and not easily solved, but we are realistic in our expectations of what can be achieved. New Zealand believes that the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security has a responsibility to find solutions to the world’s most pressing crises.
Only the United Nations and its agencies have the capacity to focus world attention across a range of issues. That was demonstrated last week with the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals. We sincerely hope that the Conference of the Parties will be similarly successful in Paris in December, with the adoption of a meaningful agreement on climate change.
Healthy and productive oceans are a key requirement for a sustainable future. I was pleased to announce earlier this week the creation of a marine sanctuary around New Zealand’s Kermadec Islands. The Kermadec Ocean Sanctuary will comprise 620,000 square kilometres of ocean in one of the most pristine and special environments on Earth. The Sanctuary will be one of the world’s largest and most significant fully protected marine areas. It will cover an area twice the size of our land mass and better protect the habitats of a huge array of sea creatures.
New Zealand is committed to managing our oceans responsibly, and we are working with our Pacific neighbours to do the same. We have committed $1 billion in development assistance to the Pacific, focused on, among other things, helping support sustainable fisheries management. Our aid is focused on our region and in areas where we know we can get real results for real people, improving livelihoods and creating opportunities. Many Governments around the world are doing the same, and we are proud to play our part.
As I prepare to leave New York, I do so proud of the contribution that New Zealand has made to the sustainable development of our oceans. I leave proud of the contribution New Zealand is making on the Security Council and proud of the values and principles that underpin the country I lead. I also leave dispirited by the Security Council’s failure to help not only the people of Syria, but those in so many other countries. The collective effort of the Security Council, supported by the broader membership, could make a real difference.
I think all of us who have been here over the past week know that collective action must start somewhere. It should start at the United Nations.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity both to consider our history and to talk about our collective future. In 1945, the countries that had defeated Nazism united their efforts to lay firm foundations for the post-war world order. I should point out here that the key decisions about the principles for guiding cooperation among States and the creation of the United Nations were made in our country, at the meeting in Yalta of the leaders of the coalition against Hitler. The Yalta system emerged out of genuine travail, paid for with tens of millions of lives and the two world wars that engulfed the world in the twentieth century. And in all fairness to it, it has helped humankind traverse the turbulent and sometimes dramatic events of the past seven decades and has spared the world major cataclysms.
The United Nations is an Organization unique in its legitimacy, representativeness and universality. True, it has recently been much criticized for its perceived insufficient effectiveness and for decision-making on fundamental issues that can be stymied by insuperable differences, particularly among members of the Security Council. I would like to point out, however, that over the 70 years of the existence of the United Nations there have always been disagreements, and the right to the veto has always been exercised — by the United States, Great Britain, France, China, the Soviet Union and later Russia, alike. That is entirely natural for such a diverse and representative Organization. When the United Nations was established, there was

no suggestion that unanimity would reign. Indeed, the essence of the Organization consists in seeking and reaching compromise. Its strength lies in taking account of different opinions and points of view. The decisions that are discussed in the United Nations are either adopted as resolutions or they are not. As the diplomats say, they either go through or do not go through. Any action on the part of any State that bypasses that procedure is illegitimate and runs counter to the Charter of the United Nations and in defiance of international law.
We all know that a single dominating power centre emerged in the world after the end of the Cold War. Those who found themselves at the top of that pyramid were tempted to think that if they were so strong and exceptional, they knew better than anyone else what should be done. As a consequence, they thought, why should they bother with the United Nations, which instead of automatically sanctioning and legitimizing necessary decisions frequently just stands in the way or, as we say, gets underfoot? It has become commonplace to say that the Organization, as originally conceived, has become obsolete and that its historical mission has been accomplished.
The world is changing, of course, and the United Nations must keep up with that natural transformation. Russia is ready to work on that, based on a broad consensus with all its partners, but we consider efforts to undermine the authority and legitimacy of the United Nations to be extremely dangerous. They could lead to the collapse of the entire architecture of international relations. Then we would indeed be left with no rules beyond might is right. That would be a world ruled by selfishness rather than collective effort; a world ever more dictatorial and less about equality, genuine democracy and freedom; a world where an ever-growing number of de facto protectorates and externally controlled territories would replace truly independent States.
What, after all, is State sovereignty, about which some of our colleagues have already spoken? More than anything it is about freedom — the freedom of every person, people or State to choose their own destiny. And by the way, the issue of the so-called legitimacy of State power also falls into this category. We should never play with words or manipulate them. Every term of international law and international affairs should be clear and transparent and possess uniformly understood criteria.
We are all different, and we should respect that. Nobody is obliged to conform once and for all to a single model of development that someone has deemed to be the only right one. We should all remember what we have learned from past experience. For example, we remember instances from the history of the Soviet Union. Attempts to export social experiments and to push for change in one country or another based on our own ideological positions often led to tragic consequences and to deterioration rather than progress.
It seems, however, that no one learns from others’ mistakes. They just repeat them, and the export of revolutions, this time so-called democratic revolutions, continues. We have only to look at the situation in the Middle East and North Africa, which the speaker before me discussed. Certainly, the political and social problems of the region have been brewing for a long time, and people there naturally wanted change.
But how has it actually turned out? Instead of reforming Government institutions, aggressive foreign interference has resulted in the abrupt destruction of the very fabric of life. Instead of the triumph of democracy and progress we got violence, poverty and social catastrophe. And human rights, including the right to life, are simply ignored. One cannot help wanting to ask those who created this situation if they at least realize now what they have done. But I am afraid the question would go unanswered, because policies based on complacency and a belief in one’s exceptionality and impunity are never abandoned.
It is now obvious that the power vacuum that has appeared in a number of the countries of the Middle East and North Africa has led to the emergence of areas of anarchy that immediately began to fill with extremists and terrorists. Tens of thousands of militants are now fighting under the banners of the so-called Islamic State. They include former Iraqi servicemen who were thrown out into the street in the wake of the invasion of Iraq in 2003. Another supplier of recruits is Libya, whose statehood was destroyed as a result of a gross violation of Security Council resolution 1973 (2011). And now members of the so-called moderate Syrian opposition, supported by the West, are joining the radical ranks. First they arm and train them, and now they are defecting to the so-called Islamic State. Indeed, the Islamic State itself did not come from nowhere. It, too, was initially forged as a tool against undesirable secular regimes. Having established a foothold in Syria and Iraq, the Islamic State is actively expanding into
other regions, with the aim of dominating the Islamic world, and not just there. It is clearly not limiting itself to those plans alone.
The situation is more than dangerous. In such circumstances, it is hypocritical and irresponsible to make loud declarations about the threat of international terrorism while turning a blind eye to the channels that are financing and supporting terrorists, including through the proceeds of drug trafficking and illicit trading in oil and arms, or to attempt to manipulate extremist groups and make them do one’s bidding in order to achieve one’s own political goals, in the hope of dealing with them — or, to put it more simply, liquidating them — later. What I have to say to those people is this: Sirs, while you are certainly dealing with cruel people, they are in no way stupid or primitive. They are just as smart as you, and you cannot yet tell who is using whom for his own ends. The recent information on the transfer of arms to the terrorists by that moderate opposition itself is the best proof of that.
We believe that any attempt to flirt with terrorists, let alone arm them, is not just short-sighted; it is incendiary. It could result in a dramatic increase in the global terrorist threat and its critical spread to new regions, especially considering the fact that militants from many countries, including Europe, are passing through Islamic State training camps. Nor, unfortunately, I must admit frankly to my colleagues, is Russia an exception. We cannot allow such criminals, who have already smelled blood, to return home and continue their evil deeds there. We do not want that. And after all, would anyone want that?
Russia has always been firm and consistent in opposing terrorism in all its forms. Today we are providing military and technical assistance to Iraq, Syria and other countries of the region that are fighting terrorist groups. We think it is an enormous mistake to refuse to cooperate with the Syrian authorities and the State armed forces, who are valiantly combating terrorism face to face. Finally, we should acknowledge that no one except President Al-Assad’s Government armed forces and the Kurdish militia is truly fighting the Islamic State and other terrorist organizations in Syria. We are aware of all the problems and contradictions in the region, but we must nonetheless be realistic.
I feel obliged to point out that Russia’s honest and straightforward approach has recently been used as a pretext for accusing us of harbouring increasing ambitions — as if the people saying that have no
ambitions at all themselves. But the real issue is not Russia’s ambitions but the fact that we can no longer tolerate the current state of affairs in the world. In reality, we are proposing that we should be guided by our shared values and interests rather than ambitions. We should unite our efforts to address, on the basis of international law, these new problems we face and create a genuinely broad international coalition against terrorism. Like the coalition against Hitler, it could unite all the diverse forces willing to resolutely resist those who, like the Nazis, sow evil and hatred of humankind.
And, naturally, Muslim countries should play a key role in that coalition. Not only is the Islamic State a direct threat to them, it also desecrates one of the world’s greatest religions with its bloody crimes. The militants’ ideologists make a mockery of Islam and pervert its true humanistic values. In that regard, I would also like to address Muslim spiritual leaders. Their authority and tutelage are vital at this moment. It is essential to prevent those whom militants try to recruit from making hasty decisions. And those who have been deceived and who by force of circumstance have ended up in the terrorists’ ranks must be helped to find a path back to normal life, lay down their arms and cease their fratricide.
In the next few days Russia, as the current President of the Security Council, will convene a ministerial-level meeting aimed at conducting a comprehensive analysis of threats in the Middle East. First, we propose to discuss the possibility of agreeing on a draft resolution designed to coordinate the actions of all the forces confronting the Islamic State and other terrorist groups. Once again, that coordination should be based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the international community can develop a comprehensive strategy for the political stabilization and social and economic recovery of the Middle East. Then there would be no need to build camps for refugees. The flood of people forced to leave their homelands has literally engulfed first the country’s neighbours and now Europe. Now they number in the hundreds of thousands, but they could soon be millions. This is a great and tragic new migration of peoples, and a harsh lesson for all of us, including Europe.
I would like to stress that the refugees unquestionably need our compassion and support. However, any fundamental solution to the problem must involve restoring statehood where it has been
destroyed, strengthening Government institutions where they still exist or are being re-established, and providing comprehensive military, economic and material assistance to countries in difficulties — and, of course, to those who have not abandoned their homes despite all their ordeals. Naturally, any assistance to sovereign States can and must be offered rather than imposed, and only in accordance with the United Nations Charter. In other words, everything being done or to be done in this area in accordance with the norms of international law must be backed by our universal Organization, and anything contravening the Charter must be rejected. More than anything, I believe it is vital to help restore Government institutions in Libya, support the new Government of Iraq and provide comprehensive assistance to the legitimate Government of Syria.
Ensuring peace and regional and global stability remains the key task of the international community, with the United Nations at its helm. In our view, that means creating a space of equal and indivisible security that is not for the select few, but for everyone. Yes, it is a complex, difficult and time-consuming task, but there are no alternatives to it. However, for some of our colleagues the Cold War bloc mindset and desire to assimilate new geopolitical areas are still paramount. They began by continuing to expand NATO — and one wonders why, with the Warsaw Pact bloc no longer in existence and the Soviet Union broken up. And yet NATO is not only still there; like its military infrastructure, it is still expanding. Then they offered post-Soviet countries a false choice — to be either with the West or the East. Sooner or later, that logic of confrontation was bound to turn into a serious geopolitical crisis, and that is what happened in Ukraine, where the people’s dissatisfaction with the authorities was exploited and a military coup provoked from outside. A civil war erupted as a result.
We firmly believe that we can end the bloodshed and find a way out of this deadlock only through full implementation, in good faith, of the Minsk agreements of 12 February. Ukraine’s territorial integrity cannot be ensured by threats and force of arms, but it must be done. What is needed is respect for the choice of the people of the Donbas region, genuine consideration of their interests and rights and their engagement in devising the key elements of the country’s political structure, in line with the Minsk agreements that will guarantee that Ukraine can develop as a civilized State and an essential link in the construction of a common
area of security and economic cooperation in both Europe and Eurasia.
I have a reason for speaking of a common area for economic cooperation. Only recently, it seemed that in the economic sphere, where the objective laws of the market apply, we would learn to live without dividing lines and to act on the basis of transparent rules, jointly devised, including the principles of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which stand for freedom of trade and investment and open competition. Today, however, unilateral sanctions that circumvent the United Nations Charter have almost become the norm. They not only serve political aims, they act as a way of pushing competitors out of the market.
I would like to note another sign of growing economic selfishness. A number of countries have chosen to create closed, exclusive economic associations, with negotiations conducted behind closed doors and in secret, undisclosed to their own citizens and business communities. Nor do they inform other countries and Governments whose interests may be affected. Perhaps they want all of us to be left with the fait accompli that the rules of the game have been changed in favour of a small group, and without the participation of the WTO. That could completely unbalance the trade system and lead to the disintegration of the global economic environment. These issues affect the interests of all States and influence the future of the entire world economy. That is why we propose discussing them within the United Nations, the WTO and the Group of 20.
In opposition to a policy of exclusiveness, Russia proposes harmonizing regional economic projects through what is known as the integration of integrations, based on the universal and transparent rules of international trade. One example is our plan to link the Eurasian Economic Union with China’s initiative in creating a Silk Road economic belt. And we continue to believe the possibility of harmonizing integration processes within the Eurasian Economic Union and the European Union to be very promising.
Among the issues affecting the future of all humankind is the challenge of global climate change. It is in our interests to ensure that we get results at the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Paris in December. As part of our national contribution, by 2030 we plan to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions to between 70 and 75 per cent of their 1990 levels. I
suggest, however, that we should take a broader view of this issue. By establishing quotas on harmful emissions or taking other steps that by their very nature are still only tactical, we may mitigate the problem for a certain amount of time, but fundamentally we will not solve it.
We need a completely different approach. We should be focusing on introducing fundamentally new technologies, inspired by nature, that rather than damaging the environment will be in harmony with it and will enable us to restore the balance between the biosphere and the technosphere that human activities have destroyed. It is indeed a challenge on a planetary scale, but I am confident that humankind has the intellectual wherewithal to respond to it. We must unite our efforts, most of all those States possessing solid research capacities and fundamental scientific achievements. We propose convening a special forum under United Nations auspices for a comprehensive consideration of the issues related to the depletion of natural resources, the destruction of habitats and climate change. Russia is ready to be one of the organizers of such a forum.
On 10 January 1946, the General Assembly of the United Nations gathered in London to begin work on its first session. Eduardo Zuleta Ángel, a Colombian diplomat and the Chairman of the Preparatory Commission, opened the session by giving what I believe was a concise definition of the basic principles by which the United Nations should be guided in its activities. They are free will, disdain for scheming and trickery, and a spirit of cooperation. Today his words can be a guide for us all. Russia believes in the huge potential of the United Nations to help us avoid a new global confrontation and engage in strategic cooperation. We will work consistently with other countries to strengthen the central coordinating role of the United Nations. I am confident that together we can make the world a stable and safe place and ensure conditions conducive to the development of every State and nation.Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations it is worth reflecting on what the members of this body, working together, have helped to achieve. Out of the ashes of the Second World War, having witnessed the unthinkable power of the atomic age, the United States has worked with many nations in the Assembly to prevent a third world war — by forging alliances with old adversaries; by supporting the steady emergence of strong democracies accountable to their people and not to any foreign Power; and by building an international system that imposes a cost on those who choose conflict over cooperation, an order that recognizes the dignity and equal worth of all people.
That has been the work of seven decades. That is the ideal that this body has, at its best, pursued. Of course, there have been too many times when, collectively, we have fallen short of those ideals. Over the seven decades, terrible conflicts have claimed untold victims. But we have pressed forward, slowly, steadily, to make a system of international rules and norms that are better and stronger and more consistent.
It is that international order that has underwritten unparalleled advances in human liberty and prosperity. It is that collective endeavour that has brought about diplomatic cooperation among the world’s major Powers and buttressed a global economy that has lifted more than a billion people from poverty. It is those international principles that have helped constrain bigger countries from imposing their will on smaller ones and have advanced the emergence of democracy and development and individual liberty on every continent.
That progress is real. It can be documented in lives saved, agreements forged, diseases conquered and mouths fed. And yet we come together today knowing that the march of human progress never travels in a straight line, that our work is far from complete and that dangerous currents risk pulling us back into a darker, more disordered world.
Today we are seeing the collapse of strongmen and fragile States breeding conflict and driving innocent men, women and children across borders on an epic scale. Brutal networks of terror have stepped into the vacuum. Technologies that empower individuals are now also exploited by those who spread disinformation, suppress dissent or radicalize our youth. Global capital flows have powered growth and investment, but they have also increased the risk of contagion, weakened the bargaining power of workers and accelerated inequality.
How should we respond to those trends? There are those who argue that the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are unachievable or out of date, a legacy of a postwar era not suited to our own. In effect, they are arguing for a return to the rules that applied for most of human history and that predate this institution — the belief that power is a zero-sum game, that might makes right, that strong States must impose their will on weaker ones, that the rights of individuals do not matter and that in a time of rapid change, order must be imposed by force.
On that basis, we see some major Powers assert themselves in ways that contravene international law. We see an erosion of the democratic principles and human rights that are fundamental to this institution’s mission. Information is strictly controlled and the space for civil society restricted. We are told that such retrenchment is required to beat back disorder; that it is the only way to stamp out terrorism and prevent foreign meddling. In accordance with that logic, we should support tyrants like Bashar Al-Assad, who drops barrel bombs to massacre innocent children, because the alternative is surely worse.
This increasing scepticism of our international order can also be found in the most advanced democracies. We see greater polarization and more frequent gridlock, with movements on the far right, and sometimes the left, that insist on stopping the trade that binds our fates to other nations or calling for the building of walls to keep out immigrants. Most ominously, we see the fears of ordinary people being exploited through appeals to sectarianism, tribalism, racism or anti-Semitism; appeals to a glorious past before the body politic was infected by those who look different or worship God differently — a politics of us versus them.
The United States is not immune to this. Even as our economy is growing and our troops have largely returned from Iraq and Afghanistan, we see in our debates about America’s role in the world a notion of strength that is defined by opposition to old enemies, perceived adversaries — a rising China or resurgent Russia, a revolutionary Iran or an Islam that is incompatible with peace. We see arguments that the only strength that matters for the United States is bellicose words and shows of military force, and that cooperation and diplomacy will not work.
As President of the United States, I am mindful of the dangers that we face. They cross my desk every 
morning. I lead the strongest military that the world has ever known, and I will never hesitate to protect my country or our allies, unilaterally and by force where necessary. But I stand before the Assembly today believing in my core that we, the nations of the world, cannot return to the old ways of conflict and coercion. We cannot look backwards. We live in an integrated world, one in which we all have a stake in one another’s success.
We cannot turn back those forces of integration. No nation here in the Assembly can insulate itself from the threat of terrorism, the risk of financial contagion, the flow of migrants or the danger of a warming planet. The disorder we see is not driven solely by competition between nations or by any single ideology. If we cannot work together more effectively, we will all suffer the consequences.
That is true for the United States as well. No matter how powerful our military, how strong our economy, we understand the United States cannot solve the world’s problems alone. In Iraq, the United States learned the hard lesson that even with hundreds of thousands of brave, effective troops and trillions of dollars from our Treasury, it cannot by itself impose stability on a foreign land. Unless we work with other nations under the mantle of international norms, principles and law that offers legitimacy to our efforts, we will not succeed. And unless we work together to defeat the ideas that drive the various communities in a country like Iraq into conflict, any order that our militaries can impose will be temporary.
Just as force alone cannot impose order internationally, I believe in my core that repression cannot forge the social cohesion that nations need to succeed. The history of the last two decades proves that in today’s world, dictatorships are unstable. The strongmen of today become the spark of revolution tomorrow. You can jail your opponents, but you cannot imprison ideas. You can try to control access to information, but you cannot turn a lie into truth. It is not a conspiracy of United States-backed non-governmental organizations that exposes corruption and raises the expectations of people around the globe — it is technology, social media and the irreducible desire of people everywhere to make their own choices about how they are governed.
Indeed, I believe that in today’s world, the measure of strength is no longer defined by the control of territory. Lasting prosperity does not come solely from
the ability to access and extract raw materials. The strength of nations depends on the success of their people — their knowledge, innovation, imagination, creativity, drive and opportunity — and that, in turn, depends on individual rights, good governance and personal security. Both internal repression and foreign aggression are symptoms of a failure to provide that foundation.
Politics and solidarity that depend on demonizing others, that draw on religious sectarianism, narrow tribalism or jingoism, may at times look like strength in the moment, but over time their weakness will be exposed. And history tells us that the dark forces unleashed by this type of politics surely make all of us less secure. Our world has been there before. We gain nothing from going back.
Instead, I believe that we must go forward in pursuit of our ideals, not abandon them at this critical time. We must give expression to our best hopes, not our deepest fears. This institution was founded because men and women who came before us had the foresight to know that our nations are more secure when we uphold basic laws and norms and pursue a path of cooperation rather than conflict. And strong nations, above all, have a responsibility to uphold that international order.
Let me give a concrete example. After I took office, I made it clear that one of the principal achievements of the United Nations — the nuclear non-proliferation regime — was endangered by Iran’s violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. On that basis, the Security Council tightened sanctions on the Iranian Government, and many nations joined us to enforce them. Together, we showed that laws and agreements mean something. But we also understood that the goal of sanctions was not simply to punish Iran. Our objective was to test whether Iran could change course, accept constraints and allow the world to verify that its nuclear programme would be peaceful. For two years, the United States and our partners, including Russia and China, stuck together in complex negotiations. The result is a lasting, comprehensive deal that prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon while allowing it to access peaceful energy. If the deal is fully implemented, the prohibition on nuclear weapons is strengthened, a potential war is averted and our world is safer. That is the strength of the international system when it works the way it should.
That same fidelity to international order guides our responses to other challenges around the world.
Consider Russia’s annexation of Crimea and further aggression in eastern Ukraine. America has few economic interests in Ukraine, and we recognize the deep and complex history between Russia and Ukraine. But we cannot stand by when the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a nation is flagrantly violated. If that happens without consequence in Ukraine, it could happen to any of the nations gathered here today. That is the basis of the sanctions that the United States and our partners impose on Russia. It is not a desire to return to a cold war.
Now, within Russia, State-controlled media may describe those events as an example of a resurgent Russia — a view shared, by the way, by a number of United States politicians and commentators who have always been deeply sceptical about Russia and seem to be convinced that a new cold war is in fact upon us. And yet look at the results. The Ukrainian people are more interested than ever in aligning with Europe instead of Russia. Sanctions have led to capital flight, a contracting economy, a fallen rouble and the emigration of more educated Russians.
Imagine if, instead, Russia had engaged in true diplomacy and worked with Ukraine and the international community to ensure that its interests were protected. That would be better for Ukraine, but also better for Russia and better for the world, which is why we continue to press for this crisis to be resolved in a way that allows a sovereign and democratic Ukraine to determine its future and control its territory. This is not because we want to isolate Russia — we do not — but because we want a strong Russia that is invested in working with us to strengthen the international system as a whole.
Similarly, in the South China Sea, the United States makes no claim on territory there. We do not adjudicate claims. But like every nation gathered here, we have an interest in upholding the basic principles of freedom of navigation and the free flow of commerce, and in resolving disputes through international law, not the law of force. So we will defend those principles, while encouraging China and other claimants to resolve their differences peacefully. I say this while recognizing that diplomacy is hard, the outcomes are sometimes unsatisfying and it is rarely politically popular. But I believe that leaders of large nations in particular have an obligation to take those risks, precisely because we are strong enough to protect our interests if and when diplomacy fails.
I also believe that to move forward in this new era, we have to be strong enough to acknowledge when what we are doing is not working. For 50 years, the United States pursued a Cuba policy that failed to improve the lives of the Cuban people. We changed that. We continue to have differences with the Cuban Government. We will continue to stand up for human rights. But we address those issues through diplomatic relations, increased commerce and people-to-people ties. As those contacts yield progress, I am confident that our Congress will inevitably lift an embargo that should not be in place any more. Change will not come overnight to Cuba, but I am confident that openness, not coercion, will support the reforms and the better life that the Cuban people deserve, just as I believe that Cuba will find its success if it pursues cooperation with other nations.
Now, if it is in the interest of major Powers to uphold international standards, that is even more true for the rest of the community of nations. Look around the world. From Singapore to Colombia to Senegal, the facts show that nations succeed when they pursue an inclusive peace and prosperity within their borders and work cooperatively with countries beyond those borders.
That path is now available to a nation such as Iran, which, as of this moment, continues to deploy violent proxies to advance its interests. Those efforts may appear to give it leverage in disputes with its neighbours, but they fuel sectarian conflict that endangers the entire region and isolates Iran from the promise of trade and commerce. The Iranian people have a proud history and are filled with extraordinary potential. But chanting “Death to America” does not create jobs or make Iran more secure. If Iran chooses a different path, that will be good for the security of the region, good for the Iranian people and good for the world.
Of course, around the globe, we will continue to be confronted with nations that reject these lessons of history — places where civil strife, border disputes and sectarian wars give rise to terrorist enclaves and humanitarian disasters. Where order has completely broken down, we must act, but we will be stronger when we act together.
In such efforts, the United States will always do its part. We will do so mindful of the lessons of the past — not just the lessons of Iraq, but also the example of Libya, where we joined an international coalition
under a United Nations mandate to prevent a slaughter. Even as we helped the Libyan people bring an end to the reign of a tyrant, our coalition could have and should have done more to fill a vacuum left behind. We are grateful to the United Nations for its efforts to forge a unity Government. We will help any legitimate Libyan Government as it works to bring the country together.
We also have to recognize that we must work more effectively in the future, as an international community, to build capacity for States that are in distress before they collapse. That is why we should celebrate the fact that, later today, the United States will join with more than 50 countries to enlist new capabilities — infantry, intelligence, helicopters, hospitals, and tens of thousands of troops — to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. These new capabilities can prevent mass killing and ensure that peace agreements are more than words on paper. But we have to do it together. Together, we must strengthen our collective capacity to establish security where order has broken down and to support those who seek a just and lasting peace.
Nowhere is our commitment to international order more tested than in Syria. When a dictator slaughters tens of thousands of his own people, that is not just a matter of one nation’s internal affairs. It breeds human suffering on an order of magnitude that affects us all. Likewise, when a terrorist group beheads captives, slaughters the innocent and enslaves women, that is not a single nation’s national security problem. It is an assault on humankind as a whole.
I have said before and I will repeat: there is no room to accommodate an apocalyptic cult like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the United States makes no apologies for using our military, as part of a broad coalition, to go after them. We do so with a determination to ensure that there will never be a safe haven for terrorists who carry out these crimes. We have demonstrated over more than a decade of relentless pursuit of Al-Qaida that we will not be outlasted by extremists.
While military power is necessary, it is not sufficient to resolve the situation in Syria. Lasting stability can take hold only when the people of Syria forge an agreement to live together peacefully. The United States is prepared to work with any nation, including Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict. But we must recognize that after so much bloodshed, so much carnage, there cannot be a return to the pre-war status quo.
Let us remember how this started. Al-Assad reacted to peaceful protests by escalating repression and killing that, in turn, created the environment for the current strife. And so Al-Assad and his allies cannot simply pacify the broad majority of a population that has been brutalized by chemical weapons and indiscriminate bombing. Yes, realism dictates that compromise will be required to end the fighting and, ultimately, stamp out ISIL. But realism also requires a managed transition away from Al-Assad and to a new leader, and an inclusive Government that recognizes there must be an end to this chaos so that the Syrian people can begin to rebuild.
We know that ISIL — which emerged out of the chaos of Iraq and Syria — depends on perpetual war to survive, but we also know that they gain adherents because of a poisonous ideology. Part of our job, together, is to work to reject such extremism that infects too many of our young people. Part of that effort must be a continued rejection by Muslims of those who distort Islam to preach intolerance and promote violence. It must also involve a rejection by non-Muslims of the ignorance that equates Islam with terrorism.
This work will take time. There are no easy answers to Syria, and there are no simple answers to the changes that are taking place in much of the Middle East and North Africa. But so many families need help right now; they do not have time. That is why the United States is increasing the number of refugees whom we welcome within our borders. That is why we will continue to be the largest donor of assistance to support those refugees. Today we are launching new efforts to ensure that our people and our businesses, our universities and our non-governmental organizations can help as well, because in the faces of suffering families, our nation of immigrants sees itself.
Of course, in the old ways of thinking, the plight of the powerless, the plight of refugees, the plight of the marginalized did not matter. They were on the periphery of the world’s concerns. Today, our concern for them is driven not just by conscience, but should also be driven by self-interest. Helping people who have been pushed to the margins of our world is not mere charity; it is a matter of collective security. The purpose of this institution is not merely to avoid conflict; it is to galvanize the collective action that makes life better on this planet.
The commitments we have made to the Sustainable Development Goals speak to this truth. I believe that 
capitalism has been the greatest creator of wealth and opportunity that the world has ever known. But from big cities to rural villages around the world, we also know that prosperity is still cruelly out of reach for too many. As His Holiness Pope Francis reminds us, we are stronger when we value the least among these and see them as equal in dignity to ourselves and our sons and our daughters.
We can roll back preventable disease and end the scourge of HIV/AIDS. We can stamp out pandemics that recognize no borders. That work may not be on television right now, but as we demonstrated in reversing the spread of Ebola, it can save more lives than anything else we can do. Together, we can eradicate extreme poverty and erase barriers to opportunity. But this requires a sustained commitment to our people so farmers can feed more people, so entrepreneurs can start a business without paying a bribe, so young people have the skills they need to succeed in this modern, knowledge-based economy.
We can promote growth through trade that meets a higher standard, and that is what we are doing through the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a trade agreement that encompasses nearly 40 per cent of the global economy, an agreement that will open markets while protecting the rights of workers and protecting the environment that enables development to be sustained.
We can roll back the pollution that we put in our skies and help economies lift people out of poverty without condemning our children to the ravages of an ever-warming climate. The same ingenuity that produced the Industrial Age and the Computer Age allows us to harness the potential of clean energy. No country can escape the ravages of climate change. And there is no stronger sign of leadership than putting future generations first. The United States will work with every nation that is willing to do its part so that we can come together in Paris to decisively confront this challenge.
Finally, regarding our vision for the future of the Assembly, my belief in moving forward rather than backwards requires us to defend the democratic principles that allow societies to succeed. Let me start from a simple premise. Catastrophes like what we are seeing in Syria do not take place in countries where there is genuine democracy and respect for the universal values this institution is supposed to defend.
I recognize that democracy is going to take different forms in different parts of the world. The very idea of a people governing themselves depends upon government giving expression to their unique culture, their unique history, their unique experiences. But some universal truths are self-evident. No person wants to be imprisoned for peaceful worship. No woman should ever be abused with impunity, no girl should be barred from attending school. There should be freedom to peacefully petition those in power without fear of arbitrary laws. These are not ideas of one country or one culture. They are fundamental to human progress. They are a cornerstone of this institution.
I realize that in many parts of the world there is a different view — a belief that strong leadership must tolerate no dissent. I hear it not only from America’s adversaries, but — privately, at least — I also hear it from some of our friends. I disagree. I believe a Government that suppresses peaceful dissent is not showing strength. It is showing weakness and it is showing fear.
History shows that regimes that fear their own people will eventually crumble, but strong institutions built on the consent of the governed endure long after any one individual is gone. That is why our strongest leaders, from George Washington to Nelson Mandela, have elevated the importance of building strong, democratic institutions over a thirst for perpetual power. Leaders who amend constitutions to stay in office only acknowledge that they failed to build a successful country for their people, because none of us lasts forever. It tells us that power is something they cling to for its own sake rather than for the betterment of those whom they purport to serve.
I understand that democracy is frustrating. Democracy in the United States is certainly imperfect. At times it can be dysfunctional. But democracy — the constant struggle to extend rights to more of our people, to give more people a voice — is what allowed us to become the most powerful nation in the world. It is not simply a matter of principle; it is not an abstraction. Democracy, inclusive democracy, makes countries stronger. When opposition parties can seek power peacefully through the ballot, a country draws upon new ideas. When a free media can inform the public, corruption and abuse are exposed and can be rooted out. When civil society thrives, communities can solve problems that Governments cannot necessarily solve alone. When immigrants are welcomed, countries are 
more productive and more vibrant. When girls can go to school, get a job and pursue unlimited opportunities, that is when a country realizes its full potential.
That is what I believe is America’s greatest strength. Not everybody in America agrees with me. That is part of democracy. I believe that the fact that one can walk the streets of this city right now and pass churches and synagogues and temples and mosques where people worship freely; the fact that our nation of immigrants mirrors the diversity of the world — one can find people from everywhere here in New York City — the fact that in this country everybody can contribute, everybody can participate no matter who they are or what they look like or whom they love — that is what makes us strong.
I believe that what is true for America is true for virtually all mature democracies. That is no accident. We can be proud of our nations without defining ourselves in opposition to some other group. We can be patriotic without demonizing someone else. We can cherish our own identities — our religion, our ethnicity, our traditions — without putting others down. Our systems are premised on the notion that absolute power will corrupt, but that people, ordinary people, are fundamentally good and value family and friendship, faith and the dignity of hard work. And with appropriate checks and balances, Governments can reflect that goodness. I believe that is the future we must seek together — to believe in the dignity of every individual, to believe we can bridge our differences and choose cooperation over conflict. That is not weakness; that is strength. It is a practical necessity in our interconnected world.
Our people understand this. Think of the Liberian doctor who went door to door to search for Ebola cases and to tell families what to do if they show symptoms. Think of the Iranian shopkeeper who said after the nuclear deal, “God willing, now we will be able to offer many more goods at better prices”. Think of the Americans who lowered the flag over our embassy in Havana in 1961, the year I was born, and who returned this summer to raise that flag back up. One of those men said of the Cuban people, “We could do things for them, and they could do things for us. We loved them”. For 50 years we ignored that fact. Think of the families leaving everything they have known behind, risking barren deserts and stormy waters just to find shelter, just to save their children. One Syrian refugee who was met in Hamburg with warm greetings and shelter said,
“We feel there are still some people who love other people”.
The people of our United Nations are not as different as they have been told. They can be made to fear; they can be taught to hate, but they can also respond to hope. History is littered with the failure of false prophets and fallen empires who believed that might always makes right. That will continue to be the case. We can count on it. But we are called upon to offer a different type of leadership, a leadership strong enough to recognize that nations share common interests and people share a common humanity. And, yes, there are certain ideas and principles that are universal. That is what those who shaped the United Nations 70 years ago understood. Let us carry that faith forward into the future, for it is the only way we can ensure that the future will be brighter, for my children and for everyone’s children.I should like to congratulate the President and his country, Denmark, on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventieth session. He has South Africa’s full support for his presidency. The theme that he has chosen, “The United Nations at 70: the road ahead for peace, security and human rights”, is timely and relevant to the current global challenges facing the world today.
Furthermore, allow me to convey our gratitude to the President of the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Mr. Sam Kutesa of the Republic of Uganda, for the outstanding manner in which he represented Africa at the helm of the General Assembly during that session.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations marks a significant moment in the history of global governance. The Charter embodies, through its principles and objectives, the aspirations of oppressed people worldwide. We would also like to acknowledge the role of the United Nations General Assembly over the past 70 years. Rooted in the principle of sovereign equality, the Assembly is the most representative international institution and organ of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has over the years remained central to the provision of support to the disadvantaged, marginalized, occupied, colonized and oppressed peoples of the world. This body elevated the South African struggle for liberation internationally when it declared apartheid a crime against humanity.
Mr. Oliver Tambo, the former President of our liberation movement, the African National Congress, addressed the General Assembly from this very podium on 26 October 1976 (see A/31/PV.41) and spoke from other United Nations platforms as well on other occasions. Many other eminent South Africans were provided an opportunity in various United Nations forums to state our case for freedom, the United Nations providing a voice to the voiceless. A free South Africa has also been honoured by the declaration of 18 July as International Mandela Day, honouring our founding President and world icon, President Nelson Mandela. At this celebration of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations I wish to extend, on behalf of the people
of South Africa, our sincere gratitude to the world for its contribution to our freedom from the shackles of apartheid and institutionalized racism.
The General Assembly continues to provide a voice for the voiceless and the oppressed. In an historic and landmark development the General Assembly approved a resolution to allow the Palestinian flag to fly in front of United Nations Headquarters (resolution 69/320). The resolution was passed by an overwhelming margin, supported by many nations from both the developed North and the developing South. There can be no peace, security and development in the Middle East without a resolution of the Palestinian question. A solution is urgent. Otherwise, if we delay, in the next decade we may no longer have a piece of land to justify the two- State solution.
The historic seventieth anniversary of the United Nations presents an opportunity to reflect on the structure and workings of the Organization. Significantly, this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) in 2005, which discussed reform of the United Nations.
A number of significant decisions on reform have been successfully implemented since that Summit. They include the following: the replacement of the Human Rights Commission with a more effective Human Rights Council, the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission as a subsidiary body of both the General Assembly and the Security Council, the reform and streamlining of the United Nations management system, the mainstreaming of gender equality through the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),and the membership-driven responsibility to protect and to assist populations facing genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We welcome that notable progress.
However, almost no progress has been made on the commitment also made by Heads of State and Government in 2005 to the early reform of the Security Council. It is unacceptable and unjustifiable that more than 1 billion people in the African continent are still excluded from permanent membership in the key decision-making structure of the United Nations, the Security Council.
A continent with a smaller population than Africa is represented by three countries on the Security
Council as permanent members. That is unfair. The United Nations cannot pretend that the world has not changed since 1945. We are no longer colonies. We are free, independent sovereign States. We welcome the fact that the push for the reform of the Security Council coming from Africa has had an impact and has given some impetus to the intergovernmental negotiations process that has been looking at the reforms. We will continue working with progressive States towards the expansion of representation.
Another critical matter that needs attention is the selection of the Secretary-General, who is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council. A review of that process is necessary so as to enable more meaningful participation on the part of the General Assembly in the process.
The President has identified human rights, governance, the rule of law, and the gender aspects of the work of the United Nations as important areas of focus for the seventieth session of the General Assembly. We have to build upon the initial work undertaken in the development of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 to enhance protection in areas such as racism, discrimination against women and the promotion of the rights of the child and the rights of people with disabilities.
We also believe that the United Nations human rights system, especially its Human Rights Council, should ensure a balance between civil and political rights, on the one hand, and economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, on the other. The Human Rights Council must also be seen as an independent and impartial mechanism for the entrenchment of a human rights culture throughout the world. It should avoid the pitfalls of its predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights, which was beset by politicization and was caught up in the divide between developed and developing countries.
This year also marks 50 years since the adoption of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The year 2015 also marks 60 years since the adoption of the Freedom Charter in South Africa, which embodies the fundamental principles and values that are now enshrined in our Constitution. South Africa will continue to champion efforts in the United Nations human rights system to combat the scourges of racism, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerances and to support
work aimed at the promotion of substantive global equality.
The seventieth general debate takes place in the context of growing international concern about the rise of violent extremism, terrorism and untold brutality, which we strongly condemn. We welcome the meetings that will take place on the margins of the General Assembly to review the progress made in countering terrorism in the Middle East and North Africa.
We wish to emphasize that the Security Council must take into account the views of the African continent and its subregional organizations when dealing with conflicts in Africa in future. The current situation in Libya and the Sahel region is a direct consequence of the failure of some members of the Council to heed informed counsel from the African Union. The norm of responsibility to protect was abused for narrow political interests that had nothing to do with the fundamental aspects of the prevention of mass atrocities.
The current refugee crisis in Europe is, sadly, the direct result of the militarization of civilian unrest, which included the massive arming of civilians and opposition groups in Libya, Syria and other affected countries. That kind of problem is a deliberately man- made problem, and it is critical that, in discussing violent extremism and terrorism in parts of Africa and the Middle East, we look into the root causes of the problem and not just the symptoms. Also requiring our serious reflection is the regime change doctrine and its role in perpetuating conflicts and instability in various parts of our continent and the world.
We welcome the recently signed peace agreement between the parties in South Sudan and urge the United Nations and all stakeholders to support the Sudanese people as they work to resolve their challenges. We reaffirm our support for the people of Western Sahara and urge the international community to encourage their struggle for self-determination, freedom, human rights and dignity.
We also welcome the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States and the release of the Cuban Five. We reiterate our call for the lifting of the economic and financial embargo to help the Cuban people to gain their economic freedom. We acknowledge the contribution of His Holiness Pope Francis to the Cuban-United States normalization process. We also warmly welcome the contribution of the Holy Father generally to the global pursuit of
peace, justice and the end of poverty and suffering, as eloquently expressed in the General Assembly and globally.
We commend the United Nations for the key role that it has played in peacekeeping and urge that resources be prioritized for this core role of the United Nations, especially in Africa.
The failure of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reach an agreement at the 2015 Review Conference — in the year that marks 70 years since the first atomic bombs were detonated in Japan — is a major setback to our commitment to rid the world of weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. There can be no safe hands where nuclear weapons are concerned. The humanitarian consequences of a possible detonation of a nuclear weapon, whether intentional or accidental, will be catastrophic for humankind.
We welcome the recent agreement reached on the Iranian nuclear programme and the recognition of the right of Iran to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The seventieth session of the General Assembly has seen the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda. The outcome document represents a victory for the developing world, as it affirms that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) should build on the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals. Additionally, while the 2030 Agenda is universal in its scope in that the Sustainable Development Goals adopted apply to both developed and developing countries, there is also a clear recognition of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities. The Agenda also contains a specific Goal on achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. That is all the more appropriate given that this year is the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action and the fifteenth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security.
As the initiator of the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action — thanks to which the current round of negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is taking place — South Africa has a special interest in and commitment to the success of the Paris session of the Conference of the Parties later this year. We require the fulfilment of all three parts of the Durban mandate,
namely, the closing of the current ambition gap in the pre-2020 period through the honouring of existing legal obligations by developed countries and enhanced action; the entry into force of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol; and the adoption in Paris of a new agreement for the post-2020 period that contains all the essential elements, including the means of implementation and the measures relating to loss, damage and response. We seek a fair, ambitious and legally binding agreement in Paris that is applicable to all parties.
In addition, South Africa, as Chair of the G-77 plus China, would not be able to accept a Paris package that is hollow or weak on finance. South Africa has submitted its intended nationally determined contribution to the UNFCCC secretariat ahead of the 1 October deadline, signalling our readiness for Paris.
We join the world in celebrating the 70 years of existence of the United Nations. As we mark this historic anniversary, the reform of the Security Council and the strengthening of the General Assembly and other organs remain a paramount concern. By the end of this session, we should be in a position to adopt a road map, with clear and implementable time frames, on the priorities of this Organization as well as on its reform. We need to do this in order for the United Nations to remain a relevant force and a force for change in the world.
In conclusion, let me express our deep appreciation of the offer made by China when it was addressing the Assembly, an offer that must go through the United Nations. China spelled out the support it intended to give to Africa: a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. We would like to underline our gratitude to China.Just 70 years ago, an earlier generation fought heroically and secured victory in an anti-fascist war, thereby ending a dark chapter in the annals of human history. That victory was hard won. Seventy years ago, humankind, acting with vision and foresight, established the United Nations. That universal and most representative and authoritative international Organization has carried humankind’s hope for a new future and ushered in a new 
era of cooperation. It was a pioneering initiative never undertaken before. Seventy years ago, that generation pooled their wisdom to adopt the Charter of the United Nations, laying the cornerstone for the contemporary international order and establishing the fundamental principles of contemporary international relations. It was an achievement of profound impact.
On 3 September, the Chinese people, together with other peoples of the world, solemnly commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese aggression and fascism in the Second World War. In the main theatre in the East, China made a national sacrifice, suffering over 35 million casualties in its fight against the main troops of Japanese militarism. China not only saved itself and its people from subjugation, but also gave strong support to the forces fighting aggression in the European and Pacific theatres, thereby making a historic contribution to the victory in that anti-fascist world war.
History is like a mirror. Only by drawing on the lessons of history can the world avoid repeating past calamities. We should review history with respect and in full conscience. The past cannot be changed, but the future can be shaped. Bearing history in mind is not to perpetuate hatred. Rather, it is necessary so that humankind does not forget history’s lessons. Remembering history does not mean being obsessed with the past; rather, in doing so, we aim to create a better future and pass the torch of peace from generation to generation.
The United Nations has survived the test of time. Over the past seven decades, it has witnessed the efforts of all countries to uphold peace, build homelands and pursue cooperation. Having reached a historic new starting point, the United Nations needs to address the central issue of how to better promote world peace and development in the twenty-first century. The world is experiencing a historic process of accelerated evolution. The sunshine of peace, development and progress will be powerful enough to penetrate the clouds of war, poverty and backwardness. The movement towards a multipolar world and the rise of emerging markets and developing countries have become an irreversible historical trend. Economic globalization with the advent of the information age has unleashed and greatly boosted social productive forces that have both created unprecedented development opportunities and given rise to new threats and challenges that we must squarely face.
As an ancient Chinese goes, “Our greatest ideal is to create a world truly shared by all”. Peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom are the common values of humankind and the lofty goals of the United Nations. Yet those goals are far from having been achieved, and we must continue our endeavours to meet them. In today’s world, all countries are interdependent and share a common future. We should renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, so as to fashion a new kind of international relations with win-win cooperation at its core and to create an international community that realizes a shared positive future for all of humankind. To achieve that goal, we need to make the following efforts.
We should build partnerships in which countries treat each other as equals, engage in mutual consultation and show mutual understanding. The principle of sovereign equality underpins the Charter of the United Nations. The future of the world must be shaped by all countries. All countries are equals. Those who are big, strong and rich should not bully the small, weak and poor. The principle of sovereignty not only means that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries are inviolable and that their internal affairs are not subject to interference. It also means that the right of all countries to independently choose social systems and development paths should be upheld and that the endeavours of all countries to promote economic and social development and to improve their people’s lives should be respected.
We should be committed to multilateralism and reject unilateralism. We should adopt a new vision of seeking win-win outcomes for all and reject the outdated mindset that one’s gain means the other’s loss or that the winner takes all. Consultation is an important form of democracy, and it should also become an important means of exercising contemporary international governance. We should resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should forge a global partnership at both the international and regional levels, and embrace a new approach to State-to-State relations, one that features dialogue rather than confrontation and seeks partnership rather than alliance.
Major countries should follow the principles of no conflict, no confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation in handling their relations. Big countries should treat small countries as equals and take the right
approach to justice and interests by putting justice before interests.
We should create a security architecture featuring fairness, justice, joint contributions and shared benefits. In an age of economic globalization, the security of all countries is interlinked and has a mutual impact. No country can maintain absolute security by its own efforts alone, and no country can achieve stability on the basis of other countries’ instability. The law of the jungle leaves the weak at the mercy of the strong; that is not the way for countries to conduct their relations. Those who adopt the high-handed approach of using force will find that they are only lifting a rock to drop it on their own feet.
We should abandon the Cold War mentality in all its manifestations and foster a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should give full play to the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council in ending conflict and keeping peace, and adopt the dual approach of seeking peaceful solutions to disputes and taking the actions required to turn hostility into amity.
We should advance international cooperation in both the economic and social fields and take a holistic approach to addressing traditional and non-traditional security threats, so as to prevent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
We should promote open, innovative and inclusive development that benefits all. The 2008 international financial crisis taught us that allowing capital to blindly pursue profit can only create a crisis and that global prosperity cannot be built on the shaky foundation of a market without moral constraints. The growing gap between rich and poor is both unsustainable and unfair. It is important for us to use both the invisible hand and the visible hand to create synergy between market forces and Government function and strive to achieve both efficiency and fairness.
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable. Achieve this goal requires openness, mutual assistance and win-win cooperation. In today’s world, close to 800 million people still live in extreme poverty; nearly 6 million children die before the age of 5 each year; and nearly 60 million children are unable to go to school. The just-concluded United Nations sustainable development Summit adopted the post-2015 development Agenda (resolution 70/1). We must translate our commitments into action and work
together to ensure a bright future in which everyone is free from want, has access to development and lives with dignity.
We should increase inter-civilization exchanges so as to promote harmony, inclusiveness and respect for differences. The world is simply more colourful as a result of its cultural diversity. Diversity breeds exchanges, exchanges create integration, and integration makes progress possible. In their interactions, civilizations must accept their differences. Only through mutual respect, mutual learning and harmonious coexistence can the world maintain its diversity and thrive. Each civilization reflects the unique vision and contribution of its people, and no civilization is superior to any other. Different civilizations should have dialogue and exchanges instead of trying to exclude or replace one another. The history of humankind is a process of active exchanges, interactions and integration among different civilizations. We should respect all civilizations and treat one another as equals. We should draw inspiration from one another to boost the creative development of human civilization.
We should build an ecosystem that puts Mother Nature and green development first. Humankind may utilize nature and even try to transform it, but we are, after all, a part of it. We should care for nature and not place ourselves above it. We should reconcile industrial development with nature and pursue harmony between man and nature to achieve the sustainable development of the world and the all-round development of humankind.
To build a sound ecology is vital for humankind’s future. All members of the international community should work together to build a sound global eco-environment. We should respect nature, follow nature’s ways and protect nature. We should firmly pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable development. China will shoulder its share of responsibility and continue to play its part in this common endeavour. We also urge developed countries to fulfil their historical responsibilities, honour their emission-reduction commitments and help developing countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
The more than 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavouring to realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of the other peoples of the world. We cannot realize the Chinese dream without a peaceful international environment, a stable
international order and the understanding, support and help of the rest of the world. The realization of the Chinese dream will bring more opportunities to other countries and contribute to global peace and development.
China will continue to participate in building world peace. We are committed to peaceful development. No matter how the international landscape may evolve and how strong China may become, China will never seek hegemony or expansion or to establish a sphere of influence. We will continue to contribute to global development and to pursue common development and the win-win strategy of opening up. We are ready to share our development experience and opportunities with other countries, and we invite other countries to board China’s express train of development, so that all of us will achieve common development.
China will continue to uphold the international order. We will stay committed to the path of peaceful development through cooperation. China was the first country to put its signature on the Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to uphold the international order and system, underpinned by the purposes and principles of the Charter. China will continue to stand together with other developing countries. We firmly support the greater representation and voice of developing countries, especially African countries, in the international governance system. In voting at the United Nations, China will always side with the developing countries.
I take this opportunity to announce China’s decision to establish a 10-year, $1 billion peace and development fund to support the work of the United Nations, advance multilateral cooperation and promote world peace and development. I also wish to announce that China will join the new United Nations peacekeeping capabilities readiness system and has therefore decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent formed peacekeeping police force and a standby peacekeeping force of 8,000 troops. I also wish to announce that China will provide a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the development of the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
As the United Nations enters a new decade, let us unite even more closely to forge a new partnership of win-win cooperation and a community of shared future for humankind. Let the vision of beating our swords
into ploughshares and building a war-free world with lasting peace take root in our hearts. Let the aspirations for development, prosperity, fairness and justice spread throughout the world.The founding of the United Nations 70 years ago cast light on the dark twentieth century. That was a pivotal moment for our world. It came not against a backdrop of glorious sunshine and green pastures, but amid the ruins of the Second World War with its more than 50 million graves. As the winter of the Cold War spread its frosty fingers, the mothers and fathers of the United Nations forged the foundations of a new order — an order that is not perfect, and which may never be perfect, but which has often enough protected us from relapse into the old barbarism.
Today, 70 years on, it is clear that we are again living in turbulent times. Millions of people are gravely affected by wars and violence, and more than 60 million people have fled their homes — more than at any time since the end of the Second World War.
The foundations of the United Nations are still strong, but the world order built on them has come loose from its moorings. The old balance of power is under pressure. Powerful new players have emerged on the world stage. Most serious of all, non-State actors are now increasingly responsible for war and violence. They abide by no rules — not even the minimum standards enshrined in the international law of war.
We therefore urgently need new buttresses and pillars so that the order based on the United Nations can withstand the tempests of our times. What form could these new pillars take? How should the world order of tomorrow look?
I do not think that there is a theoretical answer to that question; the only answer is a practical one. Just as the Charter of the United Nations was adopted as a bold response to war and suffering, today new pillars will be built only if States are ready to assume responsibility and work together to find concrete answers to the crises of our times — to poverty and underdevelopment, to refugees and migration, to the devastating civil war in Syria and the failing States across the arc of crisis from Libya to Afghanistan, to religious extremism and terrorism and the murderous deeds of the people who call themselves the Islamic State.
There is, however, one major difference between now and the situation 70 years ago. The world of today
15-29658 37/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
is more closely interconnected than ever before. Borders are becoming blurred. In this age of globalization, some say, the world has become a village. If that is so, then we are all neighbours, and I would advise us to act as good neighbours. We come from very different backgrounds. We have different traditions, religions, values and world views. That diversity must be respected. No world view takes precedence over any other, but I can think of no culture in which people are unaware of what it means to be a good neighbour and in which people do not appreciate living in an atmosphere of good-neighbourliness.
Nobody is investing as much hope in that spirit of good-neighbourliness today than the millions of women, men and children who have fled their homes. My country has assumed its responsibility towards them over the past months. Since the beginning of the year, we have taken in 600,000 refugees. Currently, upwards of 10,000 new refugees are arriving every day. Those statistics show that even we cannot absorb such numbers by ourselves over the long term. We need to arrive at a European solution, together with our European neighbours, as well as with our neighbours around the Mediterranean, especially Turkey.
Secondly, the relief agencies of the United Nations system — the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — all help people in need, on the spot and with no intermediaries. It is scandalous that those organizations are underfunded to the point that they have to cut food rations and medical aid. Accordingly, I met with the members of the Group of Seven and other partners the day before yesterday, and I am delighted to report that together we have raised an additional $1.8 billion, of which over $100 million will come from Germany, intended for the United Nations relief agencies. That will also help relieve the burden on the neighbouring countries in which the huge majority of refugees arrive, especially Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan. They too need our help, so that one exodus does not trigger another.
But good-neighbourliness comprises more than just humanity and compassion. Good-neighbourliness also presupposes that we agree on joint rules that we all must obey. They include respecting each other’s borders and sovereignty. That fundamental norm is still being violated, even in Europe. The European
Union unanimously condemned Russia’s annexation of the Crimea and the actions in eastern Ukraine, and we responded, not only in terms of condemnation and isolation, but also by launching a political process to defuse the conflict. The Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE) has played an indispensable role in that process from the outset. We want to further strengthen the OSCE as an institution for our common security when we Germans assume its chairmanship next year.
Active political responsibility is also part and parcel of good-neighbourliness. A neighbourhood in which nobody looks beyond their garden gate will not be worth living in for long. People must be vigilant, because there are many conflicts that can only be solved in concert and by means of multilateral diplomacy. While that may take time and perseverance, it works.
This past summer, the five permanent members of the Security Council and Germany concluded an agreement with Iran. After more than 10 years of negotiations, we managed to agree that Iran will never have an atomic bomb and that we can verify this. The negotiations succeeded in bringing a number of actors to the same table, including Russia and the United States of America. The negotiations have therefore proved that while neighbours may not like one another, they can still solve problems together. Indeed they must do so, if living side by side is not to become unbearable for them both.
The agreement that was reached has created common ground on which greater security can be established in the Middle East, if we persevere in our joint efforts. However, the realities are still somewhat different. In Syria, in the fifth year of the war, the slaughter knows no end. We will only put an end to it by acting together. We have to halt the brutality of Al-Assad’s dictatorship, as evinced by its use of barrel bombs and torture. We have to break the control of the Islamic State. We have to silence the guns in Syria and provide the people who live there with access to humanitarian aid.
Moreover, we also share the commons goals of preserving the territorial integrity of Syria and restoring conditions in which all ethnic and religious groups can live in peace with each other, as well as in peace with neighbouring countries. Those are goals that all the actors must believe in, whatever differences may exist between the United States of America and Russia or between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
38/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
We already have a basis for joint action aimed at achieving those goals, as illustrated by Security Council resolution 2139 (2014). We must now implement it together with all the stakeholders as a first step towards defusing the conflict. I appeal to the stakeholders in Syria and Syria’s neighbours — but not only to them. Instead of multilateral decisions, such as those recently taken by Russia, regarding military action in Syria, we need Russia to now take political action that will advocate transition in Syria. That would be an important contribution to ending the stalemate. For that stalemate is a lethal one, which claims new lives every day.
At the risk of repeating myself, let me stress that when dealing with a humanitarian catastrophe as horrifying as the one in Syria, we are all neighbours. That is what must prompt us to crawl out of our diplomatic trenches, for there can be no military solution. Neither supposed eternal truths nor national interests must be allowed to obstruct efforts to take the first steps in defusing the conflict in Syria.
In these turbulent times, the idea of universal good- neighbourliness would be no more than a dream if there were not already an umbrella, a roof, under which universal good-neighbourliness has been practised for decades. Today we need the United Nations more than ever. We need a legitimate and responsive United Nations, and that is why Germany is campaigning for the reform of the United Nations and the Security Council. That is why we are working with others on the major global projects, on the ambitious 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals (resolution 70/1), which has just been adopted and on the equally, if not more, ambitious goals to combat climate change, which we hope to adopt together at the Conference of the Parties in Paris this December.
The United Nations provides a framework, a roof, for our global endeavours. But under that roof, the work must continue at many levels. We Germans believe, first, that the way forward lies in regional cooperation in the European Union and the OSCE and in cooperation with other regional organizations, such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the African Union, among others. Secondly, we are committed to re-establishing and stabilizing State structures across the arc of crisis from Libya to Iraq and Afghanistan. And thirdly, especially in our capacity as President of the Human Rights Council, we are championing the fundamental importance of human rights. For no political order can endure if the people are not secure in their rights.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the founding of the United Nations 70 years ago. As magnificent as that moment was, it also inspires a sense of great humility in me as a German, because the Charter of the United Nations was part of humankind’s response to the war and inhumanity that had originated in my country. In the seven decades that have passed since that time, Germany has been fortunate enough to be gradually and cautiously welcomed back into the heart of the international community. For that, we Germans are grateful, but we are also aware of our responsibility. When Mr. Willy Brandt became the Federal Chancellor of Germany in 1969, he said that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours. At the time, Germany was still divided, and those words were meant as a gesture of reconciliation towards Poland, France and the other European neighbours that had suffered greatly at German hands.
Today, when a Syrian family in Berlin tells me their tale of war and expulsion, Mr. Brandt’s words take on a new meaning. Now the world has become smaller, but the crises are no fewer. It is time for us to once again reaffirm that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours to others near and far.
Our Organization, the United Nations, is celebrating its seventieth anniversary. Immense progress has been made since it was established as an institution entrusted with the task of maintaining peace, which it has managed to do so on many an occasion. Yet, 70 years later dramas and tragedies, conflicts and wars continue to unfold, and the world must yet once again rise up to significant challenges. Among those of today is the flight of hundreds of thousands — even millions — of refugees from the Middle East and Africa, seeking protection or simply to save their lives. Terrorism strikes at civilian populations and no country is immune from this scourge. There are also conflicts, such as that in
the Middle East, that have remain unresolved for years and years, and that we all know could intensify at any moment.
In the meantime, there are disasters: tsunamis, earthquakes, islands on the verge of disappearing, coastlines washed away, and glaciers melting. That is the reality of climate change.
Faced with such challenges, we must all must shoulder our responsibilities at our respective levels. France, in many domains, has never refused its cooperation. France wished to host the Climate Change Conference, no doubt because we were aware of that terrible failure at Copenhagen and felt that this time we needed to make a good decision, one that can be taken only by the entire international community.
So in Paris, we must ask ourselves one question: is humankind capable of taking the decision to preserve life on the planet? Yes, that single question places us at a level that no one could ever imagine in our generation. Some will say, “But that can happen later, maybe at another conference”. I assure the Assembly here and I will say it quite plainly: if it does not happen in Paris, it will be too late for the world.
Matters have progressed well in recent months, and very strong declarations have been made by precisely those most responsible for global warming — the United States and China, which have made commitments that contribute to changing the current situation. Many calls have come from all continents, stressing the gravity and urgency of the situation and providing detailed testimony on what global warming is now, today. There are some countries that so far have been reluctant — here I am thinking of developing countries — and have asked themselves whether it is really useful to impose restrictions on themselves when the most developed countries have been free of such rules and obligations.
If asked today for a prognosis, and I often am, I will say that nothing has been settled in regard to winning an accord in Paris — nothing. But at the same time, everything remains possible. I see three conditions that must be met for us to be able to say that the Paris Conference was truly successful, worthy of us and of what was entrusted to us when we were asked to host the Conference.
The first condition is to be able to conclude a universal agreement applicable to all, one that is binding and differentiated so that everyone can do their own part, and not more. To date, 90 countries — half
of those sitting in the United Nations — have submitted their national contribution, which represents 80 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions — already a considerable figure. That means that half of the world has not yet responded. I therefore invite them to do so and to do so quickly so that we can determine as of now what, given the contributions from every State, we can assure the world will be the limit on global warming.
The second condition that will signify our success or failure is to be able to ensure that our resolution, our action, is long-lasting. The Paris accord must not be an end or a conclusion, but rather a starting point, the beginning of a process. Through incorporating a review mechanism into the agreement, we will be able to regularly review, periodically measure and even revise every five years our national contributions. That is what will allow us to be sure that at the end of the century, well beyond our time, the planet will not havewarmed by more than 2°C.
The third condition that will determine failure or success is developed countries making financial commitments. I am aware that already in Copenhagen the figure of $100 billion was announced to ensure the financing of energy transition, adaptation and technology transfer. We must collect $100 billion by 2020, but it must be said today so as to ensure that emerging countries, developing countries, can feel confident that they will be aided and supported so that this technological leap, the sharing of technology, will come about.
Yes, one hundred billion dollars. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is responsible for providing an initial estimate, to be presented at the Lima meeting. I wish here to thank the President of Peru for continuing the work he undertook at the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The OECD will provide the initial estimate, as we have not reached $100 billion yet. So we have two months before the Paris Conference to continue to mobilize the World Bank, major development banks, financial institutions, States and private stakeholders so that we can reach $100 billion. Everyone should set an example. France abides by the rule that when serving as the host country; we must perform better than our guests, or at least as well as them.
I am announcing here today that France’s annual climate funding, which is €3 billion today, will be more than €5 billion in 2020. That increase in aid will
not be merely through loans, but also in the form of grants, because it is with grants — funds transferred directly and that will not be reimbursed — that we can powerfully promote the adaptation of developing countries to the effects of climate change.
In brief, if we are in a position to meet those three requirements — that is, a universal agreement, one that can be revised and will be revised every 5 years, and funding sufficient to cover everything that we will have to cover in emerging needs and future technology — then in Paris in two months we will be able to say we have risen to the challenge; not just a rendez-vous with history, but with the future.
It is good that the international community is able to look to the future and to say what sort of world we want. We did it with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals, and we must do it for climate issues. But what is expected of the United Nations is not simply to ensure — though this is already considerable — that the world will be liveable at the end of the century, but that it is liveable today, when conflicts and wars confront us with tragedies that in 1945, when the United Nations system was founded, nobody imagined we would ever see again.
Today, it is Syria that once again calls on us to mobilize and to intervene, as many speakers have already stated. Everyone considers that this is a tragedy striking the Syrian population. Everyone has said that we must find a solution. Let us look for it together. But first, we should assess what has not been done.
Three years ago, when I stood at this rostrum to address the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.6), there had already been 30,000 victims of the Syrian tragedy. There are now 250,000, and 12,000 children have died, victims of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. The Syrian tragedy began with a revolution led by those who wanted to challenge the dictatorship of Bashar Al-Assad. At that time, there were no terrorists, there were no fundamentalist groups — there was a dictator who was massacring a people. And the refugees whom we are discussing today, the refugees in the camps, the displaced, 8 million of them — this mass of women, men and children — have not just fled a war. For more than three years they have been fleeing from the regime of Bashar Al-Assad. And still today that same regime is raining bombs on innocent civilians.
But it is not because there is a terrorist group that itself massacres, kills, rapes, destroys — including
destruction of the common heritage of humankind — that some form of pardon, of amnesty, should necessarily be accorded to the regime that created this situation, as if the existence of a terrorist group that commits the worst kinds of evil acts could furnish the regime with a way to share in what is good. No, all those women, men and children are victims of this tragedy, which is generated by the alliance between terrorism and dictatorship. No solution can be found outside of a political process.
France, which, due to its history and also its links that bind it to that part of the world, intends to shoulder its responsibilities. It has already done so recently, including through armed action, through force. France wants to work with everyone; it does not exclude any country — neighbouring countries, which are most affected, the Gulf countries, but also Iran, the permanent members of the Security Council, as well as Europeans. We want to work with everyone, with everyone who wants to work with us.
There is talk of a coalition. This broad coalition is possible; it is even desirable and necessary in order to put an end to what is happening in Syria. But this coalition must have a clear basis or it will never see the light of day. The basis was provided in Geneva more than three years ago. And what did the Geneva agreement say? It specified a transitional Government with full powers, including members of the present Government and the opposition, formed on the basis of mutual consent. That is the basis; let us use it to move forward.
But I can see, in the context of this ongoing adversity, that some are making every diplomatic effort to incorporate Bashar Al-Assad in that process. But one cannot make the victims and the executioner work together. Al-Assad is at the origin of the problem; he cannot be part of the solution. We have to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people, but we must also look beyond the political transition that has to be sought, the broad coalition that has to be formed, this condition that has to be laid down, to a new Government capable of uniting all those who have fought, but without the dictator.
We also have to be thinking about all the refugees. Until now, those refugees have been in neighbouring countries, but there too, the international community turned a blind eye because it was far away. Today those refugees, who can endure no more, are starting a long march. Yesterday, I recalled in the Assembly (see A/70/ PV.11) that 80 per cent of the world’s refugees — refugees
because of wars, conflicts, climate, poverty — are in the South. Solidarity with the South is coming from the South. Frequently, it is the most deprived who welcome the poorest. There comes a time when the refugees start to walk, and they can no longer be stopped. If we want to avoid what we have seen — tragedies, crossings that endanger the lives of passengers — if we want to prevent smugglers and criminals from using despair to further enrich the coffers of terrorism, then we must act.
Europe has hosted refugees coming not only from Syria, but also from Iraq, Eritrea and the Sudan. That was our duty, because Europe is based on values and principles, and the right to asylum is part of this common foundation that unites all the European countries, and which must continue uniting them. Otherwise, it is not the kind of Europe that we wanted.
But while Europe should discharge its duty, the world must help refugees. What have we learned those past days and weeks? That the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), due to lack of funds, no longer has the resources to ensure the necessary support and assistance to the populations in question. What have we learned? That the World Food Programme no longer has the means to provide all the refugees basic necessities and sufficient food. What have we learned? That in some neighbouring countries, refugees could not work.
This is the start of the cycle one would have imagined. If we want to reverse the flows, if we want to keep refugees as close as possible to their home countries, then we must fund UNHCR more, we must help neighbouring countries — Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey — but also countries in Africa, transit countries, countries where there is no migration. We need a major plan now, because tragedy is calling to act and to avert other tragedies. In that context, too, France is doing what it can, and must do what it should. And concerning the World Food Programme, France has decided to immediately increase by €100 million its support for United Nations agencies that are helping countries neighbouring Syria.
I want to end my speech by saying that the legitimacy of an Organization such as the United Nations rests on its credibility. If the United Nations does not have the capacity to resolve conflicts that have been going on for far too long, if the United Nations cannot resolve tragedies or ease the situation of civilian populations, then our helplessness will condemn us. If we want our
Organization — which is celebrating its seventieth anniversary — to have a future worthy of that which the founders imagined, we cannot avoid reform of the United Nations.
France calls for the enlargement of the Security Council. France calls for a different representation in the Security Council. France calls for continents to clearly bear responsibility for the world in the framework of the Security Council. France wants the permanent members of the Security Council to no longer resort to the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities. How can we tolerate that the United Nations, even today, remains paralysed when the worst is unfolding? There again, let us lead by example. I pledge here today that France will never use its right of veto in matters involving mass atrocities. The right of veto as it was introduced when the United Nations was founded was not the right to block; it was the right to act. We have to act. We can act. We have been showing that we can for 70 years. Here, today, we can act to settle the tragedies of today and to save the planet tomorrow. Let us act.Nearly 70 years ago, the first meetings of the General Assembly and the Security Council took place in London. They marked the point when the world came together to turn its back on war and to seek to institutionalize the conditions for peace. By that process, from the ashes of the Second World War, our predecessors embarked upon a shared quest for peace, development and human dignity.
And they succeeded where the League of Nations had failed. From 51 Members at its inception to 193 now, the United Nations has become a powerful and universally recognized expression of our collective will to find solutions to the most difficult challenges we face. It is the cornerstone of the rules-based international system and an affirmation of the value we attach to human dignity and hope.
Britain is proud to have played its role in the birth of the Organization. And proud too, 70 years later, of the active role we play in international affairs as the only Security Council member, indeed the only major economy in the world, that both meets the NATO 2 per cent target for defence spending and the United Nations 0.7 per cent target for development spending.
But seven decades on, the daily reality for millions of people is a very far cry from the ideals set out in the Charter of the United Nations. Despite the historic work delivered under the Millennium Development Goals, more than a billion people still live on less than $1.25 a day. Insecurity, extremism and conflict in the
Middle East have driven millions of people to abandon their homes, creating a humanitarian emergency on an unprecedented scale. And many millions more still live under regimes in which they have no say about how they are governed, and in which human rights and fundamental freedoms are denied.
At the same time, the rules-based international system that keeps the peace between nations is being undermined by States willing to violate the territorial integrity of others or to breach the most fundamental prohibitions on weapons of mass destruction. And alongside these challenges, we face the longer term threats of climate change, global pandemics and anti-microbial resistance — threats that we must tackle effectively now, if we are not to put the lives of future generations at risk.
But it is in Syria and Iraq, in the crucible of human civilization, that our collective values and our will to act are being most immediately challenged. The twin evils of Al-Assad’s murderous regime and the brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or Daesh, have inflicted suffering on the Syrian people on an almost unimaginable scale. The humanitarian crisis, the tide of refugees seeking sanctuary in neighbouring countries and in Europe, underscore the urgent need to end the conflict and represent huge tests of our resolve.
I want to pay tribute to the extraordinary generosity of Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan, which have given a temporary home to many millions of refugees and which have accepted this role stoically for years. It is incumbent upon all of us to support them as they bear that burden, and to ensure that the United Nations appeals for Syria are fully funded. And I am proud that the United Kingdom is making the second-largest contribution of any country to the humanitarian mission in the region.
We judge it important that we seek to support those who have been displaced as close as possible to their homes. Because there will be a new Syria to build, post-Al-Assad, and that country will need to draw on the talent of all the Syrian people. But a humanitarian response alone is not adequate. We share a responsibility to act to end the bloody civil war and create an inclusive political process, and to work together to crush ISIL and banish its twisted ideology from the face of the Earth. The United Kingdom will continue to be a leading member of the international coalition against ISIL, including in carrying out more air strikes in Iraq than any other country except the United States, for as
15-29595 19/23

A/70/PV.18 29/09/2015
long as it takes to prevail in what will ultimately be a generational struggle against the Islamist extremist ideology that drives it.
But the defeat of ISIL on its own will not bring peace to Syria. An inclusive political settlement is the only sustainable way to end the suffering of the Syrian people. We must redouble our efforts to build a political process under Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, and to hold to account those who have committed crimes during the conflict. Positive movement on this agenda is a crucial test for the United Nations. Progress at the Security Council has been blocked for too long. All parties must now put narrow interests aside and cooperate for the good of the Syrian people and to reassert the values of this Organization.
Urgent though the crisis in Syria is — and to that we could add the crises in Yemen, Somalia and Libya — we cannot neglect the need to act now to prevent future threats to global security from arising. But that collective action will truly work only if we have a shared analysis of the real causes of poverty, injustice, and the conflict that feeds upon it. We need a common recognition that strong, transparent and effective institutions, open economies and open societies, the rule of law, and freedom from corruption are the conditions that will allow development to flourish over the long term and so reduce the drivers that fuel conflict. They provide what Prime Minister David Cameron has called “the golden thread of development” and they are vital to the success of the Sustainable Development Goals. Each country must, of course, follow its own path to prosperity. But as we help the poorest countries overcome conflict, poverty and instability and to move up the development curve, it is in all our interests that that development be sustainable over the long term.
And the foundation for all sustainable development is security. As a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom places security as the prerequisite to good governance, strong institutions and economic development at the core of its approach. So, as the Prime Minister pledged yesterday, the United Kingdom will resume a significant role in enabling peacekeeping operations, particularly in Africa, where the United Kingdom will support efforts by the United Nations and the African Union to end some of the world’s most destabilizing conflicts, conflicts that are prompting mass migration from South Sudan and sustaining terrorist groups in Somalia.
But there is another important truth to understand — security within countries can deliver the benefits of economic growth only if it is matched by security among countries. Britain has always believed that the stability we seek in relations between nations is best realized through the framework of laws, norms and institutions that together constitute the rules- based international system that was developed after the Second World War, with the Charter of the United Nations at its heart.
Fundamental to that system is the fact that States should respect one another’s territorial integrity and political independence. When States challenge those rules, all of us have a duty to come swiftly and unambiguously to the defence of the victims. That is why we stand shoulder to shoulder with the Ukrainian people. Illegal actions and State aggression must have consequences, or the international order will be fatally undermined. We, the United Nations, insist that differences and disputes be resolved within the framework of international law, not outside it.
The collective will to tackle threats to our security must be extended to the threat we face from climate change. It represents not just a threat to the environment and to our prosperity, but to our security too. The impact of rising sea levels and rising global temperatures will be felt by all of us, but it will hit hardest many of the poorest countries and those who are least able to adapt. So the United Kingdom will not only cut its emissions at home but, as our Prime Minister announced on Monday, also increase its support to climate finance for vulnerable countries to $9 billion over the next five years. We must work for a strong and effective deal at the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris in December, built upon clear commitments from all nations to lower emissions targets still further, and a collective commitment to maintain the goal of limiting global warming to two degrees.
Seventy years after the first session of the General Assembly, the United Nations stands battered by the waves of international crises but unbowed, proudly at the heart of the international order. Over seven decades, it has played a critical role in addressing almost every challenge we have faced. And crucial to its future success will be further evolution, embracing change, and maintaining relevance in this twenty-first century. The United Nations must strive to represent the new realities of our age with a reformed Security
20/23 15-29595

29/09/2015 A/70/PV.18
Council. It must have the best possible leadership, with a transparent system for selecting the next Secretary-General. And he — or dare I suggest perhaps she? — will have to head a more efficient Organization ensuring that every cent it receives from its Member States is used to maximum effect.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, and as a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom will champion that reform agenda, and we will continue to promote the ideals that the United Nations represents. Seventy years ago, a generation resolved to shape their world on a vision for peace, security and universal values. Today, realizing that vision in its totality still eludes us, but we have demonstrated that when we work together collectively we can take great strides towards it. Now we must resolve to demonstrate that collective will; to recognize that it is not only our moral duty, but also in the enlightened national interests of all of us to act; to respond to the grave humanitarian crises we face; to tackle the causes of conflict, poverty and instability; and to uphold the rules-based international system.
The world is a better place because of the foundation of the United Nations by our predecessors 70 years ago. By holding firm to our ideals as United Nations Members in the face of all challenges and all temptations, we will preserve their legacy and continue to build the foundations for a better age, an age of peace, hope and dignity for all.
The United Nations is marking its seventieth anniversary this year, making this session of the General Assembly a historic one. I hope that this year will also be historic for the United Nations in terms of outcomes. I would like to assure the President that he will receive India’s full support in his efforts.
Seventy years ago, the foundations of the United Nations were laid at the San Francisco Conference, in a city on the west coast of this country. India was one of the signatory countries of the Charter of the United Nations, although at that time we were not independent. We obtained our independence two years later. When the United Nations was established, a rather diminutive-looking man with the powerful weapon of non-violence was writing the final act in a struggle that would become a symbol of hope for the colonized and the oppressed everywhere. I am grateful that the United Nations has proclaimed the birthday of this extraordinary man as the International Day of Non-Violence. It is a pleasing coincidence that tomorrow is 2 October, and
42/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that we will be celebrating his birthday then. Mahatma Gandhi said, “The difference between what we do and what we are capable of doing would suffice to solve most of the world’s problems”. His message is most fitting in the context of the United Nations.
The seventieth year of any human being’s life is a milestone from which to look back and reflect on what one has achieved and what one has lost. Similarly, for people associated with an institution, the seventieth year provides an opportunity to analyse whether the institution has fulfilled its purpose and achieved the goals set for it at its establishment. Today we need to ask ourselves whether we have fulfilled the purpose and achieved the goals for which the United Nations was established 70 years ago. When I ask myself that question, I receive an affirmative answer for some questions and a negative one for others. For example, the United Nations has been successful in preventing a third world war, assisting decolonization and dismantling apartheid. It has been successful in combating global epidemics, reducing global hunger and promoting democracy and human rights.
Yet, when we ask ourselves whether we have been able to prevent conflicts taking place in various parts of the world, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to find permanent solutions to those conflicts, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to show the path of peace to a world which is treading the path of violence, the answer is “no”. According to those parameters, the United Nations appears to be ineffective at maintaining international peace and security, an institution that has failed to effectively address new challenges in that area.
Today, the world is ravaged by war on three continents, with the Security Council powerless or unwilling to stem the f low of blood. Traditional solutions that rely on force have only exacerbated problems. We must ask ourselves if we have the political will to craft alternatives to conflict and to pursue them with commitment and single-minded dedication. Nowhere is such a goal more important than in peacekeeping. Under the blue flag, men and women are constantly working to prevent conflict, protect civilians and sustain peace processes. With 180,000 peacekeepers deployed so far, India has been the largest contributor to international security provided by the United Nations. Even today, about 8,000 Indian military and police personnel are participating in 10 peacekeeping missions, operating in highly challenging environments.
India remains committed to continuing its support to United Nations peacekeeping operations and even to enhancing its contributions, as announced by our Prime Minister at the leaders summit on peacekeeping. Our new contributions will cover all aspects of peacekeeping: personnel, enablers and training. At the same time, no dilution of the cardinal principles of peacekeeping must occur. The fact that troop-contributing countries have no role in the formulation of mandates, which are often amended without consultation, is a matter of concern. That is a clear violation of Article 44 of the Charter of the United Nations. We also believe that peacekeeping operations cannot be a substitute for political solutions, a fact that the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations underscored.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the more than 3,300 peacekeepers, including 161 from India, who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We stand ready to contribute to the memorial wall for United Nations peacekeepers, which was approved by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
The safety of our peacekeepers, the security of our nations, and indeed the future of the international community itself now depend on how we respond to the greatest threat that we face today: terrorism. It is a threat that India has lived with for more than a quarter of a century, and one that was tragically brought home to this very city in the autumn of 2001. Since then, we have not adequately countered the proliferation of terrorist acts, the rise of extremist ideologies and the impunity of States that back terrorism.
Only organized international action can defeat international terrorism. The world must demonstrate zero tolerance for terrorists who kill and maim innocent civilians and base its action on the principle of prosecute or extradite. The international community must make countries that provide financing to terrorists and safe havens for their training, arming and operations pay a heavy price.
Equally important, the establishment of an international legal regime, under a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, can no longer be held up. Nineteen years ago, in 1996, India proposed such a regime at the United Nations, but the Member States have been unable to adopt it and have become mired in the issue of definition. We have to understand that no such distinction exists as good terrorists and bad terrorists, and that terrorism cannot be linked
15-29658 43/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
to any religion. A terrorist is a terrorist, and anyone who commits crimes against humanity cannot have a religion. Therefore, I appeal to everyone to come together during this seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations and to pledge to unanimously adopt a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
While on the subject of terrorism, I take this opportunity to share the challenges that we face in our ties with Pakistan. None of us can accept that terrorism is a legitimate instrument of statecraft. The world shared our outrage at the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, in which citizens of many nations were helplessly butchered. That the mastermind behind the attack is walking free is an affront to the entire international community. Not only have past assurances in this regard not been honoured, but new cross-border terrorist attacks have taken place recently, and two terrorists from across the border have been captured alive. We all know that these attacks are meant to destabilize India and legitimize Pakistan’s illegal occupation of parts of the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir and its claim to the rest of it.
Let me use this occasion to spell out our approach clearly. India remains open to dialogue but finds talks and terrorism to be incompatible. Yesterday, the Prime Minister of Pakistan proposed what he termed a new four-point peace initiative. I would like to respond to this. We do not need four points. We need just one — give up terrorism and let us sit down and talk. This will solve all the problems. That was precisely what was discussed and decided by the two Prime Ministers in Ufa this July. Let us hold talks, at the level of national security advisers, on all issues connected to terrorism and arrange an early meeting of our Directors-General of Military Operations to address the situation on the border. If the response is serious and credible, India is prepared to address all outstanding issues through bilateral dialogue. Even as we counter the menace of terrorism, we must acknowledge that real social and economic progress remains a critical goal. The elimination of basic human want leads almost invariably to more peaceful societies, as is evidenced by a map of the conflicts that engulf parts of the world.
Just a few days ago, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), with the Sustainable Development Goals at its core. They constitute a blueprint that is more comprehensive and holistic than the Millennium Development Goals. However, their successful implementation will require political resolve and an inclination to
share both technology and financial resources, while simultaneously improving our delivery mechanisms. As a woman and an elected Member of Parliament, it has been my firm conviction that there is a shortcut to real social change, and that is empowering the girl child. Our Government’s policy and our Prime Minister’s programme of Educate the Girl Child to Empower Her was conceived with that vision.
Our future rests on our building a sustainable planet for our children and our children’s children. As we prepare to meet in two months’ time, in Paris, the world expects us to deliver an ambitious and credible agreement on climate change. We have a duty to take common action, but in doing so we must keep in mind the larger historical contributions of some and the differentiated responsibilities of others. If Mahatma Gandhi were among us today, he would ask if we have used the resources of the planet for our needs or for our greed. He would also ask if adapting our lifestyle choices and reducing extravagant consumption would help us to correct our course. For this reason, the agreement in Paris needs to be comprehensive and equitable, while delivering concrete action. Developing countries can do more if they are enabled in their efforts by support from developed countries in the areas of finance, technology transfer and capacity- building. India is and always has been a willing partner in global efforts towards this goal. We will play our due role in reaching a meaningful, equitable and effective agreement in Paris.
India’s reverence for the environment is based on our traditions, which have always held nature as sacred. The health of the planet is tied to our own well-being, and it is this holistic approach that guided us in our call for the First International Day of Yoga, which was celebrated with much fervour in 192 countries of the world, as well as in this hallowed institution. I thank the international community for its enthusiasm and support in this regard. I hope that the seed that has been planted will grow into a magnificent tree.
I also congratulate States for their prompt action in tackling the threat of global epidemics. By linking our efforts, we have managed to eradicate smallpox and nearly eradicate polio. HIV/AIDS has been controlled and, more recently, the Ebola outbreak was contained, although not before an unacceptably high price in lives had been paid. The Ebola epidemic is an important example of how national action and international support can resolve a global crisis. We are proud that
44/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
India played its due part in these efforts. Inspired by our successes, we must redouble our efforts to eradicate other diseases, whether it be tuberculosis or malaria.
Natural disasters and man-made conflicts also deserve our coordinated response. In recent months, the international community has been found wanting in its response to the refugee crisis caused by the conflict situations in Syria, Iraq and Libya. What is needed is a swift response backed by political will. Our own response to humanitarian crises in our neighbourhood has been quick, responsive and holistic. Whether in Nepal or Yemen, India has emerged as a net security provider, assisting not only our nationals but those of other countries that sought our help. India will be hosting the first Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in November 2016, when the topic will be the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Like the United Nations, India has walked a long way these past 70 years. As 1.25 billion of my countrymen would attest, we have done so happy in the knowledge that our democratic traditions are deeply embedded. Nonetheless, every once in a while, there is a need for transformative change — one that can reinvigorate the nation and redeem its spirit. Ever since the new Government of Prime Minister Modi took office a year and a half ago, we have committed ourselves to this renewal. It is one that has enabled India to play its rightful role in international affairs, while also becoming the fastest-growing major economy in the world. The driving force of this comprehensive renewal has been premised on the motto of sabka saath, sabka vikas, which places emphasis on the welfare of all our people.
At the same time, we have started to reach out enthusiastically to all our partners in the international community. Our efforts have focused, first and foremost, on our immediate neighbourhood and the results have been truly transformational. We have also reached out to our extended neighbourhood, renewing ancient linkages and constructing modern economic partnerships, including, most recently, a summit with 14 Pacific island nations. Our Act East policy has replaced the previous one, Look East, with a more vigorous and proactive engagement in an economically vibrant region, and complements our Link West engagement.
We remain committed to the Middle East peace process, which is key to preventing further radicalization of the region. We continue to hope that a
solution can be reached to the Palestinian question. We have also qualitatively upgraded our relations with all the major Powers.
Africa is a region with which we have historical bonds, a solidarity born out of a common struggle against colonialism and a belief in a future of shared prosperity. Later this month we will host the third India- Africa Forum Summit, the first time that the leaders of all 54 African countries have been invited.
As a nuclear-weapon State, India is aware of its responsibility, and its support for global, non-discriminatory and verifiable nuclear disarmament is undiminished.
As with nations, so it is with institutions. Only periodic renewal can provide an organization with meaning and purpose. In a world that continues to be dominated by wealthy and influential nations, the United Nations notion of sovereign equality has permitted the developing world to question some unfair norms. But it has not permitted a fundamental challenge to the inequity of a system built for a world that longer exists. If we are to preserve the centrality and legitimacy of the United Nations as the custodian of global peace, security and development, the most urgent and pressing need is reform of the Security Council. This is the need of the hour. How can we have a Security Council in 2015 that still reflects the geopolitical architecture of 1945? How can we have a Security Council that still does not give Africa and Latin America seats as permanent members?
We must include more developing nations in the decision-making structures of the Security Council. And we must change the way it does business by doing away with outdated and non-transparent working methods. Giving it more legitimacy and balance would restore its credibility and equip it to confront the challenges of our times. We are happy that during the past year, under the leadership of Their Excellences Mr. Sam Kutesa and Mr. Courtenay Rattray, we have achieved what we had been unable to do in two decades of discussions — a text for negotiations unanimously adopted by the General Assembly as decision 69/560. That first but critical step must be a springboard for action at this historic seventieth session.
For an organization such as the United Nations, 70 years has a unique significance. It is an occasion for revitalization and for renewal. I invite everyone in this Hall to contemplate the idea of the United Nations as
15-29658 45/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
a banyan tree. In the eastern tradition, the banyan tree connotes wisdom, and yet is non-judgemental and all- encompassing. It has not one trunk but many, growing outwards, each connected to the others as well as to the sky and the earth. Its expansive branches provide shade and relief, and its base has always been a place for discussion and debate.
At 70, unlike the men and women who might have planted its seed, the banyan is still young. But without constant regeneration and expansion, it withers away. That could be the fate that awaits the United Nations. Either we can take this historic opportunity to renew this critical institution or we can condemn it to irrelevance and tragic withering. We could easily lose ourselves in a labyrinth of our own creation, but if we seize the day, we will see a United Nations growing to its full potential, a United Nations that can reduce the gap between what it does and what it is capable of doing, a mighty banyan tree providing the canopy for a peaceful and prosperous humankind. I end my statement with the hope that the United Nations will grow into such a banyan tree.
I bring greetings from Jerusalem, the city in which the Jewish people’s hopes and prayers for peace for all of humanity have echoed throughout the ages.
Thirty-one years ago, as Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I stood at this rostrum for the first time. I spoke that day against a draft resolution sponsored by Iran to expel Israel from the United Nations. Then, as now, the United Nations was obsessively hostile towards Israel, the one true democracy in the Middle East. Then, as now, some sought to deny the one and only Jewish State a place among nations. I ended that first speech by saying, “Gentlemen, check your fanaticism at the door” (A/39/PV.32, para. 83).
More than three decades later, as the Prime Minister of Israel, I am again privileged to speak from this rostrum. And for me, that privilege has always come with a moral responsibility to speak the truth. So after three days of listening to world leaders praise the nuclear deal with Iran, I begin my speech today by saying, “Ladies and gentlemen, check your enthusiasm at the door”. The deal does not make peace more likely.
By fuelling Iran’s aggressions with billions of dollars in sanctions relief, it makes war more likely.
Just look at what Iran has done in the past six months alone, since the framework agreement was announced in Lausanne. Iran boosted its supply of devastating weapons to Syria. Iran sent more soldiers of its Revolutionary Guard into Syria. Iran sent thousands of Afghani and Pakistani Shiite fighters to Syria. Iran did all that to prop up Al-Assad’s brutal regime. Iran also shipped tons of weapons and ammunition to the Houthi rebels in Yemen, including another shipment just two days ago. Iran threatened to topple Jordan. Iran’s proxy, Hizbullah, smuggled into Lebanon SA-22 missiles to down our planes and Yakhont cruise missiles to sink our ships. Iran supplied Hizbullah with precision-guided surface-to-surface missiles and attack drones so it can accurately hit any target in Israel. Iran aided Hamas and Islamic Jihad in building armed drones in Gaza. Iran also made clear its plans to open two new terror fronts against Israel, promising to arm Palestinians in the West Bank and sending its Revolutionary Guard generals to the Golan Heights, from which its operatives recently fired rockets on northern Israel.
Israel will continue to respond forcefully to any attacks against it from Syria. Israel will continue to act to prevent the transfer of strategic weapons to Hizbullah from and through Syrian territory. Every few weeks, Iran and Hizbullah set up new terrorist cells in cities throughout the world. Three such cells were recently uncovered in Kuwait, Jordan and Cyprus. In May, security forces in Cyprus raided a Hizbullah agent’s apartment in the city of Larnaca. There they found five tons of ammonium nitrate — roughly the same amount of ammonium nitrate used to blow up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City. And that was just in one apartment, in one city, in one country. But Iran is setting up dozens of terrorist cells like that around the world. They are setting up those terror cells in this hemisphere as well.
I repeat, Iran has been doing all of this — everything that I have just described — just within the past six months, when it was trying to convince the world to remove the sanctions. Just imagine what Iran will do after those sanctions are lifted. Unleashed and unmuzzled, Iran will go on the prowl, devouring more and more prey. In the wake of the nuclear deal, Iran is spending billions of dollars on weapons and satellites. Does anyone here think that Iran is doing that to
15-29658 27/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
advance peace? Does anyone here think that hundreds of billions of dollars in sanctions relief and fat contracts will turn that rapacious tiger into a kitten? People who think so should think again.
In 2013, President Rouhani began his so-called charm offensive here at the United Nations. Two years later, Iran is executing more political prisoners, escalating its regional aggression and rapidly expanding its global terror net. They say that actions speak louder than words, but, in Iran’s case, their words speak as loudly as their actions. Just listen to the Deputy Commander of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Qods Force. In February, he said that “the Islamic Revolution is not limited by geographic borders”. He boasted that Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Yemen are among the countries being “conquered by the Islamic Republic of Iran”. He said “conquered”.
For those here who believe that the deal in Vienna will bring about a change in Iran’s policy, listen to what Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, said five days after the nuclear deal was reached: “Our policies towards the arrogant Government of the United States will not change”. The United States, he vowed, will continue to be Iran’s enemy. While giving the mullahs more money is likely to fuel more repression inside Iran, it will definitely fuel more aggression outside Iran.
As the leader of a country defending itself every day against Iran’s growing aggression, I wish that I could take comfort in the claim that this deal blocks Iran’s path to nuclear weapons, but I cannot, because it does not. This deal does place several constraints on Iran’s nuclear programme, and rightly so, because the international community recognizes that Iran is particularly dangerous. But, here is the catch. Under this deal, if Iran does not change its behaviour — in fact, even if it becomes more dangerous in the years to come — the most important constraints will still be automatically lifted by year 10 and by year 15. That would place a militant Islamic terror regime weeks away from having the fissile material for an entire arsenal of nuclear bombs. That just does not make any sense.
I have said that if Iran wants to be treated like a normal country, let it act like a normal country. This deal will treat Iran like a normal country even if it remains a dark theocracy that conquers its neighbours, sponsors terrorism worldwide and chants, “Death to Israel, death to America!” Does anyone seriously
believe that flooding a radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? Does anyone here really believe that a theocratic Iran with sharper claws and sharper fangs will be more likely to change its stripes? There is a general rule that I have learned — and that that those here must have learned it in their lifetime — which is that when bad behaviour is rewarded, it only gets worse.
I have long said that the greatest danger that the world faces is the coupling of militant Islam with nuclear weapons. I am gravely concerned that the nuclear deal with Iran will prove to be the marriage certificate of that unholy union. I know that some well-intentioned people sincerely believe that this deal is the best way to block Iran’s path to the bomb. However, one of history’s most important, yet least learned lessons, is that the best intentions do not prevent the worst outcomes. The vast majority of Israelis believe that this nuclear deal with Iran is a very bad deal. What makes matters even worse is that we see the world celebrating this bad deal, rushing to embrace and do business with a regime that is openly committed to our destruction.
Last week, Major General Salehi, the Commander of Iran’s Army, proclaimed
“We will annihilate Israel, for sure. We are glad that we are in the forefront of executing the Supreme Leader’s order to destroy Israel.”
As for the Supreme Leader himself, a few days after the nuclear deal was announced, he released his latest book. It is a 400-page screed detailing his plan to destroy the State of Israel. Last month, Khamenei once again made his genocidal intentions clear. Before Iran’s top clerical body, the Assembly of Experts, he spoke about Israel, which is home to over 6 million Jews. He pledged that “there will be no Israel in 25 years”. Seventy years after the murder of 6 million Jews, Iran’s rulers promise to destroy my country, murder my people, and the response from this body, the response from nearly every one of the Governments represented here, has been absolutely nothing — utter silence, deafening silence.
Perhaps members of the Assembly can now understand why Israel is not joining in the general celebration of the deal. If Iran’s rulers were working to destroy other members’ countries, perhaps they would be less enthusiastic about the deal. If Iran’s terror proxies were firing thousands of rockets at other members’ cities, perhaps they would be more measured in their praise. And if the deal were unleashing a nuclear
28/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
arms race in their neighbourhoods, perhaps they would be more reluctant to celebrate.
But no one should think that Iran is a danger only to Israel. Besides Iran’s aggression in the Middle East and its terror campaign around the world, Iran is also building intercontinental ballistic missiles whose sole purpose is to carry nuclear warheads. Now this fact needs to be remembered: Iran already has missiles that can reach Israel. So those intercontinental ballistic missiles that Iran is building are not meant for us. They are meant for others — for Europe, for America, for raining down mass destruction anytime, anywhere.
It is not easy to oppose something that is embraced by the greatest Powers in the world. Believe me, it would be far easier to remain silent. But throughout our history, the Jewish people have learned the heavy price of silence. And as the Prime Minister of the Jewish State, as someone who knows that history, I refuse to be silent. I will say it again. The days when the Jewish people remained passive in the face of genocidal enemies — those days are over. Not being passive means speaking up about those dangers. We have spoken up, we are speaking up, and we will continue to do so. Not being passive also means defending ourselves against those dangers. We have. We are. And we will.
Israel will not allow Iran to break in, to sneak in or to walk into the nuclear-weapons club. I know that preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons remains the official policy of the international community. But no one should question Israel’s determination to defend itself against those who seek our destruction. For in every generation, there have been those who sought to destroy our people. In antiquity, we faced destruction from the ancient empires of Babylon and Rome. In the Middle Ages, we faced inquisitions and expulsions. And in modern times, we faced pogroms and the Holocaust. Yet the Jewish people persevered.
And now another regime has arisen, swearing to destroy Israel. That regime would be wise to consider this fact: I stand here today representing Israel, a country that is 67 years young but is the nation State of a people nearly 4,000 years old. The empires of Babylon and Rome are not represented in this Hall of nations, nor is the 1,000-year Reich. Those seemingly invincible empires are long gone. But Israel lives. The people of Israel live.
The rebirth of Israel is a testament to the indomitable spirit of my people. For a hundred generations, the
Jewish people dreamed of returning to the land of Israel. Even in our darkest hours — and we had so many — even in our darkest hours, we never gave up hope of rebuilding our eternal capital, Jerusalem. The establishment of Israel made it possible to realize that dream. It has enabled us to live as a free people in our ancestral homeland. It has enabled us to embrace Jews who have come from the four corners of the Earth to find refuge from persecution. They have come from war-torn Europe, from Yemen, Iraq, and Morocco, from Ethiopia and the Soviet Union, from a hundred other lands. And today, as a rising tide of anti-Semitism once again sweeps across Europe and elsewhere, many Jews come to Israel to join us in building the Jewish future.
So here is my message to the rulers of Iran. Their plan to destroy Israel will fail. Israel will not permit any force on Earth to threaten its future. And here is my message to all the countries represented here. Whatever resolutions they may adopt in this building, whatever decisions they may take in their capitals, Israel will do whatever it must do to defend our State and to defend our people.
As the deal with Iran moves ahead, I hope it will be enforced — how can I put this? — with a little more rigour than was shown with the six Security Council resolutions that Iran has systematically violated and which now have been effectively discarded. I would call for ensuring that the inspectors actually inspect, that the snapback sanctions actually snap back, and that Iran’s violations not be swept under the Persian rug. There is one thing I can assure the Assembly of today that Israel will be watching closely.
What the international community now needs to do is clear: first, it must make Iran comply with all its nuclear obligations, and hold Iran’s feet to the fire. Secondly, Iran’s regional aggression must be put in check by supporting and strengthening those fighting Iran’s aggression, beginning with Israel. Thirdly, use sanctions and all the tools available to tear down Iran’s global terror network.
Israel is working closely with our Arab peace partners to address our common security challenges from Iran and also the security challenges from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and from others. We are also working with other States in the Middle East, as well as with countries in Africa, in Asia and beyond. Many in our region know that both Iran and ISIL are our common enemies. And when
15-29658 29/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
one’s enemies fight each other, one does not strengthen either one. One weakens both.
Common dangers are clearly bringing Israel and its Arab neighbours closer. As we work together to thwart the dangers that I have mentioned, I hope that we will build lasting partnerships for security, for prosperity and for peace. But in Israel, we never forget one thing. We never forget that Israel’s most important partner has always been, and will always be, the United States of America. The alliance between Israel and the United States is unshakeable.
President Obama and I agree on the need to keep arms out of the hands of Iran’s terror proxies. We agree on the need to stop Iran from destabilizing countries throughout the Middle East. Israel deeply appreciates President Obama’s willingness to bolster our security and to help Israel maintain its qualitative military edge in order to confront the enormous challenges we face. Israel is grateful that this sentiment is widely shared by the American people and its representatives in Congress — both by those who supported the deal and by those who opposed it.
President Obama and I have both said that our differences over the nuclear deal are a disagreement within the family. But we have no disagreement about the need to work together to secure our common future. And what a great future it could be. Israel is uniquely poised to take advantage of the promise of the twenty-first century. Israel is a world leader in science and technology, in cybertechnology, software, water, agriculture, medicine, biotechnology and so many other fields that are being revolutionized by Israeli ingenuity and Israeli innovation. Israel is the innovation nation. Israeli know-how is everywhere. It is in our computers’ microprocessors and flash drives. It is in our smart phones, when we send instant messages and navigate our cars. It is on our farms, when we drip-irrigate our crops and keep our grains and produce fresh. It is in our universities, when we study Nobel Prize-winning discoveries in chemistry and economics. It is in our medicine cabinets, when we use drugs to treat Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis. It is even on our plates, when we eat delicious cherry tomatoes. They were also perfected in Israel, in case someone did not know.
We are so proud in Israel of the long strides that our country has been able to take in a short time. We are so proud that our small country is making such a huge contribution to the entire world. Yet the dreams of
our people, enshrined for eternity by the great prophets of the Bible, will be fully realized only when there is peace.
As the Middle East descends into chaos, Israel’s peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan are two cornerstones of stability. Israel remains committed to achieving peace with the Palestinians as well. Israelis know the price of war. I know the price of war. I was nearly killed in battle. I lost many friends. I lost my beloved brother Yoni. Those who know the price of war can best appreciate what the blessings of peace would mean — for ourselves, our children and our grandchildren. I am prepared to immediately resume direct peace negotiations with the Palestinian Authority without any preconditions whatsoever. Unfortunately, President Abbas said yesterday that he is not prepared to do that. I hope he changes his mind, because I remain committed to a vision of two States for two peoples, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State.
As members know, the peace process began over two decades ago. Yet despite the best efforts of six Israeli prime ministers — Rabin, Peres, Barak, Sharon, Olmert and myself — the Palestinians have consistently refused to end the conflict and to make a final peace with Israel. Unfortunately, we heard that rejectionism again only yesterday from President Abbas. How can Israel make peace with a Palestinian partner who refuses to even sit at the negotiating table? Israel expects the Palestinian Authority to abide by its commitments. The Palestinians should not walk away from peace. I would like to tell President Abbas that I know it is not easy. I know it is hard. But we owe it to our peoples to try, to continue to try. If we actually sit down together, if we actually negotiate and stop negotiating about the negotiation, and if we actually sit down to try to resolve the conflict between us, recognizing each other and not using a Palestinian State as a stepping stone for yet another Islamist dictatorship in the Middle East but as something that will live at peace next to the Jewish State, we can do remarkable things for our peoples.
The United Nations can help advance peace by supporting direct, unconditional negotiations between the parties. The United Nations will certainly not help advance peace by trying to impose solutions or by encouraging Palestinian rejectionism, And the United Nations should do one more thing. The United Nations should finally rid itself of its obsessive bashing of Israel. Here is just one absurd example of
30/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that obsession. In the four years of horrific violence in Syria, more than a quarter of a million people have lost their lives. That is more than 10 times the number of Israelis and Palestinians combined who have lost their lives in a century of conflict between us. Yet last year, the Assembly adopted 20 resolutions against Israel and only one resolution about the savage slaughter in Syria. Talk about injustice. Talk about disproportionality. Count them: 20. And one against Syria. Well, frankly I am not surprised. To borrow a line from Yogi Berra, the late, great baseball player and part-time philosopher, when it comes to the annual bashing of Israel at the United Nations, it is déjà vu all over again.
Enough is enough. Today, 31 years after I stood here for the first time, I am still asking when the United Nations will finally check its anti-Israel fanaticism at the door, when the United Nations will finally stop slandering Israel as a threat to peace and when it will actually start helping Israel advance peace. The same question should be posed to Palestinian leaders. When will they start working with Israel to advance peace and reconciliation, stop libelling Israel and stop inciting hatred and violence?
Here is a good place for President Abbas to begin. He should stop spreading lies about Israel’s alleged intentions on the Temple Mount. Israel is fully committed to maintaining the status quo there. What President Abbas should be speaking out against are the actions of the militant Islamists who are smuggling explosives into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and who are trying to prevent Jews and Christians from visiting the holy sites. That is the real threat to those sacred sites.
A thousand years before the birth of Christianity, more than 1,500 years before the birth of Islam, King David made Jerusalem our capital, and King Solomon built the Temple on that Mount. Yet Israel will always respect the sacred shrines of all religions. In a region plagued by violence and by unimaginable intolerance, in which Islamic fanatics are destroying the ancient treasures of civilization, Israel stands out as a towering beacon of enlightenment and tolerance. Far from endangering the holy sites, Israel ensures their safety. Because, unlike the Powers that ruled Jerusalem in the past, Israel respects the holy sites and the freedom of worship of Jews, Muslims, Christians — everyone. And that will never change.
Because Israel will always stay true to its values. Those values are on display each and every day. They are on display when Israel’s feisty parliament
vigorously debates every issue under the sun; when Israel’s Chief Justice sits in her chair at our fiercely independent Supreme Court; when our Christian community continues to grow and thrive from year to year, whereas Christian communities elsewhere in the Middle East are decimated; when a brilliant young Israeli Muslim student gives her valedictorian address at one of our finest universities; and when Israeli doctors and nurses — doctors and nurses from the Israeli military — treat thousands of wounded from the killing fields of Syria and thousands more in the wake of natural disasters from Haiti to Nepal. That is the true face of Israel. Those are the values of Israel.
In the Middle East, those values are under savage assault by militant Islamists, who are forcing millions of terrified people to flee to distant shores. Just 10 miles from ISIS and a few hundred yards from Iran’s murderous proxies, Israel stands in the breach, proudly and courageously defending freedom and progress. Israel is civilization’s front line in the battle against barbarism. So here is a novel idea for the United Nations. Instead of continuing the shameful routine of bashing Israel, the international community should stand with Israel. The international community should stand with Israel as we work to check the fanaticism at its doors. It should stand with Israel as we prevent that fanaticism from even reaching its doors. The international community should stand with Israel because Israel is not just defending itself. More than ever, Israel is defending the world!
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity to reflect on the state of the Organization. For most of us, the United Nations has been one of the key international realities of our lives. It has been at the heart of what has shaped us in the significant developments of the post-Second World War era. But as we all know, it is not perfect. A lot can be said about the shortcomings of the United Nations. They are many and some are serious. But there are things this Organization can do that no other international body can. And it remains the key reference point for States when there is a problem. That is why New Zealand fought so hard for its current seat on the Security Council. We sought election because the Council is the primary body for the maintenance of international peace and security.
New Zealand is a small country at the bottom of the world. Despite being far from many of the world’s trouble spots, we are not immune to their consequences. This time last year, I pressed the case for New Zealand’s election to the Security Council. I would like to thank Member States for their faith in us. In the past nine months we have striven to repay them. Much of the debate in this Hall this week has been about where the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, has not performed. The conflicts and human suffering in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and a long list of other countries show how far we are from achieving the aspirations of our founders and of today’s Members. So, too, does the lack of progress in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Since we have been on the Council, we have found it as hard as many of those here warned. The Council’s agenda is lengthy and contentious. The dynamics within it are difficult. When Council members work together, as they did over the recent agreement on Iran’s nuclear capability, they can still deliver on the Council’s role as it is set out in the Charter of the United Nations. The Iran deal was a notable bright spot this year. Although it was negotiated in Vienna, only the Council had the power to implement it. New Zealand is proud that this occurred during our presidency of the Council in July. Now, the deal has to be implemented and its example followed. That is because this important agreement must become the basis for something wider — a fundamental resetting of relationships and a foundation for the resolution of other regional conflicts.
Nowhere is the resetting of relationships needed more than in Syria. Syria has been torn apart by internal divisions and a leader prepared to wage war on his own people to cling to power. External actors, from within the region and beyond, have tried to tilt the balance in pursuit of their own interests. And as the country descended into lawlessness, the evil nightmare that is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which first took hold in Syria, spread death and terror in the region and beyond. ISIL’s warped ideology and unprecedented use of social media to export its twisted message is a threat to all of us, even a country as distant as New Zealand.
That is why New Zealand has joined the international coalition against ISIL. We are doing what we can to help the victims of the Syrian conflict and combat the scourge of ISIL. New Zealand’s armed forces are helping the Government of Iraq to train its soldiers to
16/25 15-29664

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.23
defend its people. In response to the humanitarian crisis we are helping to fund programmes in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to assist their efforts to support thousands of displaced refugees. Like many other countries, we are implementing an emergency Syrian refugee resettlement programme.
None of that gets to the root of the problems in Syria. All Council members carry responsibility for ending the misery in Syria and beyond. The consequences of inaction are not theoretical. The human toll is real — a 3-year-old boy dead, washed up on a Turkish beach; hundreds of thousands killed and millions forced to flee their homes. We cannot ignore the huddled travellers in the railway stations of Europe or the reality of refugees scratching out a meagre existence in camps and makeshift homes in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. More than 160 leaders have shown up in New York this week to mark the enduring importance of the United Nations over the past 70 years. Yet we do so against the backdrop of the worst refugee crisis since the Second World War.
Every one of us sees the harrowing images daily. At the same time we see the consequences of the Security Council’s failure to act over the past four years. It is time for the Council to step up. It is time for it to stop talking about what is right and do what is right. It is time for the Council to do the job for which it was created. It is time for its members to set aside their vested interests and historical alliances in order to stop the violence and end the suffering. It is time for the Council to do its duty by those who have lost their lives and loved ones and the millions who have been displaced. We cannot afford to let the Council go from an institution with failures to a failed institution.
There must be a political solution to the conflict in Syria. And it must come soon. It should address all issues and involve all relevant actors, from within the region and beyond. The question is not Al-Assad or ISIL. Both need to be dealt with. A workable political solution will not be a perfect one. Indeed, it is a classic case of the perfect being the enemy of the good. It will require international cooperation and compromise, on all sides.
The Council also needs to engage in making progress on the Middle East peace process. Since being elected to the Council, New Zealand has made clear its view that the status quo is unsustainable. It puts at risk the achievement of the two-State solution that we all know is the best hope for a lasting peace. That is a
matter of urgency and another critical issue on which the Security Council should lead. We are told that the conditions are not right on the ground and that the parties are not ready, but we should not let conditions on the ground dictate our actions, if our actions can help bring a solution.
We stood for the Council because we believe small States have a positive contribution to make, and we wanted to provide a voice for those who go unheard too often. It was for that latter reason that we arranged the first open debate on the peace and security challenges of small island developing States during our presidency in July (see S/PV.7499). We were heartened by the level of participation of both those States and the broader membership.
The challenge for a small elected member to have its voice heard and its views taken into account is considerable. Part of the problem is structural. That the five permanent members of the Council have the right of veto creates an extraordinary power imbalance. That imbalance is exacerbated by their practices of prenegotiating outcomes before engaging with the 10 elected members and of taking no action when one of the five does not agree. That experience has reaffirmed to us that New Zealand was right to oppose the right of veto when the Charter of the United Nations was being drafted.
It is still our view that the right of veto is a constraint on the effectiveness of the Council and realizing the aspirations of the States Members of the United Nations. For that reason, New Zealand supports the two proposals being put forward this year — by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group of countries and by France and Mexico — to limit the use of the veto in mass atrocity situations. The fact that two permanent members are supportive represents progress, but part of the problem is also behavioural. The permanent members have become used to exercising power and are protective of their privileged position. They presume to control the Council’s agenda and to determine its processes. Despite that, we are doing what we can to ensure that the elected members have the information and the opportunity to contribute effectively to Council decision-making. And, in turn, that it makes effective decisions.
We want to contribute to a Council that is genuinely focused on finding practical solutions to political problems and not on preserving the status quo. We are well aware that the conflicts on the Council’s agenda
15-29664 17/25

A/70/PV.23 01/10/2015
are complex and not easily solved, but we are realistic in our expectations of what can be achieved. New Zealand believes that the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security has a responsibility to find solutions to the world’s most pressing crises.
Only the United Nations and its agencies have the capacity to focus world attention across a range of issues. That was demonstrated last week with the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals. We sincerely hope that the Conference of the Parties will be similarly successful in Paris in December, with the adoption of a meaningful agreement on climate change.
Healthy and productive oceans are a key requirement for a sustainable future. I was pleased to announce earlier this week the creation of a marine sanctuary around New Zealand’s Kermadec Islands. The Kermadec Ocean Sanctuary will comprise 620,000 square kilometres of ocean in one of the most pristine and special environments on Earth. The Sanctuary will be one of the world’s largest and most significant fully protected marine areas. It will cover an area twice the size of our land mass and better protect the habitats of a huge array of sea creatures.
New Zealand is committed to managing our oceans responsibly, and we are working with our Pacific neighbours to do the same. We have committed $1 billion in development assistance to the Pacific, focused on, among other things, helping support sustainable fisheries management. Our aid is focused on our region and in areas where we know we can get real results for real people, improving livelihoods and creating opportunities. Many Governments around the world are doing the same, and we are proud to play our part.
As I prepare to leave New York, I do so proud of the contribution that New Zealand has made to the sustainable development of our oceans. I leave proud of the contribution New Zealand is making on the Security Council and proud of the values and principles that underpin the country I lead. I also leave dispirited by the Security Council’s failure to help not only the people of Syria, but those in so many other countries. The collective effort of the Security Council, supported by the broader membership, could make a real difference.
I think all of us who have been here over the past week know that collective action must start somewhere. It should start at the United Nations.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity both to consider our history and to talk about our collective future. In 1945, the countries that had defeated Nazism united their efforts to lay firm foundations for the post-war world order. I should point out here that the key decisions about the principles for guiding cooperation among States and the creation of the United Nations were made in our country, at the meeting in Yalta of the leaders of the coalition against Hitler. The Yalta system emerged out of genuine travail, paid for with tens of millions of lives and the two world wars that engulfed the world in the twentieth century. And in all fairness to it, it has helped humankind traverse the turbulent and sometimes dramatic events of the past seven decades and has spared the world major cataclysms.
The United Nations is an Organization unique in its legitimacy, representativeness and universality. True, it has recently been much criticized for its perceived insufficient effectiveness and for decision-making on fundamental issues that can be stymied by insuperable differences, particularly among members of the Security Council. I would like to point out, however, that over the 70 years of the existence of the United Nations there have always been disagreements, and the right to the veto has always been exercised — by the United States, Great Britain, France, China, the Soviet Union and later Russia, alike. That is entirely natural for such a diverse and representative Organization. When the United Nations was established, there was

no suggestion that unanimity would reign. Indeed, the essence of the Organization consists in seeking and reaching compromise. Its strength lies in taking account of different opinions and points of view. The decisions that are discussed in the United Nations are either adopted as resolutions or they are not. As the diplomats say, they either go through or do not go through. Any action on the part of any State that bypasses that procedure is illegitimate and runs counter to the Charter of the United Nations and in defiance of international law.
We all know that a single dominating power centre emerged in the world after the end of the Cold War. Those who found themselves at the top of that pyramid were tempted to think that if they were so strong and exceptional, they knew better than anyone else what should be done. As a consequence, they thought, why should they bother with the United Nations, which instead of automatically sanctioning and legitimizing necessary decisions frequently just stands in the way or, as we say, gets underfoot? It has become commonplace to say that the Organization, as originally conceived, has become obsolete and that its historical mission has been accomplished.
The world is changing, of course, and the United Nations must keep up with that natural transformation. Russia is ready to work on that, based on a broad consensus with all its partners, but we consider efforts to undermine the authority and legitimacy of the United Nations to be extremely dangerous. They could lead to the collapse of the entire architecture of international relations. Then we would indeed be left with no rules beyond might is right. That would be a world ruled by selfishness rather than collective effort; a world ever more dictatorial and less about equality, genuine democracy and freedom; a world where an ever-growing number of de facto protectorates and externally controlled territories would replace truly independent States.
What, after all, is State sovereignty, about which some of our colleagues have already spoken? More than anything it is about freedom — the freedom of every person, people or State to choose their own destiny. And by the way, the issue of the so-called legitimacy of State power also falls into this category. We should never play with words or manipulate them. Every term of international law and international affairs should be clear and transparent and possess uniformly understood criteria.
We are all different, and we should respect that. Nobody is obliged to conform once and for all to a single model of development that someone has deemed to be the only right one. We should all remember what we have learned from past experience. For example, we remember instances from the history of the Soviet Union. Attempts to export social experiments and to push for change in one country or another based on our own ideological positions often led to tragic consequences and to deterioration rather than progress.
It seems, however, that no one learns from others’ mistakes. They just repeat them, and the export of revolutions, this time so-called democratic revolutions, continues. We have only to look at the situation in the Middle East and North Africa, which the speaker before me discussed. Certainly, the political and social problems of the region have been brewing for a long time, and people there naturally wanted change.
But how has it actually turned out? Instead of reforming Government institutions, aggressive foreign interference has resulted in the abrupt destruction of the very fabric of life. Instead of the triumph of democracy and progress we got violence, poverty and social catastrophe. And human rights, including the right to life, are simply ignored. One cannot help wanting to ask those who created this situation if they at least realize now what they have done. But I am afraid the question would go unanswered, because policies based on complacency and a belief in one’s exceptionality and impunity are never abandoned.
It is now obvious that the power vacuum that has appeared in a number of the countries of the Middle East and North Africa has led to the emergence of areas of anarchy that immediately began to fill with extremists and terrorists. Tens of thousands of militants are now fighting under the banners of the so-called Islamic State. They include former Iraqi servicemen who were thrown out into the street in the wake of the invasion of Iraq in 2003. Another supplier of recruits is Libya, whose statehood was destroyed as a result of a gross violation of Security Council resolution 1973 (2011). And now members of the so-called moderate Syrian opposition, supported by the West, are joining the radical ranks. First they arm and train them, and now they are defecting to the so-called Islamic State. Indeed, the Islamic State itself did not come from nowhere. It, too, was initially forged as a tool against undesirable secular regimes. Having established a foothold in Syria and Iraq, the Islamic State is actively expanding into
other regions, with the aim of dominating the Islamic world, and not just there. It is clearly not limiting itself to those plans alone.
The situation is more than dangerous. In such circumstances, it is hypocritical and irresponsible to make loud declarations about the threat of international terrorism while turning a blind eye to the channels that are financing and supporting terrorists, including through the proceeds of drug trafficking and illicit trading in oil and arms, or to attempt to manipulate extremist groups and make them do one’s bidding in order to achieve one’s own political goals, in the hope of dealing with them — or, to put it more simply, liquidating them — later. What I have to say to those people is this: Sirs, while you are certainly dealing with cruel people, they are in no way stupid or primitive. They are just as smart as you, and you cannot yet tell who is using whom for his own ends. The recent information on the transfer of arms to the terrorists by that moderate opposition itself is the best proof of that.
We believe that any attempt to flirt with terrorists, let alone arm them, is not just short-sighted; it is incendiary. It could result in a dramatic increase in the global terrorist threat and its critical spread to new regions, especially considering the fact that militants from many countries, including Europe, are passing through Islamic State training camps. Nor, unfortunately, I must admit frankly to my colleagues, is Russia an exception. We cannot allow such criminals, who have already smelled blood, to return home and continue their evil deeds there. We do not want that. And after all, would anyone want that?
Russia has always been firm and consistent in opposing terrorism in all its forms. Today we are providing military and technical assistance to Iraq, Syria and other countries of the region that are fighting terrorist groups. We think it is an enormous mistake to refuse to cooperate with the Syrian authorities and the State armed forces, who are valiantly combating terrorism face to face. Finally, we should acknowledge that no one except President Al-Assad’s Government armed forces and the Kurdish militia is truly fighting the Islamic State and other terrorist organizations in Syria. We are aware of all the problems and contradictions in the region, but we must nonetheless be realistic.
I feel obliged to point out that Russia’s honest and straightforward approach has recently been used as a pretext for accusing us of harbouring increasing ambitions — as if the people saying that have no
ambitions at all themselves. But the real issue is not Russia’s ambitions but the fact that we can no longer tolerate the current state of affairs in the world. In reality, we are proposing that we should be guided by our shared values and interests rather than ambitions. We should unite our efforts to address, on the basis of international law, these new problems we face and create a genuinely broad international coalition against terrorism. Like the coalition against Hitler, it could unite all the diverse forces willing to resolutely resist those who, like the Nazis, sow evil and hatred of humankind.
And, naturally, Muslim countries should play a key role in that coalition. Not only is the Islamic State a direct threat to them, it also desecrates one of the world’s greatest religions with its bloody crimes. The militants’ ideologists make a mockery of Islam and pervert its true humanistic values. In that regard, I would also like to address Muslim spiritual leaders. Their authority and tutelage are vital at this moment. It is essential to prevent those whom militants try to recruit from making hasty decisions. And those who have been deceived and who by force of circumstance have ended up in the terrorists’ ranks must be helped to find a path back to normal life, lay down their arms and cease their fratricide.
In the next few days Russia, as the current President of the Security Council, will convene a ministerial-level meeting aimed at conducting a comprehensive analysis of threats in the Middle East. First, we propose to discuss the possibility of agreeing on a draft resolution designed to coordinate the actions of all the forces confronting the Islamic State and other terrorist groups. Once again, that coordination should be based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the international community can develop a comprehensive strategy for the political stabilization and social and economic recovery of the Middle East. Then there would be no need to build camps for refugees. The flood of people forced to leave their homelands has literally engulfed first the country’s neighbours and now Europe. Now they number in the hundreds of thousands, but they could soon be millions. This is a great and tragic new migration of peoples, and a harsh lesson for all of us, including Europe.
I would like to stress that the refugees unquestionably need our compassion and support. However, any fundamental solution to the problem must involve restoring statehood where it has been
destroyed, strengthening Government institutions where they still exist or are being re-established, and providing comprehensive military, economic and material assistance to countries in difficulties — and, of course, to those who have not abandoned their homes despite all their ordeals. Naturally, any assistance to sovereign States can and must be offered rather than imposed, and only in accordance with the United Nations Charter. In other words, everything being done or to be done in this area in accordance with the norms of international law must be backed by our universal Organization, and anything contravening the Charter must be rejected. More than anything, I believe it is vital to help restore Government institutions in Libya, support the new Government of Iraq and provide comprehensive assistance to the legitimate Government of Syria.
Ensuring peace and regional and global stability remains the key task of the international community, with the United Nations at its helm. In our view, that means creating a space of equal and indivisible security that is not for the select few, but for everyone. Yes, it is a complex, difficult and time-consuming task, but there are no alternatives to it. However, for some of our colleagues the Cold War bloc mindset and desire to assimilate new geopolitical areas are still paramount. They began by continuing to expand NATO — and one wonders why, with the Warsaw Pact bloc no longer in existence and the Soviet Union broken up. And yet NATO is not only still there; like its military infrastructure, it is still expanding. Then they offered post-Soviet countries a false choice — to be either with the West or the East. Sooner or later, that logic of confrontation was bound to turn into a serious geopolitical crisis, and that is what happened in Ukraine, where the people’s dissatisfaction with the authorities was exploited and a military coup provoked from outside. A civil war erupted as a result.
We firmly believe that we can end the bloodshed and find a way out of this deadlock only through full implementation, in good faith, of the Minsk agreements of 12 February. Ukraine’s territorial integrity cannot be ensured by threats and force of arms, but it must be done. What is needed is respect for the choice of the people of the Donbas region, genuine consideration of their interests and rights and their engagement in devising the key elements of the country’s political structure, in line with the Minsk agreements that will guarantee that Ukraine can develop as a civilized State and an essential link in the construction of a common
area of security and economic cooperation in both Europe and Eurasia.
I have a reason for speaking of a common area for economic cooperation. Only recently, it seemed that in the economic sphere, where the objective laws of the market apply, we would learn to live without dividing lines and to act on the basis of transparent rules, jointly devised, including the principles of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which stand for freedom of trade and investment and open competition. Today, however, unilateral sanctions that circumvent the United Nations Charter have almost become the norm. They not only serve political aims, they act as a way of pushing competitors out of the market.
I would like to note another sign of growing economic selfishness. A number of countries have chosen to create closed, exclusive economic associations, with negotiations conducted behind closed doors and in secret, undisclosed to their own citizens and business communities. Nor do they inform other countries and Governments whose interests may be affected. Perhaps they want all of us to be left with the fait accompli that the rules of the game have been changed in favour of a small group, and without the participation of the WTO. That could completely unbalance the trade system and lead to the disintegration of the global economic environment. These issues affect the interests of all States and influence the future of the entire world economy. That is why we propose discussing them within the United Nations, the WTO and the Group of 20.
In opposition to a policy of exclusiveness, Russia proposes harmonizing regional economic projects through what is known as the integration of integrations, based on the universal and transparent rules of international trade. One example is our plan to link the Eurasian Economic Union with China’s initiative in creating a Silk Road economic belt. And we continue to believe the possibility of harmonizing integration processes within the Eurasian Economic Union and the European Union to be very promising.
Among the issues affecting the future of all humankind is the challenge of global climate change. It is in our interests to ensure that we get results at the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Paris in December. As part of our national contribution, by 2030 we plan to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions to between 70 and 75 per cent of their 1990 levels. I
suggest, however, that we should take a broader view of this issue. By establishing quotas on harmful emissions or taking other steps that by their very nature are still only tactical, we may mitigate the problem for a certain amount of time, but fundamentally we will not solve it.
We need a completely different approach. We should be focusing on introducing fundamentally new technologies, inspired by nature, that rather than damaging the environment will be in harmony with it and will enable us to restore the balance between the biosphere and the technosphere that human activities have destroyed. It is indeed a challenge on a planetary scale, but I am confident that humankind has the intellectual wherewithal to respond to it. We must unite our efforts, most of all those States possessing solid research capacities and fundamental scientific achievements. We propose convening a special forum under United Nations auspices for a comprehensive consideration of the issues related to the depletion of natural resources, the destruction of habitats and climate change. Russia is ready to be one of the organizers of such a forum.
On 10 January 1946, the General Assembly of the United Nations gathered in London to begin work on its first session. Eduardo Zuleta Ángel, a Colombian diplomat and the Chairman of the Preparatory Commission, opened the session by giving what I believe was a concise definition of the basic principles by which the United Nations should be guided in its activities. They are free will, disdain for scheming and trickery, and a spirit of cooperation. Today his words can be a guide for us all. Russia believes in the huge potential of the United Nations to help us avoid a new global confrontation and engage in strategic cooperation. We will work consistently with other countries to strengthen the central coordinating role of the United Nations. I am confident that together we can make the world a stable and safe place and ensure conditions conducive to the development of every State and nation.Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations it is worth reflecting on what the members of this body, working together, have helped to achieve. Out of the ashes of the Second World War, having witnessed the unthinkable power of the atomic age, the United States has worked with many nations in the Assembly to prevent a third world war — by forging alliances with old adversaries; by supporting the steady emergence of strong democracies accountable to their people and not to any foreign Power; and by building an international system that imposes a cost on those who choose conflict over cooperation, an order that recognizes the dignity and equal worth of all people.
That has been the work of seven decades. That is the ideal that this body has, at its best, pursued. Of course, there have been too many times when, collectively, we have fallen short of those ideals. Over the seven decades, terrible conflicts have claimed untold victims. But we have pressed forward, slowly, steadily, to make a system of international rules and norms that are better and stronger and more consistent.
It is that international order that has underwritten unparalleled advances in human liberty and prosperity. It is that collective endeavour that has brought about diplomatic cooperation among the world’s major Powers and buttressed a global economy that has lifted more than a billion people from poverty. It is those international principles that have helped constrain bigger countries from imposing their will on smaller ones and have advanced the emergence of democracy and development and individual liberty on every continent.
That progress is real. It can be documented in lives saved, agreements forged, diseases conquered and mouths fed. And yet we come together today knowing that the march of human progress never travels in a straight line, that our work is far from complete and that dangerous currents risk pulling us back into a darker, more disordered world.
Today we are seeing the collapse of strongmen and fragile States breeding conflict and driving innocent men, women and children across borders on an epic scale. Brutal networks of terror have stepped into the vacuum. Technologies that empower individuals are now also exploited by those who spread disinformation, suppress dissent or radicalize our youth. Global capital flows have powered growth and investment, but they have also increased the risk of contagion, weakened the bargaining power of workers and accelerated inequality.
How should we respond to those trends? There are those who argue that the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are unachievable or out of date, a legacy of a postwar era not suited to our own. In effect, they are arguing for a return to the rules that applied for most of human history and that predate this institution — the belief that power is a zero-sum game, that might makes right, that strong States must impose their will on weaker ones, that the rights of individuals do not matter and that in a time of rapid change, order must be imposed by force.
On that basis, we see some major Powers assert themselves in ways that contravene international law. We see an erosion of the democratic principles and human rights that are fundamental to this institution’s mission. Information is strictly controlled and the space for civil society restricted. We are told that such retrenchment is required to beat back disorder; that it is the only way to stamp out terrorism and prevent foreign meddling. In accordance with that logic, we should support tyrants like Bashar Al-Assad, who drops barrel bombs to massacre innocent children, because the alternative is surely worse.
This increasing scepticism of our international order can also be found in the most advanced democracies. We see greater polarization and more frequent gridlock, with movements on the far right, and sometimes the left, that insist on stopping the trade that binds our fates to other nations or calling for the building of walls to keep out immigrants. Most ominously, we see the fears of ordinary people being exploited through appeals to sectarianism, tribalism, racism or anti-Semitism; appeals to a glorious past before the body politic was infected by those who look different or worship God differently — a politics of us versus them.
The United States is not immune to this. Even as our economy is growing and our troops have largely returned from Iraq and Afghanistan, we see in our debates about America’s role in the world a notion of strength that is defined by opposition to old enemies, perceived adversaries — a rising China or resurgent Russia, a revolutionary Iran or an Islam that is incompatible with peace. We see arguments that the only strength that matters for the United States is bellicose words and shows of military force, and that cooperation and diplomacy will not work.
As President of the United States, I am mindful of the dangers that we face. They cross my desk every 
morning. I lead the strongest military that the world has ever known, and I will never hesitate to protect my country or our allies, unilaterally and by force where necessary. But I stand before the Assembly today believing in my core that we, the nations of the world, cannot return to the old ways of conflict and coercion. We cannot look backwards. We live in an integrated world, one in which we all have a stake in one another’s success.
We cannot turn back those forces of integration. No nation here in the Assembly can insulate itself from the threat of terrorism, the risk of financial contagion, the flow of migrants or the danger of a warming planet. The disorder we see is not driven solely by competition between nations or by any single ideology. If we cannot work together more effectively, we will all suffer the consequences.
That is true for the United States as well. No matter how powerful our military, how strong our economy, we understand the United States cannot solve the world’s problems alone. In Iraq, the United States learned the hard lesson that even with hundreds of thousands of brave, effective troops and trillions of dollars from our Treasury, it cannot by itself impose stability on a foreign land. Unless we work with other nations under the mantle of international norms, principles and law that offers legitimacy to our efforts, we will not succeed. And unless we work together to defeat the ideas that drive the various communities in a country like Iraq into conflict, any order that our militaries can impose will be temporary.
Just as force alone cannot impose order internationally, I believe in my core that repression cannot forge the social cohesion that nations need to succeed. The history of the last two decades proves that in today’s world, dictatorships are unstable. The strongmen of today become the spark of revolution tomorrow. You can jail your opponents, but you cannot imprison ideas. You can try to control access to information, but you cannot turn a lie into truth. It is not a conspiracy of United States-backed non-governmental organizations that exposes corruption and raises the expectations of people around the globe — it is technology, social media and the irreducible desire of people everywhere to make their own choices about how they are governed.
Indeed, I believe that in today’s world, the measure of strength is no longer defined by the control of territory. Lasting prosperity does not come solely from
the ability to access and extract raw materials. The strength of nations depends on the success of their people — their knowledge, innovation, imagination, creativity, drive and opportunity — and that, in turn, depends on individual rights, good governance and personal security. Both internal repression and foreign aggression are symptoms of a failure to provide that foundation.
Politics and solidarity that depend on demonizing others, that draw on religious sectarianism, narrow tribalism or jingoism, may at times look like strength in the moment, but over time their weakness will be exposed. And history tells us that the dark forces unleashed by this type of politics surely make all of us less secure. Our world has been there before. We gain nothing from going back.
Instead, I believe that we must go forward in pursuit of our ideals, not abandon them at this critical time. We must give expression to our best hopes, not our deepest fears. This institution was founded because men and women who came before us had the foresight to know that our nations are more secure when we uphold basic laws and norms and pursue a path of cooperation rather than conflict. And strong nations, above all, have a responsibility to uphold that international order.
Let me give a concrete example. After I took office, I made it clear that one of the principal achievements of the United Nations — the nuclear non-proliferation regime — was endangered by Iran’s violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. On that basis, the Security Council tightened sanctions on the Iranian Government, and many nations joined us to enforce them. Together, we showed that laws and agreements mean something. But we also understood that the goal of sanctions was not simply to punish Iran. Our objective was to test whether Iran could change course, accept constraints and allow the world to verify that its nuclear programme would be peaceful. For two years, the United States and our partners, including Russia and China, stuck together in complex negotiations. The result is a lasting, comprehensive deal that prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon while allowing it to access peaceful energy. If the deal is fully implemented, the prohibition on nuclear weapons is strengthened, a potential war is averted and our world is safer. That is the strength of the international system when it works the way it should.
That same fidelity to international order guides our responses to other challenges around the world.
Consider Russia’s annexation of Crimea and further aggression in eastern Ukraine. America has few economic interests in Ukraine, and we recognize the deep and complex history between Russia and Ukraine. But we cannot stand by when the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a nation is flagrantly violated. If that happens without consequence in Ukraine, it could happen to any of the nations gathered here today. That is the basis of the sanctions that the United States and our partners impose on Russia. It is not a desire to return to a cold war.
Now, within Russia, State-controlled media may describe those events as an example of a resurgent Russia — a view shared, by the way, by a number of United States politicians and commentators who have always been deeply sceptical about Russia and seem to be convinced that a new cold war is in fact upon us. And yet look at the results. The Ukrainian people are more interested than ever in aligning with Europe instead of Russia. Sanctions have led to capital flight, a contracting economy, a fallen rouble and the emigration of more educated Russians.
Imagine if, instead, Russia had engaged in true diplomacy and worked with Ukraine and the international community to ensure that its interests were protected. That would be better for Ukraine, but also better for Russia and better for the world, which is why we continue to press for this crisis to be resolved in a way that allows a sovereign and democratic Ukraine to determine its future and control its territory. This is not because we want to isolate Russia — we do not — but because we want a strong Russia that is invested in working with us to strengthen the international system as a whole.
Similarly, in the South China Sea, the United States makes no claim on territory there. We do not adjudicate claims. But like every nation gathered here, we have an interest in upholding the basic principles of freedom of navigation and the free flow of commerce, and in resolving disputes through international law, not the law of force. So we will defend those principles, while encouraging China and other claimants to resolve their differences peacefully. I say this while recognizing that diplomacy is hard, the outcomes are sometimes unsatisfying and it is rarely politically popular. But I believe that leaders of large nations in particular have an obligation to take those risks, precisely because we are strong enough to protect our interests if and when diplomacy fails.
I also believe that to move forward in this new era, we have to be strong enough to acknowledge when what we are doing is not working. For 50 years, the United States pursued a Cuba policy that failed to improve the lives of the Cuban people. We changed that. We continue to have differences with the Cuban Government. We will continue to stand up for human rights. But we address those issues through diplomatic relations, increased commerce and people-to-people ties. As those contacts yield progress, I am confident that our Congress will inevitably lift an embargo that should not be in place any more. Change will not come overnight to Cuba, but I am confident that openness, not coercion, will support the reforms and the better life that the Cuban people deserve, just as I believe that Cuba will find its success if it pursues cooperation with other nations.
Now, if it is in the interest of major Powers to uphold international standards, that is even more true for the rest of the community of nations. Look around the world. From Singapore to Colombia to Senegal, the facts show that nations succeed when they pursue an inclusive peace and prosperity within their borders and work cooperatively with countries beyond those borders.
That path is now available to a nation such as Iran, which, as of this moment, continues to deploy violent proxies to advance its interests. Those efforts may appear to give it leverage in disputes with its neighbours, but they fuel sectarian conflict that endangers the entire region and isolates Iran from the promise of trade and commerce. The Iranian people have a proud history and are filled with extraordinary potential. But chanting “Death to America” does not create jobs or make Iran more secure. If Iran chooses a different path, that will be good for the security of the region, good for the Iranian people and good for the world.
Of course, around the globe, we will continue to be confronted with nations that reject these lessons of history — places where civil strife, border disputes and sectarian wars give rise to terrorist enclaves and humanitarian disasters. Where order has completely broken down, we must act, but we will be stronger when we act together.
In such efforts, the United States will always do its part. We will do so mindful of the lessons of the past — not just the lessons of Iraq, but also the example of Libya, where we joined an international coalition
under a United Nations mandate to prevent a slaughter. Even as we helped the Libyan people bring an end to the reign of a tyrant, our coalition could have and should have done more to fill a vacuum left behind. We are grateful to the United Nations for its efforts to forge a unity Government. We will help any legitimate Libyan Government as it works to bring the country together.
We also have to recognize that we must work more effectively in the future, as an international community, to build capacity for States that are in distress before they collapse. That is why we should celebrate the fact that, later today, the United States will join with more than 50 countries to enlist new capabilities — infantry, intelligence, helicopters, hospitals, and tens of thousands of troops — to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. These new capabilities can prevent mass killing and ensure that peace agreements are more than words on paper. But we have to do it together. Together, we must strengthen our collective capacity to establish security where order has broken down and to support those who seek a just and lasting peace.
Nowhere is our commitment to international order more tested than in Syria. When a dictator slaughters tens of thousands of his own people, that is not just a matter of one nation’s internal affairs. It breeds human suffering on an order of magnitude that affects us all. Likewise, when a terrorist group beheads captives, slaughters the innocent and enslaves women, that is not a single nation’s national security problem. It is an assault on humankind as a whole.
I have said before and I will repeat: there is no room to accommodate an apocalyptic cult like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the United States makes no apologies for using our military, as part of a broad coalition, to go after them. We do so with a determination to ensure that there will never be a safe haven for terrorists who carry out these crimes. We have demonstrated over more than a decade of relentless pursuit of Al-Qaida that we will not be outlasted by extremists.
While military power is necessary, it is not sufficient to resolve the situation in Syria. Lasting stability can take hold only when the people of Syria forge an agreement to live together peacefully. The United States is prepared to work with any nation, including Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict. But we must recognize that after so much bloodshed, so much carnage, there cannot be a return to the pre-war status quo.
Let us remember how this started. Al-Assad reacted to peaceful protests by escalating repression and killing that, in turn, created the environment for the current strife. And so Al-Assad and his allies cannot simply pacify the broad majority of a population that has been brutalized by chemical weapons and indiscriminate bombing. Yes, realism dictates that compromise will be required to end the fighting and, ultimately, stamp out ISIL. But realism also requires a managed transition away from Al-Assad and to a new leader, and an inclusive Government that recognizes there must be an end to this chaos so that the Syrian people can begin to rebuild.
We know that ISIL — which emerged out of the chaos of Iraq and Syria — depends on perpetual war to survive, but we also know that they gain adherents because of a poisonous ideology. Part of our job, together, is to work to reject such extremism that infects too many of our young people. Part of that effort must be a continued rejection by Muslims of those who distort Islam to preach intolerance and promote violence. It must also involve a rejection by non-Muslims of the ignorance that equates Islam with terrorism.
This work will take time. There are no easy answers to Syria, and there are no simple answers to the changes that are taking place in much of the Middle East and North Africa. But so many families need help right now; they do not have time. That is why the United States is increasing the number of refugees whom we welcome within our borders. That is why we will continue to be the largest donor of assistance to support those refugees. Today we are launching new efforts to ensure that our people and our businesses, our universities and our non-governmental organizations can help as well, because in the faces of suffering families, our nation of immigrants sees itself.
Of course, in the old ways of thinking, the plight of the powerless, the plight of refugees, the plight of the marginalized did not matter. They were on the periphery of the world’s concerns. Today, our concern for them is driven not just by conscience, but should also be driven by self-interest. Helping people who have been pushed to the margins of our world is not mere charity; it is a matter of collective security. The purpose of this institution is not merely to avoid conflict; it is to galvanize the collective action that makes life better on this planet.
The commitments we have made to the Sustainable Development Goals speak to this truth. I believe that 
capitalism has been the greatest creator of wealth and opportunity that the world has ever known. But from big cities to rural villages around the world, we also know that prosperity is still cruelly out of reach for too many. As His Holiness Pope Francis reminds us, we are stronger when we value the least among these and see them as equal in dignity to ourselves and our sons and our daughters.
We can roll back preventable disease and end the scourge of HIV/AIDS. We can stamp out pandemics that recognize no borders. That work may not be on television right now, but as we demonstrated in reversing the spread of Ebola, it can save more lives than anything else we can do. Together, we can eradicate extreme poverty and erase barriers to opportunity. But this requires a sustained commitment to our people so farmers can feed more people, so entrepreneurs can start a business without paying a bribe, so young people have the skills they need to succeed in this modern, knowledge-based economy.
We can promote growth through trade that meets a higher standard, and that is what we are doing through the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a trade agreement that encompasses nearly 40 per cent of the global economy, an agreement that will open markets while protecting the rights of workers and protecting the environment that enables development to be sustained.
We can roll back the pollution that we put in our skies and help economies lift people out of poverty without condemning our children to the ravages of an ever-warming climate. The same ingenuity that produced the Industrial Age and the Computer Age allows us to harness the potential of clean energy. No country can escape the ravages of climate change. And there is no stronger sign of leadership than putting future generations first. The United States will work with every nation that is willing to do its part so that we can come together in Paris to decisively confront this challenge.
Finally, regarding our vision for the future of the Assembly, my belief in moving forward rather than backwards requires us to defend the democratic principles that allow societies to succeed. Let me start from a simple premise. Catastrophes like what we are seeing in Syria do not take place in countries where there is genuine democracy and respect for the universal values this institution is supposed to defend.
I recognize that democracy is going to take different forms in different parts of the world. The very idea of a people governing themselves depends upon government giving expression to their unique culture, their unique history, their unique experiences. But some universal truths are self-evident. No person wants to be imprisoned for peaceful worship. No woman should ever be abused with impunity, no girl should be barred from attending school. There should be freedom to peacefully petition those in power without fear of arbitrary laws. These are not ideas of one country or one culture. They are fundamental to human progress. They are a cornerstone of this institution.
I realize that in many parts of the world there is a different view — a belief that strong leadership must tolerate no dissent. I hear it not only from America’s adversaries, but — privately, at least — I also hear it from some of our friends. I disagree. I believe a Government that suppresses peaceful dissent is not showing strength. It is showing weakness and it is showing fear.
History shows that regimes that fear their own people will eventually crumble, but strong institutions built on the consent of the governed endure long after any one individual is gone. That is why our strongest leaders, from George Washington to Nelson Mandela, have elevated the importance of building strong, democratic institutions over a thirst for perpetual power. Leaders who amend constitutions to stay in office only acknowledge that they failed to build a successful country for their people, because none of us lasts forever. It tells us that power is something they cling to for its own sake rather than for the betterment of those whom they purport to serve.
I understand that democracy is frustrating. Democracy in the United States is certainly imperfect. At times it can be dysfunctional. But democracy — the constant struggle to extend rights to more of our people, to give more people a voice — is what allowed us to become the most powerful nation in the world. It is not simply a matter of principle; it is not an abstraction. Democracy, inclusive democracy, makes countries stronger. When opposition parties can seek power peacefully through the ballot, a country draws upon new ideas. When a free media can inform the public, corruption and abuse are exposed and can be rooted out. When civil society thrives, communities can solve problems that Governments cannot necessarily solve alone. When immigrants are welcomed, countries are 
more productive and more vibrant. When girls can go to school, get a job and pursue unlimited opportunities, that is when a country realizes its full potential.
That is what I believe is America’s greatest strength. Not everybody in America agrees with me. That is part of democracy. I believe that the fact that one can walk the streets of this city right now and pass churches and synagogues and temples and mosques where people worship freely; the fact that our nation of immigrants mirrors the diversity of the world — one can find people from everywhere here in New York City — the fact that in this country everybody can contribute, everybody can participate no matter who they are or what they look like or whom they love — that is what makes us strong.
I believe that what is true for America is true for virtually all mature democracies. That is no accident. We can be proud of our nations without defining ourselves in opposition to some other group. We can be patriotic without demonizing someone else. We can cherish our own identities — our religion, our ethnicity, our traditions — without putting others down. Our systems are premised on the notion that absolute power will corrupt, but that people, ordinary people, are fundamentally good and value family and friendship, faith and the dignity of hard work. And with appropriate checks and balances, Governments can reflect that goodness. I believe that is the future we must seek together — to believe in the dignity of every individual, to believe we can bridge our differences and choose cooperation over conflict. That is not weakness; that is strength. It is a practical necessity in our interconnected world.
Our people understand this. Think of the Liberian doctor who went door to door to search for Ebola cases and to tell families what to do if they show symptoms. Think of the Iranian shopkeeper who said after the nuclear deal, “God willing, now we will be able to offer many more goods at better prices”. Think of the Americans who lowered the flag over our embassy in Havana in 1961, the year I was born, and who returned this summer to raise that flag back up. One of those men said of the Cuban people, “We could do things for them, and they could do things for us. We loved them”. For 50 years we ignored that fact. Think of the families leaving everything they have known behind, risking barren deserts and stormy waters just to find shelter, just to save their children. One Syrian refugee who was met in Hamburg with warm greetings and shelter said,
“We feel there are still some people who love other people”.
The people of our United Nations are not as different as they have been told. They can be made to fear; they can be taught to hate, but they can also respond to hope. History is littered with the failure of false prophets and fallen empires who believed that might always makes right. That will continue to be the case. We can count on it. But we are called upon to offer a different type of leadership, a leadership strong enough to recognize that nations share common interests and people share a common humanity. And, yes, there are certain ideas and principles that are universal. That is what those who shaped the United Nations 70 years ago understood. Let us carry that faith forward into the future, for it is the only way we can ensure that the future will be brighter, for my children and for everyone’s children.I should like to congratulate the President and his country, Denmark, on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventieth session. He has South Africa’s full support for his presidency. The theme that he has chosen, “The United Nations at 70: the road ahead for peace, security and human rights”, is timely and relevant to the current global challenges facing the world today.
Furthermore, allow me to convey our gratitude to the President of the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Mr. Sam Kutesa of the Republic of Uganda, for the outstanding manner in which he represented Africa at the helm of the General Assembly during that session.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations marks a significant moment in the history of global governance. The Charter embodies, through its principles and objectives, the aspirations of oppressed people worldwide. We would also like to acknowledge the role of the United Nations General Assembly over the past 70 years. Rooted in the principle of sovereign equality, the Assembly is the most representative international institution and organ of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has over the years remained central to the provision of support to the disadvantaged, marginalized, occupied, colonized and oppressed peoples of the world. This body elevated the South African struggle for liberation internationally when it declared apartheid a crime against humanity.
Mr. Oliver Tambo, the former President of our liberation movement, the African National Congress, addressed the General Assembly from this very podium on 26 October 1976 (see A/31/PV.41) and spoke from other United Nations platforms as well on other occasions. Many other eminent South Africans were provided an opportunity in various United Nations forums to state our case for freedom, the United Nations providing a voice to the voiceless. A free South Africa has also been honoured by the declaration of 18 July as International Mandela Day, honouring our founding President and world icon, President Nelson Mandela. At this celebration of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations I wish to extend, on behalf of the people
of South Africa, our sincere gratitude to the world for its contribution to our freedom from the shackles of apartheid and institutionalized racism.
The General Assembly continues to provide a voice for the voiceless and the oppressed. In an historic and landmark development the General Assembly approved a resolution to allow the Palestinian flag to fly in front of United Nations Headquarters (resolution 69/320). The resolution was passed by an overwhelming margin, supported by many nations from both the developed North and the developing South. There can be no peace, security and development in the Middle East without a resolution of the Palestinian question. A solution is urgent. Otherwise, if we delay, in the next decade we may no longer have a piece of land to justify the two- State solution.
The historic seventieth anniversary of the United Nations presents an opportunity to reflect on the structure and workings of the Organization. Significantly, this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) in 2005, which discussed reform of the United Nations.
A number of significant decisions on reform have been successfully implemented since that Summit. They include the following: the replacement of the Human Rights Commission with a more effective Human Rights Council, the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission as a subsidiary body of both the General Assembly and the Security Council, the reform and streamlining of the United Nations management system, the mainstreaming of gender equality through the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),and the membership-driven responsibility to protect and to assist populations facing genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We welcome that notable progress.
However, almost no progress has been made on the commitment also made by Heads of State and Government in 2005 to the early reform of the Security Council. It is unacceptable and unjustifiable that more than 1 billion people in the African continent are still excluded from permanent membership in the key decision-making structure of the United Nations, the Security Council.
A continent with a smaller population than Africa is represented by three countries on the Security
Council as permanent members. That is unfair. The United Nations cannot pretend that the world has not changed since 1945. We are no longer colonies. We are free, independent sovereign States. We welcome the fact that the push for the reform of the Security Council coming from Africa has had an impact and has given some impetus to the intergovernmental negotiations process that has been looking at the reforms. We will continue working with progressive States towards the expansion of representation.
Another critical matter that needs attention is the selection of the Secretary-General, who is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council. A review of that process is necessary so as to enable more meaningful participation on the part of the General Assembly in the process.
The President has identified human rights, governance, the rule of law, and the gender aspects of the work of the United Nations as important areas of focus for the seventieth session of the General Assembly. We have to build upon the initial work undertaken in the development of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 to enhance protection in areas such as racism, discrimination against women and the promotion of the rights of the child and the rights of people with disabilities.
We also believe that the United Nations human rights system, especially its Human Rights Council, should ensure a balance between civil and political rights, on the one hand, and economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, on the other. The Human Rights Council must also be seen as an independent and impartial mechanism for the entrenchment of a human rights culture throughout the world. It should avoid the pitfalls of its predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights, which was beset by politicization and was caught up in the divide between developed and developing countries.
This year also marks 50 years since the adoption of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The year 2015 also marks 60 years since the adoption of the Freedom Charter in South Africa, which embodies the fundamental principles and values that are now enshrined in our Constitution. South Africa will continue to champion efforts in the United Nations human rights system to combat the scourges of racism, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerances and to support
work aimed at the promotion of substantive global equality.
The seventieth general debate takes place in the context of growing international concern about the rise of violent extremism, terrorism and untold brutality, which we strongly condemn. We welcome the meetings that will take place on the margins of the General Assembly to review the progress made in countering terrorism in the Middle East and North Africa.
We wish to emphasize that the Security Council must take into account the views of the African continent and its subregional organizations when dealing with conflicts in Africa in future. The current situation in Libya and the Sahel region is a direct consequence of the failure of some members of the Council to heed informed counsel from the African Union. The norm of responsibility to protect was abused for narrow political interests that had nothing to do with the fundamental aspects of the prevention of mass atrocities.
The current refugee crisis in Europe is, sadly, the direct result of the militarization of civilian unrest, which included the massive arming of civilians and opposition groups in Libya, Syria and other affected countries. That kind of problem is a deliberately man- made problem, and it is critical that, in discussing violent extremism and terrorism in parts of Africa and the Middle East, we look into the root causes of the problem and not just the symptoms. Also requiring our serious reflection is the regime change doctrine and its role in perpetuating conflicts and instability in various parts of our continent and the world.
We welcome the recently signed peace agreement between the parties in South Sudan and urge the United Nations and all stakeholders to support the Sudanese people as they work to resolve their challenges. We reaffirm our support for the people of Western Sahara and urge the international community to encourage their struggle for self-determination, freedom, human rights and dignity.
We also welcome the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States and the release of the Cuban Five. We reiterate our call for the lifting of the economic and financial embargo to help the Cuban people to gain their economic freedom. We acknowledge the contribution of His Holiness Pope Francis to the Cuban-United States normalization process. We also warmly welcome the contribution of the Holy Father generally to the global pursuit of
peace, justice and the end of poverty and suffering, as eloquently expressed in the General Assembly and globally.
We commend the United Nations for the key role that it has played in peacekeeping and urge that resources be prioritized for this core role of the United Nations, especially in Africa.
The failure of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reach an agreement at the 2015 Review Conference — in the year that marks 70 years since the first atomic bombs were detonated in Japan — is a major setback to our commitment to rid the world of weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. There can be no safe hands where nuclear weapons are concerned. The humanitarian consequences of a possible detonation of a nuclear weapon, whether intentional or accidental, will be catastrophic for humankind.
We welcome the recent agreement reached on the Iranian nuclear programme and the recognition of the right of Iran to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The seventieth session of the General Assembly has seen the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda. The outcome document represents a victory for the developing world, as it affirms that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) should build on the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals. Additionally, while the 2030 Agenda is universal in its scope in that the Sustainable Development Goals adopted apply to both developed and developing countries, there is also a clear recognition of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities. The Agenda also contains a specific Goal on achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. That is all the more appropriate given that this year is the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action and the fifteenth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security.
As the initiator of the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action — thanks to which the current round of negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is taking place — South Africa has a special interest in and commitment to the success of the Paris session of the Conference of the Parties later this year. We require the fulfilment of all three parts of the Durban mandate,
namely, the closing of the current ambition gap in the pre-2020 period through the honouring of existing legal obligations by developed countries and enhanced action; the entry into force of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol; and the adoption in Paris of a new agreement for the post-2020 period that contains all the essential elements, including the means of implementation and the measures relating to loss, damage and response. We seek a fair, ambitious and legally binding agreement in Paris that is applicable to all parties.
In addition, South Africa, as Chair of the G-77 plus China, would not be able to accept a Paris package that is hollow or weak on finance. South Africa has submitted its intended nationally determined contribution to the UNFCCC secretariat ahead of the 1 October deadline, signalling our readiness for Paris.
We join the world in celebrating the 70 years of existence of the United Nations. As we mark this historic anniversary, the reform of the Security Council and the strengthening of the General Assembly and other organs remain a paramount concern. By the end of this session, we should be in a position to adopt a road map, with clear and implementable time frames, on the priorities of this Organization as well as on its reform. We need to do this in order for the United Nations to remain a relevant force and a force for change in the world.
In conclusion, let me express our deep appreciation of the offer made by China when it was addressing the Assembly, an offer that must go through the United Nations. China spelled out the support it intended to give to Africa: a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. We would like to underline our gratitude to China.Just 70 years ago, an earlier generation fought heroically and secured victory in an anti-fascist war, thereby ending a dark chapter in the annals of human history. That victory was hard won. Seventy years ago, humankind, acting with vision and foresight, established the United Nations. That universal and most representative and authoritative international Organization has carried humankind’s hope for a new future and ushered in a new 
era of cooperation. It was a pioneering initiative never undertaken before. Seventy years ago, that generation pooled their wisdom to adopt the Charter of the United Nations, laying the cornerstone for the contemporary international order and establishing the fundamental principles of contemporary international relations. It was an achievement of profound impact.
On 3 September, the Chinese people, together with other peoples of the world, solemnly commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese aggression and fascism in the Second World War. In the main theatre in the East, China made a national sacrifice, suffering over 35 million casualties in its fight against the main troops of Japanese militarism. China not only saved itself and its people from subjugation, but also gave strong support to the forces fighting aggression in the European and Pacific theatres, thereby making a historic contribution to the victory in that anti-fascist world war.
History is like a mirror. Only by drawing on the lessons of history can the world avoid repeating past calamities. We should review history with respect and in full conscience. The past cannot be changed, but the future can be shaped. Bearing history in mind is not to perpetuate hatred. Rather, it is necessary so that humankind does not forget history’s lessons. Remembering history does not mean being obsessed with the past; rather, in doing so, we aim to create a better future and pass the torch of peace from generation to generation.
The United Nations has survived the test of time. Over the past seven decades, it has witnessed the efforts of all countries to uphold peace, build homelands and pursue cooperation. Having reached a historic new starting point, the United Nations needs to address the central issue of how to better promote world peace and development in the twenty-first century. The world is experiencing a historic process of accelerated evolution. The sunshine of peace, development and progress will be powerful enough to penetrate the clouds of war, poverty and backwardness. The movement towards a multipolar world and the rise of emerging markets and developing countries have become an irreversible historical trend. Economic globalization with the advent of the information age has unleashed and greatly boosted social productive forces that have both created unprecedented development opportunities and given rise to new threats and challenges that we must squarely face.
As an ancient Chinese goes, “Our greatest ideal is to create a world truly shared by all”. Peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom are the common values of humankind and the lofty goals of the United Nations. Yet those goals are far from having been achieved, and we must continue our endeavours to meet them. In today’s world, all countries are interdependent and share a common future. We should renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, so as to fashion a new kind of international relations with win-win cooperation at its core and to create an international community that realizes a shared positive future for all of humankind. To achieve that goal, we need to make the following efforts.
We should build partnerships in which countries treat each other as equals, engage in mutual consultation and show mutual understanding. The principle of sovereign equality underpins the Charter of the United Nations. The future of the world must be shaped by all countries. All countries are equals. Those who are big, strong and rich should not bully the small, weak and poor. The principle of sovereignty not only means that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries are inviolable and that their internal affairs are not subject to interference. It also means that the right of all countries to independently choose social systems and development paths should be upheld and that the endeavours of all countries to promote economic and social development and to improve their people’s lives should be respected.
We should be committed to multilateralism and reject unilateralism. We should adopt a new vision of seeking win-win outcomes for all and reject the outdated mindset that one’s gain means the other’s loss or that the winner takes all. Consultation is an important form of democracy, and it should also become an important means of exercising contemporary international governance. We should resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should forge a global partnership at both the international and regional levels, and embrace a new approach to State-to-State relations, one that features dialogue rather than confrontation and seeks partnership rather than alliance.
Major countries should follow the principles of no conflict, no confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation in handling their relations. Big countries should treat small countries as equals and take the right
approach to justice and interests by putting justice before interests.
We should create a security architecture featuring fairness, justice, joint contributions and shared benefits. In an age of economic globalization, the security of all countries is interlinked and has a mutual impact. No country can maintain absolute security by its own efforts alone, and no country can achieve stability on the basis of other countries’ instability. The law of the jungle leaves the weak at the mercy of the strong; that is not the way for countries to conduct their relations. Those who adopt the high-handed approach of using force will find that they are only lifting a rock to drop it on their own feet.
We should abandon the Cold War mentality in all its manifestations and foster a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should give full play to the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council in ending conflict and keeping peace, and adopt the dual approach of seeking peaceful solutions to disputes and taking the actions required to turn hostility into amity.
We should advance international cooperation in both the economic and social fields and take a holistic approach to addressing traditional and non-traditional security threats, so as to prevent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
We should promote open, innovative and inclusive development that benefits all. The 2008 international financial crisis taught us that allowing capital to blindly pursue profit can only create a crisis and that global prosperity cannot be built on the shaky foundation of a market without moral constraints. The growing gap between rich and poor is both unsustainable and unfair. It is important for us to use both the invisible hand and the visible hand to create synergy between market forces and Government function and strive to achieve both efficiency and fairness.
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable. Achieve this goal requires openness, mutual assistance and win-win cooperation. In today’s world, close to 800 million people still live in extreme poverty; nearly 6 million children die before the age of 5 each year; and nearly 60 million children are unable to go to school. The just-concluded United Nations sustainable development Summit adopted the post-2015 development Agenda (resolution 70/1). We must translate our commitments into action and work
together to ensure a bright future in which everyone is free from want, has access to development and lives with dignity.
We should increase inter-civilization exchanges so as to promote harmony, inclusiveness and respect for differences. The world is simply more colourful as a result of its cultural diversity. Diversity breeds exchanges, exchanges create integration, and integration makes progress possible. In their interactions, civilizations must accept their differences. Only through mutual respect, mutual learning and harmonious coexistence can the world maintain its diversity and thrive. Each civilization reflects the unique vision and contribution of its people, and no civilization is superior to any other. Different civilizations should have dialogue and exchanges instead of trying to exclude or replace one another. The history of humankind is a process of active exchanges, interactions and integration among different civilizations. We should respect all civilizations and treat one another as equals. We should draw inspiration from one another to boost the creative development of human civilization.
We should build an ecosystem that puts Mother Nature and green development first. Humankind may utilize nature and even try to transform it, but we are, after all, a part of it. We should care for nature and not place ourselves above it. We should reconcile industrial development with nature and pursue harmony between man and nature to achieve the sustainable development of the world and the all-round development of humankind.
To build a sound ecology is vital for humankind’s future. All members of the international community should work together to build a sound global eco-environment. We should respect nature, follow nature’s ways and protect nature. We should firmly pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable development. China will shoulder its share of responsibility and continue to play its part in this common endeavour. We also urge developed countries to fulfil their historical responsibilities, honour their emission-reduction commitments and help developing countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
The more than 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavouring to realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of the other peoples of the world. We cannot realize the Chinese dream without a peaceful international environment, a stable
international order and the understanding, support and help of the rest of the world. The realization of the Chinese dream will bring more opportunities to other countries and contribute to global peace and development.
China will continue to participate in building world peace. We are committed to peaceful development. No matter how the international landscape may evolve and how strong China may become, China will never seek hegemony or expansion or to establish a sphere of influence. We will continue to contribute to global development and to pursue common development and the win-win strategy of opening up. We are ready to share our development experience and opportunities with other countries, and we invite other countries to board China’s express train of development, so that all of us will achieve common development.
China will continue to uphold the international order. We will stay committed to the path of peaceful development through cooperation. China was the first country to put its signature on the Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to uphold the international order and system, underpinned by the purposes and principles of the Charter. China will continue to stand together with other developing countries. We firmly support the greater representation and voice of developing countries, especially African countries, in the international governance system. In voting at the United Nations, China will always side with the developing countries.
I take this opportunity to announce China’s decision to establish a 10-year, $1 billion peace and development fund to support the work of the United Nations, advance multilateral cooperation and promote world peace and development. I also wish to announce that China will join the new United Nations peacekeeping capabilities readiness system and has therefore decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent formed peacekeeping police force and a standby peacekeeping force of 8,000 troops. I also wish to announce that China will provide a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the development of the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
As the United Nations enters a new decade, let us unite even more closely to forge a new partnership of win-win cooperation and a community of shared future for humankind. Let the vision of beating our swords
into ploughshares and building a war-free world with lasting peace take root in our hearts. Let the aspirations for development, prosperity, fairness and justice spread throughout the world.The founding of the United Nations 70 years ago cast light on the dark twentieth century. That was a pivotal moment for our world. It came not against a backdrop of glorious sunshine and green pastures, but amid the ruins of the Second World War with its more than 50 million graves. As the winter of the Cold War spread its frosty fingers, the mothers and fathers of the United Nations forged the foundations of a new order — an order that is not perfect, and which may never be perfect, but which has often enough protected us from relapse into the old barbarism.
Today, 70 years on, it is clear that we are again living in turbulent times. Millions of people are gravely affected by wars and violence, and more than 60 million people have fled their homes — more than at any time since the end of the Second World War.
The foundations of the United Nations are still strong, but the world order built on them has come loose from its moorings. The old balance of power is under pressure. Powerful new players have emerged on the world stage. Most serious of all, non-State actors are now increasingly responsible for war and violence. They abide by no rules — not even the minimum standards enshrined in the international law of war.
We therefore urgently need new buttresses and pillars so that the order based on the United Nations can withstand the tempests of our times. What form could these new pillars take? How should the world order of tomorrow look?
I do not think that there is a theoretical answer to that question; the only answer is a practical one. Just as the Charter of the United Nations was adopted as a bold response to war and suffering, today new pillars will be built only if States are ready to assume responsibility and work together to find concrete answers to the crises of our times — to poverty and underdevelopment, to refugees and migration, to the devastating civil war in Syria and the failing States across the arc of crisis from Libya to Afghanistan, to religious extremism and terrorism and the murderous deeds of the people who call themselves the Islamic State.
There is, however, one major difference between now and the situation 70 years ago. The world of today
15-29658 37/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
is more closely interconnected than ever before. Borders are becoming blurred. In this age of globalization, some say, the world has become a village. If that is so, then we are all neighbours, and I would advise us to act as good neighbours. We come from very different backgrounds. We have different traditions, religions, values and world views. That diversity must be respected. No world view takes precedence over any other, but I can think of no culture in which people are unaware of what it means to be a good neighbour and in which people do not appreciate living in an atmosphere of good-neighbourliness.
Nobody is investing as much hope in that spirit of good-neighbourliness today than the millions of women, men and children who have fled their homes. My country has assumed its responsibility towards them over the past months. Since the beginning of the year, we have taken in 600,000 refugees. Currently, upwards of 10,000 new refugees are arriving every day. Those statistics show that even we cannot absorb such numbers by ourselves over the long term. We need to arrive at a European solution, together with our European neighbours, as well as with our neighbours around the Mediterranean, especially Turkey.
Secondly, the relief agencies of the United Nations system — the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs — all help people in need, on the spot and with no intermediaries. It is scandalous that those organizations are underfunded to the point that they have to cut food rations and medical aid. Accordingly, I met with the members of the Group of Seven and other partners the day before yesterday, and I am delighted to report that together we have raised an additional $1.8 billion, of which over $100 million will come from Germany, intended for the United Nations relief agencies. That will also help relieve the burden on the neighbouring countries in which the huge majority of refugees arrive, especially Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan. They too need our help, so that one exodus does not trigger another.
But good-neighbourliness comprises more than just humanity and compassion. Good-neighbourliness also presupposes that we agree on joint rules that we all must obey. They include respecting each other’s borders and sovereignty. That fundamental norm is still being violated, even in Europe. The European
Union unanimously condemned Russia’s annexation of the Crimea and the actions in eastern Ukraine, and we responded, not only in terms of condemnation and isolation, but also by launching a political process to defuse the conflict. The Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE) has played an indispensable role in that process from the outset. We want to further strengthen the OSCE as an institution for our common security when we Germans assume its chairmanship next year.
Active political responsibility is also part and parcel of good-neighbourliness. A neighbourhood in which nobody looks beyond their garden gate will not be worth living in for long. People must be vigilant, because there are many conflicts that can only be solved in concert and by means of multilateral diplomacy. While that may take time and perseverance, it works.
This past summer, the five permanent members of the Security Council and Germany concluded an agreement with Iran. After more than 10 years of negotiations, we managed to agree that Iran will never have an atomic bomb and that we can verify this. The negotiations succeeded in bringing a number of actors to the same table, including Russia and the United States of America. The negotiations have therefore proved that while neighbours may not like one another, they can still solve problems together. Indeed they must do so, if living side by side is not to become unbearable for them both.
The agreement that was reached has created common ground on which greater security can be established in the Middle East, if we persevere in our joint efforts. However, the realities are still somewhat different. In Syria, in the fifth year of the war, the slaughter knows no end. We will only put an end to it by acting together. We have to halt the brutality of Al-Assad’s dictatorship, as evinced by its use of barrel bombs and torture. We have to break the control of the Islamic State. We have to silence the guns in Syria and provide the people who live there with access to humanitarian aid.
Moreover, we also share the commons goals of preserving the territorial integrity of Syria and restoring conditions in which all ethnic and religious groups can live in peace with each other, as well as in peace with neighbouring countries. Those are goals that all the actors must believe in, whatever differences may exist between the United States of America and Russia or between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
38/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
We already have a basis for joint action aimed at achieving those goals, as illustrated by Security Council resolution 2139 (2014). We must now implement it together with all the stakeholders as a first step towards defusing the conflict. I appeal to the stakeholders in Syria and Syria’s neighbours — but not only to them. Instead of multilateral decisions, such as those recently taken by Russia, regarding military action in Syria, we need Russia to now take political action that will advocate transition in Syria. That would be an important contribution to ending the stalemate. For that stalemate is a lethal one, which claims new lives every day.
At the risk of repeating myself, let me stress that when dealing with a humanitarian catastrophe as horrifying as the one in Syria, we are all neighbours. That is what must prompt us to crawl out of our diplomatic trenches, for there can be no military solution. Neither supposed eternal truths nor national interests must be allowed to obstruct efforts to take the first steps in defusing the conflict in Syria.
In these turbulent times, the idea of universal good- neighbourliness would be no more than a dream if there were not already an umbrella, a roof, under which universal good-neighbourliness has been practised for decades. Today we need the United Nations more than ever. We need a legitimate and responsive United Nations, and that is why Germany is campaigning for the reform of the United Nations and the Security Council. That is why we are working with others on the major global projects, on the ambitious 2030 Agenda Sustainable Development Goals (resolution 70/1), which has just been adopted and on the equally, if not more, ambitious goals to combat climate change, which we hope to adopt together at the Conference of the Parties in Paris this December.
The United Nations provides a framework, a roof, for our global endeavours. But under that roof, the work must continue at many levels. We Germans believe, first, that the way forward lies in regional cooperation in the European Union and the OSCE and in cooperation with other regional organizations, such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the African Union, among others. Secondly, we are committed to re-establishing and stabilizing State structures across the arc of crisis from Libya to Iraq and Afghanistan. And thirdly, especially in our capacity as President of the Human Rights Council, we are championing the fundamental importance of human rights. For no political order can endure if the people are not secure in their rights.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the founding of the United Nations 70 years ago. As magnificent as that moment was, it also inspires a sense of great humility in me as a German, because the Charter of the United Nations was part of humankind’s response to the war and inhumanity that had originated in my country. In the seven decades that have passed since that time, Germany has been fortunate enough to be gradually and cautiously welcomed back into the heart of the international community. For that, we Germans are grateful, but we are also aware of our responsibility. When Mr. Willy Brandt became the Federal Chancellor of Germany in 1969, he said that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours. At the time, Germany was still divided, and those words were meant as a gesture of reconciliation towards Poland, France and the other European neighbours that had suffered greatly at German hands.
Today, when a Syrian family in Berlin tells me their tale of war and expulsion, Mr. Brandt’s words take on a new meaning. Now the world has become smaller, but the crises are no fewer. It is time for us to once again reaffirm that we Germans want to be a people of good neighbours to others near and far.
Our Organization, the United Nations, is celebrating its seventieth anniversary. Immense progress has been made since it was established as an institution entrusted with the task of maintaining peace, which it has managed to do so on many an occasion. Yet, 70 years later dramas and tragedies, conflicts and wars continue to unfold, and the world must yet once again rise up to significant challenges. Among those of today is the flight of hundreds of thousands — even millions — of refugees from the Middle East and Africa, seeking protection or simply to save their lives. Terrorism strikes at civilian populations and no country is immune from this scourge. There are also conflicts, such as that in
the Middle East, that have remain unresolved for years and years, and that we all know could intensify at any moment.
In the meantime, there are disasters: tsunamis, earthquakes, islands on the verge of disappearing, coastlines washed away, and glaciers melting. That is the reality of climate change.
Faced with such challenges, we must all must shoulder our responsibilities at our respective levels. France, in many domains, has never refused its cooperation. France wished to host the Climate Change Conference, no doubt because we were aware of that terrible failure at Copenhagen and felt that this time we needed to make a good decision, one that can be taken only by the entire international community.
So in Paris, we must ask ourselves one question: is humankind capable of taking the decision to preserve life on the planet? Yes, that single question places us at a level that no one could ever imagine in our generation. Some will say, “But that can happen later, maybe at another conference”. I assure the Assembly here and I will say it quite plainly: if it does not happen in Paris, it will be too late for the world.
Matters have progressed well in recent months, and very strong declarations have been made by precisely those most responsible for global warming — the United States and China, which have made commitments that contribute to changing the current situation. Many calls have come from all continents, stressing the gravity and urgency of the situation and providing detailed testimony on what global warming is now, today. There are some countries that so far have been reluctant — here I am thinking of developing countries — and have asked themselves whether it is really useful to impose restrictions on themselves when the most developed countries have been free of such rules and obligations.
If asked today for a prognosis, and I often am, I will say that nothing has been settled in regard to winning an accord in Paris — nothing. But at the same time, everything remains possible. I see three conditions that must be met for us to be able to say that the Paris Conference was truly successful, worthy of us and of what was entrusted to us when we were asked to host the Conference.
The first condition is to be able to conclude a universal agreement applicable to all, one that is binding and differentiated so that everyone can do their own part, and not more. To date, 90 countries — half
of those sitting in the United Nations — have submitted their national contribution, which represents 80 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions — already a considerable figure. That means that half of the world has not yet responded. I therefore invite them to do so and to do so quickly so that we can determine as of now what, given the contributions from every State, we can assure the world will be the limit on global warming.
The second condition that will signify our success or failure is to be able to ensure that our resolution, our action, is long-lasting. The Paris accord must not be an end or a conclusion, but rather a starting point, the beginning of a process. Through incorporating a review mechanism into the agreement, we will be able to regularly review, periodically measure and even revise every five years our national contributions. That is what will allow us to be sure that at the end of the century, well beyond our time, the planet will not havewarmed by more than 2°C.
The third condition that will determine failure or success is developed countries making financial commitments. I am aware that already in Copenhagen the figure of $100 billion was announced to ensure the financing of energy transition, adaptation and technology transfer. We must collect $100 billion by 2020, but it must be said today so as to ensure that emerging countries, developing countries, can feel confident that they will be aided and supported so that this technological leap, the sharing of technology, will come about.
Yes, one hundred billion dollars. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is responsible for providing an initial estimate, to be presented at the Lima meeting. I wish here to thank the President of Peru for continuing the work he undertook at the twentieth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The OECD will provide the initial estimate, as we have not reached $100 billion yet. So we have two months before the Paris Conference to continue to mobilize the World Bank, major development banks, financial institutions, States and private stakeholders so that we can reach $100 billion. Everyone should set an example. France abides by the rule that when serving as the host country; we must perform better than our guests, or at least as well as them.
I am announcing here today that France’s annual climate funding, which is €3 billion today, will be more than €5 billion in 2020. That increase in aid will
not be merely through loans, but also in the form of grants, because it is with grants — funds transferred directly and that will not be reimbursed — that we can powerfully promote the adaptation of developing countries to the effects of climate change.
In brief, if we are in a position to meet those three requirements — that is, a universal agreement, one that can be revised and will be revised every 5 years, and funding sufficient to cover everything that we will have to cover in emerging needs and future technology — then in Paris in two months we will be able to say we have risen to the challenge; not just a rendez-vous with history, but with the future.
It is good that the international community is able to look to the future and to say what sort of world we want. We did it with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals, and we must do it for climate issues. But what is expected of the United Nations is not simply to ensure — though this is already considerable — that the world will be liveable at the end of the century, but that it is liveable today, when conflicts and wars confront us with tragedies that in 1945, when the United Nations system was founded, nobody imagined we would ever see again.
Today, it is Syria that once again calls on us to mobilize and to intervene, as many speakers have already stated. Everyone considers that this is a tragedy striking the Syrian population. Everyone has said that we must find a solution. Let us look for it together. But first, we should assess what has not been done.
Three years ago, when I stood at this rostrum to address the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.6), there had already been 30,000 victims of the Syrian tragedy. There are now 250,000, and 12,000 children have died, victims of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. The Syrian tragedy began with a revolution led by those who wanted to challenge the dictatorship of Bashar Al-Assad. At that time, there were no terrorists, there were no fundamentalist groups — there was a dictator who was massacring a people. And the refugees whom we are discussing today, the refugees in the camps, the displaced, 8 million of them — this mass of women, men and children — have not just fled a war. For more than three years they have been fleeing from the regime of Bashar Al-Assad. And still today that same regime is raining bombs on innocent civilians.
But it is not because there is a terrorist group that itself massacres, kills, rapes, destroys — including
destruction of the common heritage of humankind — that some form of pardon, of amnesty, should necessarily be accorded to the regime that created this situation, as if the existence of a terrorist group that commits the worst kinds of evil acts could furnish the regime with a way to share in what is good. No, all those women, men and children are victims of this tragedy, which is generated by the alliance between terrorism and dictatorship. No solution can be found outside of a political process.
France, which, due to its history and also its links that bind it to that part of the world, intends to shoulder its responsibilities. It has already done so recently, including through armed action, through force. France wants to work with everyone; it does not exclude any country — neighbouring countries, which are most affected, the Gulf countries, but also Iran, the permanent members of the Security Council, as well as Europeans. We want to work with everyone, with everyone who wants to work with us.
There is talk of a coalition. This broad coalition is possible; it is even desirable and necessary in order to put an end to what is happening in Syria. But this coalition must have a clear basis or it will never see the light of day. The basis was provided in Geneva more than three years ago. And what did the Geneva agreement say? It specified a transitional Government with full powers, including members of the present Government and the opposition, formed on the basis of mutual consent. That is the basis; let us use it to move forward.
But I can see, in the context of this ongoing adversity, that some are making every diplomatic effort to incorporate Bashar Al-Assad in that process. But one cannot make the victims and the executioner work together. Al-Assad is at the origin of the problem; he cannot be part of the solution. We have to put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people, but we must also look beyond the political transition that has to be sought, the broad coalition that has to be formed, this condition that has to be laid down, to a new Government capable of uniting all those who have fought, but without the dictator.
We also have to be thinking about all the refugees. Until now, those refugees have been in neighbouring countries, but there too, the international community turned a blind eye because it was far away. Today those refugees, who can endure no more, are starting a long march. Yesterday, I recalled in the Assembly (see A/70/ PV.11) that 80 per cent of the world’s refugees — refugees
because of wars, conflicts, climate, poverty — are in the South. Solidarity with the South is coming from the South. Frequently, it is the most deprived who welcome the poorest. There comes a time when the refugees start to walk, and they can no longer be stopped. If we want to avoid what we have seen — tragedies, crossings that endanger the lives of passengers — if we want to prevent smugglers and criminals from using despair to further enrich the coffers of terrorism, then we must act.
Europe has hosted refugees coming not only from Syria, but also from Iraq, Eritrea and the Sudan. That was our duty, because Europe is based on values and principles, and the right to asylum is part of this common foundation that unites all the European countries, and which must continue uniting them. Otherwise, it is not the kind of Europe that we wanted.
But while Europe should discharge its duty, the world must help refugees. What have we learned those past days and weeks? That the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), due to lack of funds, no longer has the resources to ensure the necessary support and assistance to the populations in question. What have we learned? That the World Food Programme no longer has the means to provide all the refugees basic necessities and sufficient food. What have we learned? That in some neighbouring countries, refugees could not work.
This is the start of the cycle one would have imagined. If we want to reverse the flows, if we want to keep refugees as close as possible to their home countries, then we must fund UNHCR more, we must help neighbouring countries — Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey — but also countries in Africa, transit countries, countries where there is no migration. We need a major plan now, because tragedy is calling to act and to avert other tragedies. In that context, too, France is doing what it can, and must do what it should. And concerning the World Food Programme, France has decided to immediately increase by €100 million its support for United Nations agencies that are helping countries neighbouring Syria.
I want to end my speech by saying that the legitimacy of an Organization such as the United Nations rests on its credibility. If the United Nations does not have the capacity to resolve conflicts that have been going on for far too long, if the United Nations cannot resolve tragedies or ease the situation of civilian populations, then our helplessness will condemn us. If we want our
Organization — which is celebrating its seventieth anniversary — to have a future worthy of that which the founders imagined, we cannot avoid reform of the United Nations.
France calls for the enlargement of the Security Council. France calls for a different representation in the Security Council. France calls for continents to clearly bear responsibility for the world in the framework of the Security Council. France wants the permanent members of the Security Council to no longer resort to the right of veto in cases of mass atrocities. How can we tolerate that the United Nations, even today, remains paralysed when the worst is unfolding? There again, let us lead by example. I pledge here today that France will never use its right of veto in matters involving mass atrocities. The right of veto as it was introduced when the United Nations was founded was not the right to block; it was the right to act. We have to act. We can act. We have been showing that we can for 70 years. Here, today, we can act to settle the tragedies of today and to save the planet tomorrow. Let us act.Nearly 70 years ago, the first meetings of the General Assembly and the Security Council took place in London. They marked the point when the world came together to turn its back on war and to seek to institutionalize the conditions for peace. By that process, from the ashes of the Second World War, our predecessors embarked upon a shared quest for peace, development and human dignity.
And they succeeded where the League of Nations had failed. From 51 Members at its inception to 193 now, the United Nations has become a powerful and universally recognized expression of our collective will to find solutions to the most difficult challenges we face. It is the cornerstone of the rules-based international system and an affirmation of the value we attach to human dignity and hope.
Britain is proud to have played its role in the birth of the Organization. And proud too, 70 years later, of the active role we play in international affairs as the only Security Council member, indeed the only major economy in the world, that both meets the NATO 2 per cent target for defence spending and the United Nations 0.7 per cent target for development spending.
But seven decades on, the daily reality for millions of people is a very far cry from the ideals set out in the Charter of the United Nations. Despite the historic work delivered under the Millennium Development Goals, more than a billion people still live on less than $1.25 a day. Insecurity, extremism and conflict in the
Middle East have driven millions of people to abandon their homes, creating a humanitarian emergency on an unprecedented scale. And many millions more still live under regimes in which they have no say about how they are governed, and in which human rights and fundamental freedoms are denied.
At the same time, the rules-based international system that keeps the peace between nations is being undermined by States willing to violate the territorial integrity of others or to breach the most fundamental prohibitions on weapons of mass destruction. And alongside these challenges, we face the longer term threats of climate change, global pandemics and anti-microbial resistance — threats that we must tackle effectively now, if we are not to put the lives of future generations at risk.
But it is in Syria and Iraq, in the crucible of human civilization, that our collective values and our will to act are being most immediately challenged. The twin evils of Al-Assad’s murderous regime and the brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) or Daesh, have inflicted suffering on the Syrian people on an almost unimaginable scale. The humanitarian crisis, the tide of refugees seeking sanctuary in neighbouring countries and in Europe, underscore the urgent need to end the conflict and represent huge tests of our resolve.
I want to pay tribute to the extraordinary generosity of Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan, which have given a temporary home to many millions of refugees and which have accepted this role stoically for years. It is incumbent upon all of us to support them as they bear that burden, and to ensure that the United Nations appeals for Syria are fully funded. And I am proud that the United Kingdom is making the second-largest contribution of any country to the humanitarian mission in the region.
We judge it important that we seek to support those who have been displaced as close as possible to their homes. Because there will be a new Syria to build, post-Al-Assad, and that country will need to draw on the talent of all the Syrian people. But a humanitarian response alone is not adequate. We share a responsibility to act to end the bloody civil war and create an inclusive political process, and to work together to crush ISIL and banish its twisted ideology from the face of the Earth. The United Kingdom will continue to be a leading member of the international coalition against ISIL, including in carrying out more air strikes in Iraq than any other country except the United States, for as
15-29595 19/23

A/70/PV.18 29/09/2015
long as it takes to prevail in what will ultimately be a generational struggle against the Islamist extremist ideology that drives it.
But the defeat of ISIL on its own will not bring peace to Syria. An inclusive political settlement is the only sustainable way to end the suffering of the Syrian people. We must redouble our efforts to build a political process under Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, and to hold to account those who have committed crimes during the conflict. Positive movement on this agenda is a crucial test for the United Nations. Progress at the Security Council has been blocked for too long. All parties must now put narrow interests aside and cooperate for the good of the Syrian people and to reassert the values of this Organization.
Urgent though the crisis in Syria is — and to that we could add the crises in Yemen, Somalia and Libya — we cannot neglect the need to act now to prevent future threats to global security from arising. But that collective action will truly work only if we have a shared analysis of the real causes of poverty, injustice, and the conflict that feeds upon it. We need a common recognition that strong, transparent and effective institutions, open economies and open societies, the rule of law, and freedom from corruption are the conditions that will allow development to flourish over the long term and so reduce the drivers that fuel conflict. They provide what Prime Minister David Cameron has called “the golden thread of development” and they are vital to the success of the Sustainable Development Goals. Each country must, of course, follow its own path to prosperity. But as we help the poorest countries overcome conflict, poverty and instability and to move up the development curve, it is in all our interests that that development be sustainable over the long term.
And the foundation for all sustainable development is security. As a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom places security as the prerequisite to good governance, strong institutions and economic development at the core of its approach. So, as the Prime Minister pledged yesterday, the United Kingdom will resume a significant role in enabling peacekeeping operations, particularly in Africa, where the United Kingdom will support efforts by the United Nations and the African Union to end some of the world’s most destabilizing conflicts, conflicts that are prompting mass migration from South Sudan and sustaining terrorist groups in Somalia.
But there is another important truth to understand — security within countries can deliver the benefits of economic growth only if it is matched by security among countries. Britain has always believed that the stability we seek in relations between nations is best realized through the framework of laws, norms and institutions that together constitute the rules- based international system that was developed after the Second World War, with the Charter of the United Nations at its heart.
Fundamental to that system is the fact that States should respect one another’s territorial integrity and political independence. When States challenge those rules, all of us have a duty to come swiftly and unambiguously to the defence of the victims. That is why we stand shoulder to shoulder with the Ukrainian people. Illegal actions and State aggression must have consequences, or the international order will be fatally undermined. We, the United Nations, insist that differences and disputes be resolved within the framework of international law, not outside it.
The collective will to tackle threats to our security must be extended to the threat we face from climate change. It represents not just a threat to the environment and to our prosperity, but to our security too. The impact of rising sea levels and rising global temperatures will be felt by all of us, but it will hit hardest many of the poorest countries and those who are least able to adapt. So the United Kingdom will not only cut its emissions at home but, as our Prime Minister announced on Monday, also increase its support to climate finance for vulnerable countries to $9 billion over the next five years. We must work for a strong and effective deal at the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris in December, built upon clear commitments from all nations to lower emissions targets still further, and a collective commitment to maintain the goal of limiting global warming to two degrees.
Seventy years after the first session of the General Assembly, the United Nations stands battered by the waves of international crises but unbowed, proudly at the heart of the international order. Over seven decades, it has played a critical role in addressing almost every challenge we have faced. And crucial to its future success will be further evolution, embracing change, and maintaining relevance in this twenty-first century. The United Nations must strive to represent the new realities of our age with a reformed Security
20/23 15-29595

29/09/2015 A/70/PV.18
Council. It must have the best possible leadership, with a transparent system for selecting the next Secretary-General. And he — or dare I suggest perhaps she? — will have to head a more efficient Organization ensuring that every cent it receives from its Member States is used to maximum effect.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, and as a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom will champion that reform agenda, and we will continue to promote the ideals that the United Nations represents. Seventy years ago, a generation resolved to shape their world on a vision for peace, security and universal values. Today, realizing that vision in its totality still eludes us, but we have demonstrated that when we work together collectively we can take great strides towards it. Now we must resolve to demonstrate that collective will; to recognize that it is not only our moral duty, but also in the enlightened national interests of all of us to act; to respond to the grave humanitarian crises we face; to tackle the causes of conflict, poverty and instability; and to uphold the rules-based international system.
The world is a better place because of the foundation of the United Nations by our predecessors 70 years ago. By holding firm to our ideals as United Nations Members in the face of all challenges and all temptations, we will preserve their legacy and continue to build the foundations for a better age, an age of peace, hope and dignity for all.
The United Nations is marking its seventieth anniversary this year, making this session of the General Assembly a historic one. I hope that this year will also be historic for the United Nations in terms of outcomes. I would like to assure the President that he will receive India’s full support in his efforts.
Seventy years ago, the foundations of the United Nations were laid at the San Francisco Conference, in a city on the west coast of this country. India was one of the signatory countries of the Charter of the United Nations, although at that time we were not independent. We obtained our independence two years later. When the United Nations was established, a rather diminutive-looking man with the powerful weapon of non-violence was writing the final act in a struggle that would become a symbol of hope for the colonized and the oppressed everywhere. I am grateful that the United Nations has proclaimed the birthday of this extraordinary man as the International Day of Non-Violence. It is a pleasing coincidence that tomorrow is 2 October, and
42/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that we will be celebrating his birthday then. Mahatma Gandhi said, “The difference between what we do and what we are capable of doing would suffice to solve most of the world’s problems”. His message is most fitting in the context of the United Nations.
The seventieth year of any human being’s life is a milestone from which to look back and reflect on what one has achieved and what one has lost. Similarly, for people associated with an institution, the seventieth year provides an opportunity to analyse whether the institution has fulfilled its purpose and achieved the goals set for it at its establishment. Today we need to ask ourselves whether we have fulfilled the purpose and achieved the goals for which the United Nations was established 70 years ago. When I ask myself that question, I receive an affirmative answer for some questions and a negative one for others. For example, the United Nations has been successful in preventing a third world war, assisting decolonization and dismantling apartheid. It has been successful in combating global epidemics, reducing global hunger and promoting democracy and human rights.
Yet, when we ask ourselves whether we have been able to prevent conflicts taking place in various parts of the world, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to find permanent solutions to those conflicts, the answer is “no”. If we ask whether we were able to show the path of peace to a world which is treading the path of violence, the answer is “no”. According to those parameters, the United Nations appears to be ineffective at maintaining international peace and security, an institution that has failed to effectively address new challenges in that area.
Today, the world is ravaged by war on three continents, with the Security Council powerless or unwilling to stem the f low of blood. Traditional solutions that rely on force have only exacerbated problems. We must ask ourselves if we have the political will to craft alternatives to conflict and to pursue them with commitment and single-minded dedication. Nowhere is such a goal more important than in peacekeeping. Under the blue flag, men and women are constantly working to prevent conflict, protect civilians and sustain peace processes. With 180,000 peacekeepers deployed so far, India has been the largest contributor to international security provided by the United Nations. Even today, about 8,000 Indian military and police personnel are participating in 10 peacekeeping missions, operating in highly challenging environments.
India remains committed to continuing its support to United Nations peacekeeping operations and even to enhancing its contributions, as announced by our Prime Minister at the leaders summit on peacekeeping. Our new contributions will cover all aspects of peacekeeping: personnel, enablers and training. At the same time, no dilution of the cardinal principles of peacekeeping must occur. The fact that troop-contributing countries have no role in the formulation of mandates, which are often amended without consultation, is a matter of concern. That is a clear violation of Article 44 of the Charter of the United Nations. We also believe that peacekeeping operations cannot be a substitute for political solutions, a fact that the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations underscored.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the more than 3,300 peacekeepers, including 161 from India, who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We stand ready to contribute to the memorial wall for United Nations peacekeepers, which was approved by the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
The safety of our peacekeepers, the security of our nations, and indeed the future of the international community itself now depend on how we respond to the greatest threat that we face today: terrorism. It is a threat that India has lived with for more than a quarter of a century, and one that was tragically brought home to this very city in the autumn of 2001. Since then, we have not adequately countered the proliferation of terrorist acts, the rise of extremist ideologies and the impunity of States that back terrorism.
Only organized international action can defeat international terrorism. The world must demonstrate zero tolerance for terrorists who kill and maim innocent civilians and base its action on the principle of prosecute or extradite. The international community must make countries that provide financing to terrorists and safe havens for their training, arming and operations pay a heavy price.
Equally important, the establishment of an international legal regime, under a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, can no longer be held up. Nineteen years ago, in 1996, India proposed such a regime at the United Nations, but the Member States have been unable to adopt it and have become mired in the issue of definition. We have to understand that no such distinction exists as good terrorists and bad terrorists, and that terrorism cannot be linked
15-29658 43/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
to any religion. A terrorist is a terrorist, and anyone who commits crimes against humanity cannot have a religion. Therefore, I appeal to everyone to come together during this seventieth anniversary year of the United Nations and to pledge to unanimously adopt a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
While on the subject of terrorism, I take this opportunity to share the challenges that we face in our ties with Pakistan. None of us can accept that terrorism is a legitimate instrument of statecraft. The world shared our outrage at the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, in which citizens of many nations were helplessly butchered. That the mastermind behind the attack is walking free is an affront to the entire international community. Not only have past assurances in this regard not been honoured, but new cross-border terrorist attacks have taken place recently, and two terrorists from across the border have been captured alive. We all know that these attacks are meant to destabilize India and legitimize Pakistan’s illegal occupation of parts of the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir and its claim to the rest of it.
Let me use this occasion to spell out our approach clearly. India remains open to dialogue but finds talks and terrorism to be incompatible. Yesterday, the Prime Minister of Pakistan proposed what he termed a new four-point peace initiative. I would like to respond to this. We do not need four points. We need just one — give up terrorism and let us sit down and talk. This will solve all the problems. That was precisely what was discussed and decided by the two Prime Ministers in Ufa this July. Let us hold talks, at the level of national security advisers, on all issues connected to terrorism and arrange an early meeting of our Directors-General of Military Operations to address the situation on the border. If the response is serious and credible, India is prepared to address all outstanding issues through bilateral dialogue. Even as we counter the menace of terrorism, we must acknowledge that real social and economic progress remains a critical goal. The elimination of basic human want leads almost invariably to more peaceful societies, as is evidenced by a map of the conflicts that engulf parts of the world.
Just a few days ago, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), with the Sustainable Development Goals at its core. They constitute a blueprint that is more comprehensive and holistic than the Millennium Development Goals. However, their successful implementation will require political resolve and an inclination to
share both technology and financial resources, while simultaneously improving our delivery mechanisms. As a woman and an elected Member of Parliament, it has been my firm conviction that there is a shortcut to real social change, and that is empowering the girl child. Our Government’s policy and our Prime Minister’s programme of Educate the Girl Child to Empower Her was conceived with that vision.
Our future rests on our building a sustainable planet for our children and our children’s children. As we prepare to meet in two months’ time, in Paris, the world expects us to deliver an ambitious and credible agreement on climate change. We have a duty to take common action, but in doing so we must keep in mind the larger historical contributions of some and the differentiated responsibilities of others. If Mahatma Gandhi were among us today, he would ask if we have used the resources of the planet for our needs or for our greed. He would also ask if adapting our lifestyle choices and reducing extravagant consumption would help us to correct our course. For this reason, the agreement in Paris needs to be comprehensive and equitable, while delivering concrete action. Developing countries can do more if they are enabled in their efforts by support from developed countries in the areas of finance, technology transfer and capacity- building. India is and always has been a willing partner in global efforts towards this goal. We will play our due role in reaching a meaningful, equitable and effective agreement in Paris.
India’s reverence for the environment is based on our traditions, which have always held nature as sacred. The health of the planet is tied to our own well-being, and it is this holistic approach that guided us in our call for the First International Day of Yoga, which was celebrated with much fervour in 192 countries of the world, as well as in this hallowed institution. I thank the international community for its enthusiasm and support in this regard. I hope that the seed that has been planted will grow into a magnificent tree.
I also congratulate States for their prompt action in tackling the threat of global epidemics. By linking our efforts, we have managed to eradicate smallpox and nearly eradicate polio. HIV/AIDS has been controlled and, more recently, the Ebola outbreak was contained, although not before an unacceptably high price in lives had been paid. The Ebola epidemic is an important example of how national action and international support can resolve a global crisis. We are proud that
44/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
India played its due part in these efforts. Inspired by our successes, we must redouble our efforts to eradicate other diseases, whether it be tuberculosis or malaria.
Natural disasters and man-made conflicts also deserve our coordinated response. In recent months, the international community has been found wanting in its response to the refugee crisis caused by the conflict situations in Syria, Iraq and Libya. What is needed is a swift response backed by political will. Our own response to humanitarian crises in our neighbourhood has been quick, responsive and holistic. Whether in Nepal or Yemen, India has emerged as a net security provider, assisting not only our nationals but those of other countries that sought our help. India will be hosting the first Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in November 2016, when the topic will be the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Like the United Nations, India has walked a long way these past 70 years. As 1.25 billion of my countrymen would attest, we have done so happy in the knowledge that our democratic traditions are deeply embedded. Nonetheless, every once in a while, there is a need for transformative change — one that can reinvigorate the nation and redeem its spirit. Ever since the new Government of Prime Minister Modi took office a year and a half ago, we have committed ourselves to this renewal. It is one that has enabled India to play its rightful role in international affairs, while also becoming the fastest-growing major economy in the world. The driving force of this comprehensive renewal has been premised on the motto of sabka saath, sabka vikas, which places emphasis on the welfare of all our people.
At the same time, we have started to reach out enthusiastically to all our partners in the international community. Our efforts have focused, first and foremost, on our immediate neighbourhood and the results have been truly transformational. We have also reached out to our extended neighbourhood, renewing ancient linkages and constructing modern economic partnerships, including, most recently, a summit with 14 Pacific island nations. Our Act East policy has replaced the previous one, Look East, with a more vigorous and proactive engagement in an economically vibrant region, and complements our Link West engagement.
We remain committed to the Middle East peace process, which is key to preventing further radicalization of the region. We continue to hope that a
solution can be reached to the Palestinian question. We have also qualitatively upgraded our relations with all the major Powers.
Africa is a region with which we have historical bonds, a solidarity born out of a common struggle against colonialism and a belief in a future of shared prosperity. Later this month we will host the third India- Africa Forum Summit, the first time that the leaders of all 54 African countries have been invited.
As a nuclear-weapon State, India is aware of its responsibility, and its support for global, non-discriminatory and verifiable nuclear disarmament is undiminished.
As with nations, so it is with institutions. Only periodic renewal can provide an organization with meaning and purpose. In a world that continues to be dominated by wealthy and influential nations, the United Nations notion of sovereign equality has permitted the developing world to question some unfair norms. But it has not permitted a fundamental challenge to the inequity of a system built for a world that longer exists. If we are to preserve the centrality and legitimacy of the United Nations as the custodian of global peace, security and development, the most urgent and pressing need is reform of the Security Council. This is the need of the hour. How can we have a Security Council in 2015 that still reflects the geopolitical architecture of 1945? How can we have a Security Council that still does not give Africa and Latin America seats as permanent members?
We must include more developing nations in the decision-making structures of the Security Council. And we must change the way it does business by doing away with outdated and non-transparent working methods. Giving it more legitimacy and balance would restore its credibility and equip it to confront the challenges of our times. We are happy that during the past year, under the leadership of Their Excellences Mr. Sam Kutesa and Mr. Courtenay Rattray, we have achieved what we had been unable to do in two decades of discussions — a text for negotiations unanimously adopted by the General Assembly as decision 69/560. That first but critical step must be a springboard for action at this historic seventieth session.
For an organization such as the United Nations, 70 years has a unique significance. It is an occasion for revitalization and for renewal. I invite everyone in this Hall to contemplate the idea of the United Nations as
15-29658 45/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
a banyan tree. In the eastern tradition, the banyan tree connotes wisdom, and yet is non-judgemental and all- encompassing. It has not one trunk but many, growing outwards, each connected to the others as well as to the sky and the earth. Its expansive branches provide shade and relief, and its base has always been a place for discussion and debate.
At 70, unlike the men and women who might have planted its seed, the banyan is still young. But without constant regeneration and expansion, it withers away. That could be the fate that awaits the United Nations. Either we can take this historic opportunity to renew this critical institution or we can condemn it to irrelevance and tragic withering. We could easily lose ourselves in a labyrinth of our own creation, but if we seize the day, we will see a United Nations growing to its full potential, a United Nations that can reduce the gap between what it does and what it is capable of doing, a mighty banyan tree providing the canopy for a peaceful and prosperous humankind. I end my statement with the hope that the United Nations will grow into such a banyan tree.
I bring greetings from Jerusalem, the city in which the Jewish people’s hopes and prayers for peace for all of humanity have echoed throughout the ages.
Thirty-one years ago, as Israel’s Ambassador to the United Nations, I stood at this rostrum for the first time. I spoke that day against a draft resolution sponsored by Iran to expel Israel from the United Nations. Then, as now, the United Nations was obsessively hostile towards Israel, the one true democracy in the Middle East. Then, as now, some sought to deny the one and only Jewish State a place among nations. I ended that first speech by saying, “Gentlemen, check your fanaticism at the door” (A/39/PV.32, para. 83).
More than three decades later, as the Prime Minister of Israel, I am again privileged to speak from this rostrum. And for me, that privilege has always come with a moral responsibility to speak the truth. So after three days of listening to world leaders praise the nuclear deal with Iran, I begin my speech today by saying, “Ladies and gentlemen, check your enthusiasm at the door”. The deal does not make peace more likely.
By fuelling Iran’s aggressions with billions of dollars in sanctions relief, it makes war more likely.
Just look at what Iran has done in the past six months alone, since the framework agreement was announced in Lausanne. Iran boosted its supply of devastating weapons to Syria. Iran sent more soldiers of its Revolutionary Guard into Syria. Iran sent thousands of Afghani and Pakistani Shiite fighters to Syria. Iran did all that to prop up Al-Assad’s brutal regime. Iran also shipped tons of weapons and ammunition to the Houthi rebels in Yemen, including another shipment just two days ago. Iran threatened to topple Jordan. Iran’s proxy, Hizbullah, smuggled into Lebanon SA-22 missiles to down our planes and Yakhont cruise missiles to sink our ships. Iran supplied Hizbullah with precision-guided surface-to-surface missiles and attack drones so it can accurately hit any target in Israel. Iran aided Hamas and Islamic Jihad in building armed drones in Gaza. Iran also made clear its plans to open two new terror fronts against Israel, promising to arm Palestinians in the West Bank and sending its Revolutionary Guard generals to the Golan Heights, from which its operatives recently fired rockets on northern Israel.
Israel will continue to respond forcefully to any attacks against it from Syria. Israel will continue to act to prevent the transfer of strategic weapons to Hizbullah from and through Syrian territory. Every few weeks, Iran and Hizbullah set up new terrorist cells in cities throughout the world. Three such cells were recently uncovered in Kuwait, Jordan and Cyprus. In May, security forces in Cyprus raided a Hizbullah agent’s apartment in the city of Larnaca. There they found five tons of ammonium nitrate — roughly the same amount of ammonium nitrate used to blow up the Federal Building in Oklahoma City. And that was just in one apartment, in one city, in one country. But Iran is setting up dozens of terrorist cells like that around the world. They are setting up those terror cells in this hemisphere as well.
I repeat, Iran has been doing all of this — everything that I have just described — just within the past six months, when it was trying to convince the world to remove the sanctions. Just imagine what Iran will do after those sanctions are lifted. Unleashed and unmuzzled, Iran will go on the prowl, devouring more and more prey. In the wake of the nuclear deal, Iran is spending billions of dollars on weapons and satellites. Does anyone here think that Iran is doing that to
15-29658 27/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
advance peace? Does anyone here think that hundreds of billions of dollars in sanctions relief and fat contracts will turn that rapacious tiger into a kitten? People who think so should think again.
In 2013, President Rouhani began his so-called charm offensive here at the United Nations. Two years later, Iran is executing more political prisoners, escalating its regional aggression and rapidly expanding its global terror net. They say that actions speak louder than words, but, in Iran’s case, their words speak as loudly as their actions. Just listen to the Deputy Commander of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Qods Force. In February, he said that “the Islamic Revolution is not limited by geographic borders”. He boasted that Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine and Yemen are among the countries being “conquered by the Islamic Republic of Iran”. He said “conquered”.
For those here who believe that the deal in Vienna will bring about a change in Iran’s policy, listen to what Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, said five days after the nuclear deal was reached: “Our policies towards the arrogant Government of the United States will not change”. The United States, he vowed, will continue to be Iran’s enemy. While giving the mullahs more money is likely to fuel more repression inside Iran, it will definitely fuel more aggression outside Iran.
As the leader of a country defending itself every day against Iran’s growing aggression, I wish that I could take comfort in the claim that this deal blocks Iran’s path to nuclear weapons, but I cannot, because it does not. This deal does place several constraints on Iran’s nuclear programme, and rightly so, because the international community recognizes that Iran is particularly dangerous. But, here is the catch. Under this deal, if Iran does not change its behaviour — in fact, even if it becomes more dangerous in the years to come — the most important constraints will still be automatically lifted by year 10 and by year 15. That would place a militant Islamic terror regime weeks away from having the fissile material for an entire arsenal of nuclear bombs. That just does not make any sense.
I have said that if Iran wants to be treated like a normal country, let it act like a normal country. This deal will treat Iran like a normal country even if it remains a dark theocracy that conquers its neighbours, sponsors terrorism worldwide and chants, “Death to Israel, death to America!” Does anyone seriously
believe that flooding a radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? Does anyone here really believe that a theocratic Iran with sharper claws and sharper fangs will be more likely to change its stripes? There is a general rule that I have learned — and that that those here must have learned it in their lifetime — which is that when bad behaviour is rewarded, it only gets worse.
I have long said that the greatest danger that the world faces is the coupling of militant Islam with nuclear weapons. I am gravely concerned that the nuclear deal with Iran will prove to be the marriage certificate of that unholy union. I know that some well-intentioned people sincerely believe that this deal is the best way to block Iran’s path to the bomb. However, one of history’s most important, yet least learned lessons, is that the best intentions do not prevent the worst outcomes. The vast majority of Israelis believe that this nuclear deal with Iran is a very bad deal. What makes matters even worse is that we see the world celebrating this bad deal, rushing to embrace and do business with a regime that is openly committed to our destruction.
Last week, Major General Salehi, the Commander of Iran’s Army, proclaimed
“We will annihilate Israel, for sure. We are glad that we are in the forefront of executing the Supreme Leader’s order to destroy Israel.”
As for the Supreme Leader himself, a few days after the nuclear deal was announced, he released his latest book. It is a 400-page screed detailing his plan to destroy the State of Israel. Last month, Khamenei once again made his genocidal intentions clear. Before Iran’s top clerical body, the Assembly of Experts, he spoke about Israel, which is home to over 6 million Jews. He pledged that “there will be no Israel in 25 years”. Seventy years after the murder of 6 million Jews, Iran’s rulers promise to destroy my country, murder my people, and the response from this body, the response from nearly every one of the Governments represented here, has been absolutely nothing — utter silence, deafening silence.
Perhaps members of the Assembly can now understand why Israel is not joining in the general celebration of the deal. If Iran’s rulers were working to destroy other members’ countries, perhaps they would be less enthusiastic about the deal. If Iran’s terror proxies were firing thousands of rockets at other members’ cities, perhaps they would be more measured in their praise. And if the deal were unleashing a nuclear
28/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
arms race in their neighbourhoods, perhaps they would be more reluctant to celebrate.
But no one should think that Iran is a danger only to Israel. Besides Iran’s aggression in the Middle East and its terror campaign around the world, Iran is also building intercontinental ballistic missiles whose sole purpose is to carry nuclear warheads. Now this fact needs to be remembered: Iran already has missiles that can reach Israel. So those intercontinental ballistic missiles that Iran is building are not meant for us. They are meant for others — for Europe, for America, for raining down mass destruction anytime, anywhere.
It is not easy to oppose something that is embraced by the greatest Powers in the world. Believe me, it would be far easier to remain silent. But throughout our history, the Jewish people have learned the heavy price of silence. And as the Prime Minister of the Jewish State, as someone who knows that history, I refuse to be silent. I will say it again. The days when the Jewish people remained passive in the face of genocidal enemies — those days are over. Not being passive means speaking up about those dangers. We have spoken up, we are speaking up, and we will continue to do so. Not being passive also means defending ourselves against those dangers. We have. We are. And we will.
Israel will not allow Iran to break in, to sneak in or to walk into the nuclear-weapons club. I know that preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons remains the official policy of the international community. But no one should question Israel’s determination to defend itself against those who seek our destruction. For in every generation, there have been those who sought to destroy our people. In antiquity, we faced destruction from the ancient empires of Babylon and Rome. In the Middle Ages, we faced inquisitions and expulsions. And in modern times, we faced pogroms and the Holocaust. Yet the Jewish people persevered.
And now another regime has arisen, swearing to destroy Israel. That regime would be wise to consider this fact: I stand here today representing Israel, a country that is 67 years young but is the nation State of a people nearly 4,000 years old. The empires of Babylon and Rome are not represented in this Hall of nations, nor is the 1,000-year Reich. Those seemingly invincible empires are long gone. But Israel lives. The people of Israel live.
The rebirth of Israel is a testament to the indomitable spirit of my people. For a hundred generations, the
Jewish people dreamed of returning to the land of Israel. Even in our darkest hours — and we had so many — even in our darkest hours, we never gave up hope of rebuilding our eternal capital, Jerusalem. The establishment of Israel made it possible to realize that dream. It has enabled us to live as a free people in our ancestral homeland. It has enabled us to embrace Jews who have come from the four corners of the Earth to find refuge from persecution. They have come from war-torn Europe, from Yemen, Iraq, and Morocco, from Ethiopia and the Soviet Union, from a hundred other lands. And today, as a rising tide of anti-Semitism once again sweeps across Europe and elsewhere, many Jews come to Israel to join us in building the Jewish future.
So here is my message to the rulers of Iran. Their plan to destroy Israel will fail. Israel will not permit any force on Earth to threaten its future. And here is my message to all the countries represented here. Whatever resolutions they may adopt in this building, whatever decisions they may take in their capitals, Israel will do whatever it must do to defend our State and to defend our people.
As the deal with Iran moves ahead, I hope it will be enforced — how can I put this? — with a little more rigour than was shown with the six Security Council resolutions that Iran has systematically violated and which now have been effectively discarded. I would call for ensuring that the inspectors actually inspect, that the snapback sanctions actually snap back, and that Iran’s violations not be swept under the Persian rug. There is one thing I can assure the Assembly of today that Israel will be watching closely.
What the international community now needs to do is clear: first, it must make Iran comply with all its nuclear obligations, and hold Iran’s feet to the fire. Secondly, Iran’s regional aggression must be put in check by supporting and strengthening those fighting Iran’s aggression, beginning with Israel. Thirdly, use sanctions and all the tools available to tear down Iran’s global terror network.
Israel is working closely with our Arab peace partners to address our common security challenges from Iran and also the security challenges from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and from others. We are also working with other States in the Middle East, as well as with countries in Africa, in Asia and beyond. Many in our region know that both Iran and ISIL are our common enemies. And when
15-29658 29/55

A/70/PV.22 01/10/2015
one’s enemies fight each other, one does not strengthen either one. One weakens both.
Common dangers are clearly bringing Israel and its Arab neighbours closer. As we work together to thwart the dangers that I have mentioned, I hope that we will build lasting partnerships for security, for prosperity and for peace. But in Israel, we never forget one thing. We never forget that Israel’s most important partner has always been, and will always be, the United States of America. The alliance between Israel and the United States is unshakeable.
President Obama and I agree on the need to keep arms out of the hands of Iran’s terror proxies. We agree on the need to stop Iran from destabilizing countries throughout the Middle East. Israel deeply appreciates President Obama’s willingness to bolster our security and to help Israel maintain its qualitative military edge in order to confront the enormous challenges we face. Israel is grateful that this sentiment is widely shared by the American people and its representatives in Congress — both by those who supported the deal and by those who opposed it.
President Obama and I have both said that our differences over the nuclear deal are a disagreement within the family. But we have no disagreement about the need to work together to secure our common future. And what a great future it could be. Israel is uniquely poised to take advantage of the promise of the twenty-first century. Israel is a world leader in science and technology, in cybertechnology, software, water, agriculture, medicine, biotechnology and so many other fields that are being revolutionized by Israeli ingenuity and Israeli innovation. Israel is the innovation nation. Israeli know-how is everywhere. It is in our computers’ microprocessors and flash drives. It is in our smart phones, when we send instant messages and navigate our cars. It is on our farms, when we drip-irrigate our crops and keep our grains and produce fresh. It is in our universities, when we study Nobel Prize-winning discoveries in chemistry and economics. It is in our medicine cabinets, when we use drugs to treat Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis. It is even on our plates, when we eat delicious cherry tomatoes. They were also perfected in Israel, in case someone did not know.
We are so proud in Israel of the long strides that our country has been able to take in a short time. We are so proud that our small country is making such a huge contribution to the entire world. Yet the dreams of
our people, enshrined for eternity by the great prophets of the Bible, will be fully realized only when there is peace.
As the Middle East descends into chaos, Israel’s peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan are two cornerstones of stability. Israel remains committed to achieving peace with the Palestinians as well. Israelis know the price of war. I know the price of war. I was nearly killed in battle. I lost many friends. I lost my beloved brother Yoni. Those who know the price of war can best appreciate what the blessings of peace would mean — for ourselves, our children and our grandchildren. I am prepared to immediately resume direct peace negotiations with the Palestinian Authority without any preconditions whatsoever. Unfortunately, President Abbas said yesterday that he is not prepared to do that. I hope he changes his mind, because I remain committed to a vision of two States for two peoples, in which a demilitarized Palestinian State recognizes the Jewish State.
As members know, the peace process began over two decades ago. Yet despite the best efforts of six Israeli prime ministers — Rabin, Peres, Barak, Sharon, Olmert and myself — the Palestinians have consistently refused to end the conflict and to make a final peace with Israel. Unfortunately, we heard that rejectionism again only yesterday from President Abbas. How can Israel make peace with a Palestinian partner who refuses to even sit at the negotiating table? Israel expects the Palestinian Authority to abide by its commitments. The Palestinians should not walk away from peace. I would like to tell President Abbas that I know it is not easy. I know it is hard. But we owe it to our peoples to try, to continue to try. If we actually sit down together, if we actually negotiate and stop negotiating about the negotiation, and if we actually sit down to try to resolve the conflict between us, recognizing each other and not using a Palestinian State as a stepping stone for yet another Islamist dictatorship in the Middle East but as something that will live at peace next to the Jewish State, we can do remarkable things for our peoples.
The United Nations can help advance peace by supporting direct, unconditional negotiations between the parties. The United Nations will certainly not help advance peace by trying to impose solutions or by encouraging Palestinian rejectionism, And the United Nations should do one more thing. The United Nations should finally rid itself of its obsessive bashing of Israel. Here is just one absurd example of
30/55 15-29658

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.22
that obsession. In the four years of horrific violence in Syria, more than a quarter of a million people have lost their lives. That is more than 10 times the number of Israelis and Palestinians combined who have lost their lives in a century of conflict between us. Yet last year, the Assembly adopted 20 resolutions against Israel and only one resolution about the savage slaughter in Syria. Talk about injustice. Talk about disproportionality. Count them: 20. And one against Syria. Well, frankly I am not surprised. To borrow a line from Yogi Berra, the late, great baseball player and part-time philosopher, when it comes to the annual bashing of Israel at the United Nations, it is déjà vu all over again.
Enough is enough. Today, 31 years after I stood here for the first time, I am still asking when the United Nations will finally check its anti-Israel fanaticism at the door, when the United Nations will finally stop slandering Israel as a threat to peace and when it will actually start helping Israel advance peace. The same question should be posed to Palestinian leaders. When will they start working with Israel to advance peace and reconciliation, stop libelling Israel and stop inciting hatred and violence?
Here is a good place for President Abbas to begin. He should stop spreading lies about Israel’s alleged intentions on the Temple Mount. Israel is fully committed to maintaining the status quo there. What President Abbas should be speaking out against are the actions of the militant Islamists who are smuggling explosives into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and who are trying to prevent Jews and Christians from visiting the holy sites. That is the real threat to those sacred sites.
A thousand years before the birth of Christianity, more than 1,500 years before the birth of Islam, King David made Jerusalem our capital, and King Solomon built the Temple on that Mount. Yet Israel will always respect the sacred shrines of all religions. In a region plagued by violence and by unimaginable intolerance, in which Islamic fanatics are destroying the ancient treasures of civilization, Israel stands out as a towering beacon of enlightenment and tolerance. Far from endangering the holy sites, Israel ensures their safety. Because, unlike the Powers that ruled Jerusalem in the past, Israel respects the holy sites and the freedom of worship of Jews, Muslims, Christians — everyone. And that will never change.
Because Israel will always stay true to its values. Those values are on display each and every day. They are on display when Israel’s feisty parliament
vigorously debates every issue under the sun; when Israel’s Chief Justice sits in her chair at our fiercely independent Supreme Court; when our Christian community continues to grow and thrive from year to year, whereas Christian communities elsewhere in the Middle East are decimated; when a brilliant young Israeli Muslim student gives her valedictorian address at one of our finest universities; and when Israeli doctors and nurses — doctors and nurses from the Israeli military — treat thousands of wounded from the killing fields of Syria and thousands more in the wake of natural disasters from Haiti to Nepal. That is the true face of Israel. Those are the values of Israel.
In the Middle East, those values are under savage assault by militant Islamists, who are forcing millions of terrified people to flee to distant shores. Just 10 miles from ISIS and a few hundred yards from Iran’s murderous proxies, Israel stands in the breach, proudly and courageously defending freedom and progress. Israel is civilization’s front line in the battle against barbarism. So here is a novel idea for the United Nations. Instead of continuing the shameful routine of bashing Israel, the international community should stand with Israel. The international community should stand with Israel as we work to check the fanaticism at its doors. It should stand with Israel as we prevent that fanaticism from even reaching its doors. The international community should stand with Israel because Israel is not just defending itself. More than ever, Israel is defending the world!
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity to reflect on the state of the Organization. For most of us, the United Nations has been one of the key international realities of our lives. It has been at the heart of what has shaped us in the significant developments of the post-Second World War era. But as we all know, it is not perfect. A lot can be said about the shortcomings of the United Nations. They are many and some are serious. But there are things this Organization can do that no other international body can. And it remains the key reference point for States when there is a problem. That is why New Zealand fought so hard for its current seat on the Security Council. We sought election because the Council is the primary body for the maintenance of international peace and security.
New Zealand is a small country at the bottom of the world. Despite being far from many of the world’s trouble spots, we are not immune to their consequences. This time last year, I pressed the case for New Zealand’s election to the Security Council. I would like to thank Member States for their faith in us. In the past nine months we have striven to repay them. Much of the debate in this Hall this week has been about where the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, has not performed. The conflicts and human suffering in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and a long list of other countries show how far we are from achieving the aspirations of our founders and of today’s Members. So, too, does the lack of progress in bringing peace to the Middle East.
Since we have been on the Council, we have found it as hard as many of those here warned. The Council’s agenda is lengthy and contentious. The dynamics within it are difficult. When Council members work together, as they did over the recent agreement on Iran’s nuclear capability, they can still deliver on the Council’s role as it is set out in the Charter of the United Nations. The Iran deal was a notable bright spot this year. Although it was negotiated in Vienna, only the Council had the power to implement it. New Zealand is proud that this occurred during our presidency of the Council in July. Now, the deal has to be implemented and its example followed. That is because this important agreement must become the basis for something wider — a fundamental resetting of relationships and a foundation for the resolution of other regional conflicts.
Nowhere is the resetting of relationships needed more than in Syria. Syria has been torn apart by internal divisions and a leader prepared to wage war on his own people to cling to power. External actors, from within the region and beyond, have tried to tilt the balance in pursuit of their own interests. And as the country descended into lawlessness, the evil nightmare that is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which first took hold in Syria, spread death and terror in the region and beyond. ISIL’s warped ideology and unprecedented use of social media to export its twisted message is a threat to all of us, even a country as distant as New Zealand.
That is why New Zealand has joined the international coalition against ISIL. We are doing what we can to help the victims of the Syrian conflict and combat the scourge of ISIL. New Zealand’s armed forces are helping the Government of Iraq to train its soldiers to
16/25 15-29664

01/10/2015 A/70/PV.23
defend its people. In response to the humanitarian crisis we are helping to fund programmes in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to assist their efforts to support thousands of displaced refugees. Like many other countries, we are implementing an emergency Syrian refugee resettlement programme.
None of that gets to the root of the problems in Syria. All Council members carry responsibility for ending the misery in Syria and beyond. The consequences of inaction are not theoretical. The human toll is real — a 3-year-old boy dead, washed up on a Turkish beach; hundreds of thousands killed and millions forced to flee their homes. We cannot ignore the huddled travellers in the railway stations of Europe or the reality of refugees scratching out a meagre existence in camps and makeshift homes in Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon. More than 160 leaders have shown up in New York this week to mark the enduring importance of the United Nations over the past 70 years. Yet we do so against the backdrop of the worst refugee crisis since the Second World War.
Every one of us sees the harrowing images daily. At the same time we see the consequences of the Security Council’s failure to act over the past four years. It is time for the Council to step up. It is time for it to stop talking about what is right and do what is right. It is time for the Council to do the job for which it was created. It is time for its members to set aside their vested interests and historical alliances in order to stop the violence and end the suffering. It is time for the Council to do its duty by those who have lost their lives and loved ones and the millions who have been displaced. We cannot afford to let the Council go from an institution with failures to a failed institution.
There must be a political solution to the conflict in Syria. And it must come soon. It should address all issues and involve all relevant actors, from within the region and beyond. The question is not Al-Assad or ISIL. Both need to be dealt with. A workable political solution will not be a perfect one. Indeed, it is a classic case of the perfect being the enemy of the good. It will require international cooperation and compromise, on all sides.
The Council also needs to engage in making progress on the Middle East peace process. Since being elected to the Council, New Zealand has made clear its view that the status quo is unsustainable. It puts at risk the achievement of the two-State solution that we all know is the best hope for a lasting peace. That is a
matter of urgency and another critical issue on which the Security Council should lead. We are told that the conditions are not right on the ground and that the parties are not ready, but we should not let conditions on the ground dictate our actions, if our actions can help bring a solution.
We stood for the Council because we believe small States have a positive contribution to make, and we wanted to provide a voice for those who go unheard too often. It was for that latter reason that we arranged the first open debate on the peace and security challenges of small island developing States during our presidency in July (see S/PV.7499). We were heartened by the level of participation of both those States and the broader membership.
The challenge for a small elected member to have its voice heard and its views taken into account is considerable. Part of the problem is structural. That the five permanent members of the Council have the right of veto creates an extraordinary power imbalance. That imbalance is exacerbated by their practices of prenegotiating outcomes before engaging with the 10 elected members and of taking no action when one of the five does not agree. That experience has reaffirmed to us that New Zealand was right to oppose the right of veto when the Charter of the United Nations was being drafted.
It is still our view that the right of veto is a constraint on the effectiveness of the Council and realizing the aspirations of the States Members of the United Nations. For that reason, New Zealand supports the two proposals being put forward this year — by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group of countries and by France and Mexico — to limit the use of the veto in mass atrocity situations. The fact that two permanent members are supportive represents progress, but part of the problem is also behavioural. The permanent members have become used to exercising power and are protective of their privileged position. They presume to control the Council’s agenda and to determine its processes. Despite that, we are doing what we can to ensure that the elected members have the information and the opportunity to contribute effectively to Council decision-making. And, in turn, that it makes effective decisions.
We want to contribute to a Council that is genuinely focused on finding practical solutions to political problems and not on preserving the status quo. We are well aware that the conflicts on the Council’s agenda
15-29664 17/25

A/70/PV.23 01/10/2015
are complex and not easily solved, but we are realistic in our expectations of what can be achieved. New Zealand believes that the body responsible for maintaining international peace and security has a responsibility to find solutions to the world’s most pressing crises.
Only the United Nations and its agencies have the capacity to focus world attention across a range of issues. That was demonstrated last week with the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals. We sincerely hope that the Conference of the Parties will be similarly successful in Paris in December, with the adoption of a meaningful agreement on climate change.
Healthy and productive oceans are a key requirement for a sustainable future. I was pleased to announce earlier this week the creation of a marine sanctuary around New Zealand’s Kermadec Islands. The Kermadec Ocean Sanctuary will comprise 620,000 square kilometres of ocean in one of the most pristine and special environments on Earth. The Sanctuary will be one of the world’s largest and most significant fully protected marine areas. It will cover an area twice the size of our land mass and better protect the habitats of a huge array of sea creatures.
New Zealand is committed to managing our oceans responsibly, and we are working with our Pacific neighbours to do the same. We have committed $1 billion in development assistance to the Pacific, focused on, among other things, helping support sustainable fisheries management. Our aid is focused on our region and in areas where we know we can get real results for real people, improving livelihoods and creating opportunities. Many Governments around the world are doing the same, and we are proud to play our part.
As I prepare to leave New York, I do so proud of the contribution that New Zealand has made to the sustainable development of our oceans. I leave proud of the contribution New Zealand is making on the Security Council and proud of the values and principles that underpin the country I lead. I also leave dispirited by the Security Council’s failure to help not only the people of Syria, but those in so many other countries. The collective effort of the Security Council, supported by the broader membership, could make a real difference.
I think all of us who have been here over the past week know that collective action must start somewhere. It should start at the United Nations.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations is a good opportunity both to consider our history and to talk about our collective future. In 1945, the countries that had defeated Nazism united their efforts to lay firm foundations for the post-war world order. I should point out here that the key decisions about the principles for guiding cooperation among States and the creation of the United Nations were made in our country, at the meeting in Yalta of the leaders of the coalition against Hitler. The Yalta system emerged out of genuine travail, paid for with tens of millions of lives and the two world wars that engulfed the world in the twentieth century. And in all fairness to it, it has helped humankind traverse the turbulent and sometimes dramatic events of the past seven decades and has spared the world major cataclysms.
The United Nations is an Organization unique in its legitimacy, representativeness and universality. True, it has recently been much criticized for its perceived insufficient effectiveness and for decision-making on fundamental issues that can be stymied by insuperable differences, particularly among members of the Security Council. I would like to point out, however, that over the 70 years of the existence of the United Nations there have always been disagreements, and the right to the veto has always been exercised — by the United States, Great Britain, France, China, the Soviet Union and later Russia, alike. That is entirely natural for such a diverse and representative Organization. When the United Nations was established, there was

no suggestion that unanimity would reign. Indeed, the essence of the Organization consists in seeking and reaching compromise. Its strength lies in taking account of different opinions and points of view. The decisions that are discussed in the United Nations are either adopted as resolutions or they are not. As the diplomats say, they either go through or do not go through. Any action on the part of any State that bypasses that procedure is illegitimate and runs counter to the Charter of the United Nations and in defiance of international law.
We all know that a single dominating power centre emerged in the world after the end of the Cold War. Those who found themselves at the top of that pyramid were tempted to think that if they were so strong and exceptional, they knew better than anyone else what should be done. As a consequence, they thought, why should they bother with the United Nations, which instead of automatically sanctioning and legitimizing necessary decisions frequently just stands in the way or, as we say, gets underfoot? It has become commonplace to say that the Organization, as originally conceived, has become obsolete and that its historical mission has been accomplished.
The world is changing, of course, and the United Nations must keep up with that natural transformation. Russia is ready to work on that, based on a broad consensus with all its partners, but we consider efforts to undermine the authority and legitimacy of the United Nations to be extremely dangerous. They could lead to the collapse of the entire architecture of international relations. Then we would indeed be left with no rules beyond might is right. That would be a world ruled by selfishness rather than collective effort; a world ever more dictatorial and less about equality, genuine democracy and freedom; a world where an ever-growing number of de facto protectorates and externally controlled territories would replace truly independent States.
What, after all, is State sovereignty, about which some of our colleagues have already spoken? More than anything it is about freedom — the freedom of every person, people or State to choose their own destiny. And by the way, the issue of the so-called legitimacy of State power also falls into this category. We should never play with words or manipulate them. Every term of international law and international affairs should be clear and transparent and possess uniformly understood criteria.
We are all different, and we should respect that. Nobody is obliged to conform once and for all to a single model of development that someone has deemed to be the only right one. We should all remember what we have learned from past experience. For example, we remember instances from the history of the Soviet Union. Attempts to export social experiments and to push for change in one country or another based on our own ideological positions often led to tragic consequences and to deterioration rather than progress.
It seems, however, that no one learns from others’ mistakes. They just repeat them, and the export of revolutions, this time so-called democratic revolutions, continues. We have only to look at the situation in the Middle East and North Africa, which the speaker before me discussed. Certainly, the political and social problems of the region have been brewing for a long time, and people there naturally wanted change.
But how has it actually turned out? Instead of reforming Government institutions, aggressive foreign interference has resulted in the abrupt destruction of the very fabric of life. Instead of the triumph of democracy and progress we got violence, poverty and social catastrophe. And human rights, including the right to life, are simply ignored. One cannot help wanting to ask those who created this situation if they at least realize now what they have done. But I am afraid the question would go unanswered, because policies based on complacency and a belief in one’s exceptionality and impunity are never abandoned.
It is now obvious that the power vacuum that has appeared in a number of the countries of the Middle East and North Africa has led to the emergence of areas of anarchy that immediately began to fill with extremists and terrorists. Tens of thousands of militants are now fighting under the banners of the so-called Islamic State. They include former Iraqi servicemen who were thrown out into the street in the wake of the invasion of Iraq in 2003. Another supplier of recruits is Libya, whose statehood was destroyed as a result of a gross violation of Security Council resolution 1973 (2011). And now members of the so-called moderate Syrian opposition, supported by the West, are joining the radical ranks. First they arm and train them, and now they are defecting to the so-called Islamic State. Indeed, the Islamic State itself did not come from nowhere. It, too, was initially forged as a tool against undesirable secular regimes. Having established a foothold in Syria and Iraq, the Islamic State is actively expanding into
other regions, with the aim of dominating the Islamic world, and not just there. It is clearly not limiting itself to those plans alone.
The situation is more than dangerous. In such circumstances, it is hypocritical and irresponsible to make loud declarations about the threat of international terrorism while turning a blind eye to the channels that are financing and supporting terrorists, including through the proceeds of drug trafficking and illicit trading in oil and arms, or to attempt to manipulate extremist groups and make them do one’s bidding in order to achieve one’s own political goals, in the hope of dealing with them — or, to put it more simply, liquidating them — later. What I have to say to those people is this: Sirs, while you are certainly dealing with cruel people, they are in no way stupid or primitive. They are just as smart as you, and you cannot yet tell who is using whom for his own ends. The recent information on the transfer of arms to the terrorists by that moderate opposition itself is the best proof of that.
We believe that any attempt to flirt with terrorists, let alone arm them, is not just short-sighted; it is incendiary. It could result in a dramatic increase in the global terrorist threat and its critical spread to new regions, especially considering the fact that militants from many countries, including Europe, are passing through Islamic State training camps. Nor, unfortunately, I must admit frankly to my colleagues, is Russia an exception. We cannot allow such criminals, who have already smelled blood, to return home and continue their evil deeds there. We do not want that. And after all, would anyone want that?
Russia has always been firm and consistent in opposing terrorism in all its forms. Today we are providing military and technical assistance to Iraq, Syria and other countries of the region that are fighting terrorist groups. We think it is an enormous mistake to refuse to cooperate with the Syrian authorities and the State armed forces, who are valiantly combating terrorism face to face. Finally, we should acknowledge that no one except President Al-Assad’s Government armed forces and the Kurdish militia is truly fighting the Islamic State and other terrorist organizations in Syria. We are aware of all the problems and contradictions in the region, but we must nonetheless be realistic.
I feel obliged to point out that Russia’s honest and straightforward approach has recently been used as a pretext for accusing us of harbouring increasing ambitions — as if the people saying that have no
ambitions at all themselves. But the real issue is not Russia’s ambitions but the fact that we can no longer tolerate the current state of affairs in the world. In reality, we are proposing that we should be guided by our shared values and interests rather than ambitions. We should unite our efforts to address, on the basis of international law, these new problems we face and create a genuinely broad international coalition against terrorism. Like the coalition against Hitler, it could unite all the diverse forces willing to resolutely resist those who, like the Nazis, sow evil and hatred of humankind.
And, naturally, Muslim countries should play a key role in that coalition. Not only is the Islamic State a direct threat to them, it also desecrates one of the world’s greatest religions with its bloody crimes. The militants’ ideologists make a mockery of Islam and pervert its true humanistic values. In that regard, I would also like to address Muslim spiritual leaders. Their authority and tutelage are vital at this moment. It is essential to prevent those whom militants try to recruit from making hasty decisions. And those who have been deceived and who by force of circumstance have ended up in the terrorists’ ranks must be helped to find a path back to normal life, lay down their arms and cease their fratricide.
In the next few days Russia, as the current President of the Security Council, will convene a ministerial-level meeting aimed at conducting a comprehensive analysis of threats in the Middle East. First, we propose to discuss the possibility of agreeing on a draft resolution designed to coordinate the actions of all the forces confronting the Islamic State and other terrorist groups. Once again, that coordination should be based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the international community can develop a comprehensive strategy for the political stabilization and social and economic recovery of the Middle East. Then there would be no need to build camps for refugees. The flood of people forced to leave their homelands has literally engulfed first the country’s neighbours and now Europe. Now they number in the hundreds of thousands, but they could soon be millions. This is a great and tragic new migration of peoples, and a harsh lesson for all of us, including Europe.
I would like to stress that the refugees unquestionably need our compassion and support. However, any fundamental solution to the problem must involve restoring statehood where it has been
destroyed, strengthening Government institutions where they still exist or are being re-established, and providing comprehensive military, economic and material assistance to countries in difficulties — and, of course, to those who have not abandoned their homes despite all their ordeals. Naturally, any assistance to sovereign States can and must be offered rather than imposed, and only in accordance with the United Nations Charter. In other words, everything being done or to be done in this area in accordance with the norms of international law must be backed by our universal Organization, and anything contravening the Charter must be rejected. More than anything, I believe it is vital to help restore Government institutions in Libya, support the new Government of Iraq and provide comprehensive assistance to the legitimate Government of Syria.
Ensuring peace and regional and global stability remains the key task of the international community, with the United Nations at its helm. In our view, that means creating a space of equal and indivisible security that is not for the select few, but for everyone. Yes, it is a complex, difficult and time-consuming task, but there are no alternatives to it. However, for some of our colleagues the Cold War bloc mindset and desire to assimilate new geopolitical areas are still paramount. They began by continuing to expand NATO — and one wonders why, with the Warsaw Pact bloc no longer in existence and the Soviet Union broken up. And yet NATO is not only still there; like its military infrastructure, it is still expanding. Then they offered post-Soviet countries a false choice — to be either with the West or the East. Sooner or later, that logic of confrontation was bound to turn into a serious geopolitical crisis, and that is what happened in Ukraine, where the people’s dissatisfaction with the authorities was exploited and a military coup provoked from outside. A civil war erupted as a result.
We firmly believe that we can end the bloodshed and find a way out of this deadlock only through full implementation, in good faith, of the Minsk agreements of 12 February. Ukraine’s territorial integrity cannot be ensured by threats and force of arms, but it must be done. What is needed is respect for the choice of the people of the Donbas region, genuine consideration of their interests and rights and their engagement in devising the key elements of the country’s political structure, in line with the Minsk agreements that will guarantee that Ukraine can develop as a civilized State and an essential link in the construction of a common
area of security and economic cooperation in both Europe and Eurasia.
I have a reason for speaking of a common area for economic cooperation. Only recently, it seemed that in the economic sphere, where the objective laws of the market apply, we would learn to live without dividing lines and to act on the basis of transparent rules, jointly devised, including the principles of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which stand for freedom of trade and investment and open competition. Today, however, unilateral sanctions that circumvent the United Nations Charter have almost become the norm. They not only serve political aims, they act as a way of pushing competitors out of the market.
I would like to note another sign of growing economic selfishness. A number of countries have chosen to create closed, exclusive economic associations, with negotiations conducted behind closed doors and in secret, undisclosed to their own citizens and business communities. Nor do they inform other countries and Governments whose interests may be affected. Perhaps they want all of us to be left with the fait accompli that the rules of the game have been changed in favour of a small group, and without the participation of the WTO. That could completely unbalance the trade system and lead to the disintegration of the global economic environment. These issues affect the interests of all States and influence the future of the entire world economy. That is why we propose discussing them within the United Nations, the WTO and the Group of 20.
In opposition to a policy of exclusiveness, Russia proposes harmonizing regional economic projects through what is known as the integration of integrations, based on the universal and transparent rules of international trade. One example is our plan to link the Eurasian Economic Union with China’s initiative in creating a Silk Road economic belt. And we continue to believe the possibility of harmonizing integration processes within the Eurasian Economic Union and the European Union to be very promising.
Among the issues affecting the future of all humankind is the challenge of global climate change. It is in our interests to ensure that we get results at the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Paris in December. As part of our national contribution, by 2030 we plan to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions to between 70 and 75 per cent of their 1990 levels. I
suggest, however, that we should take a broader view of this issue. By establishing quotas on harmful emissions or taking other steps that by their very nature are still only tactical, we may mitigate the problem for a certain amount of time, but fundamentally we will not solve it.
We need a completely different approach. We should be focusing on introducing fundamentally new technologies, inspired by nature, that rather than damaging the environment will be in harmony with it and will enable us to restore the balance between the biosphere and the technosphere that human activities have destroyed. It is indeed a challenge on a planetary scale, but I am confident that humankind has the intellectual wherewithal to respond to it. We must unite our efforts, most of all those States possessing solid research capacities and fundamental scientific achievements. We propose convening a special forum under United Nations auspices for a comprehensive consideration of the issues related to the depletion of natural resources, the destruction of habitats and climate change. Russia is ready to be one of the organizers of such a forum.
On 10 January 1946, the General Assembly of the United Nations gathered in London to begin work on its first session. Eduardo Zuleta Ángel, a Colombian diplomat and the Chairman of the Preparatory Commission, opened the session by giving what I believe was a concise definition of the basic principles by which the United Nations should be guided in its activities. They are free will, disdain for scheming and trickery, and a spirit of cooperation. Today his words can be a guide for us all. Russia believes in the huge potential of the United Nations to help us avoid a new global confrontation and engage in strategic cooperation. We will work consistently with other countries to strengthen the central coordinating role of the United Nations. I am confident that together we can make the world a stable and safe place and ensure conditions conducive to the development of every State and nation.Seventy years after the founding of the United Nations it is worth reflecting on what the members of this body, working together, have helped to achieve. Out of the ashes of the Second World War, having witnessed the unthinkable power of the atomic age, the United States has worked with many nations in the Assembly to prevent a third world war — by forging alliances with old adversaries; by supporting the steady emergence of strong democracies accountable to their people and not to any foreign Power; and by building an international system that imposes a cost on those who choose conflict over cooperation, an order that recognizes the dignity and equal worth of all people.
That has been the work of seven decades. That is the ideal that this body has, at its best, pursued. Of course, there have been too many times when, collectively, we have fallen short of those ideals. Over the seven decades, terrible conflicts have claimed untold victims. But we have pressed forward, slowly, steadily, to make a system of international rules and norms that are better and stronger and more consistent.
It is that international order that has underwritten unparalleled advances in human liberty and prosperity. It is that collective endeavour that has brought about diplomatic cooperation among the world’s major Powers and buttressed a global economy that has lifted more than a billion people from poverty. It is those international principles that have helped constrain bigger countries from imposing their will on smaller ones and have advanced the emergence of democracy and development and individual liberty on every continent.
That progress is real. It can be documented in lives saved, agreements forged, diseases conquered and mouths fed. And yet we come together today knowing that the march of human progress never travels in a straight line, that our work is far from complete and that dangerous currents risk pulling us back into a darker, more disordered world.
Today we are seeing the collapse of strongmen and fragile States breeding conflict and driving innocent men, women and children across borders on an epic scale. Brutal networks of terror have stepped into the vacuum. Technologies that empower individuals are now also exploited by those who spread disinformation, suppress dissent or radicalize our youth. Global capital flows have powered growth and investment, but they have also increased the risk of contagion, weakened the bargaining power of workers and accelerated inequality.
How should we respond to those trends? There are those who argue that the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations are unachievable or out of date, a legacy of a postwar era not suited to our own. In effect, they are arguing for a return to the rules that applied for most of human history and that predate this institution — the belief that power is a zero-sum game, that might makes right, that strong States must impose their will on weaker ones, that the rights of individuals do not matter and that in a time of rapid change, order must be imposed by force.
On that basis, we see some major Powers assert themselves in ways that contravene international law. We see an erosion of the democratic principles and human rights that are fundamental to this institution’s mission. Information is strictly controlled and the space for civil society restricted. We are told that such retrenchment is required to beat back disorder; that it is the only way to stamp out terrorism and prevent foreign meddling. In accordance with that logic, we should support tyrants like Bashar Al-Assad, who drops barrel bombs to massacre innocent children, because the alternative is surely worse.
This increasing scepticism of our international order can also be found in the most advanced democracies. We see greater polarization and more frequent gridlock, with movements on the far right, and sometimes the left, that insist on stopping the trade that binds our fates to other nations or calling for the building of walls to keep out immigrants. Most ominously, we see the fears of ordinary people being exploited through appeals to sectarianism, tribalism, racism or anti-Semitism; appeals to a glorious past before the body politic was infected by those who look different or worship God differently — a politics of us versus them.
The United States is not immune to this. Even as our economy is growing and our troops have largely returned from Iraq and Afghanistan, we see in our debates about America’s role in the world a notion of strength that is defined by opposition to old enemies, perceived adversaries — a rising China or resurgent Russia, a revolutionary Iran or an Islam that is incompatible with peace. We see arguments that the only strength that matters for the United States is bellicose words and shows of military force, and that cooperation and diplomacy will not work.
As President of the United States, I am mindful of the dangers that we face. They cross my desk every 
morning. I lead the strongest military that the world has ever known, and I will never hesitate to protect my country or our allies, unilaterally and by force where necessary. But I stand before the Assembly today believing in my core that we, the nations of the world, cannot return to the old ways of conflict and coercion. We cannot look backwards. We live in an integrated world, one in which we all have a stake in one another’s success.
We cannot turn back those forces of integration. No nation here in the Assembly can insulate itself from the threat of terrorism, the risk of financial contagion, the flow of migrants or the danger of a warming planet. The disorder we see is not driven solely by competition between nations or by any single ideology. If we cannot work together more effectively, we will all suffer the consequences.
That is true for the United States as well. No matter how powerful our military, how strong our economy, we understand the United States cannot solve the world’s problems alone. In Iraq, the United States learned the hard lesson that even with hundreds of thousands of brave, effective troops and trillions of dollars from our Treasury, it cannot by itself impose stability on a foreign land. Unless we work with other nations under the mantle of international norms, principles and law that offers legitimacy to our efforts, we will not succeed. And unless we work together to defeat the ideas that drive the various communities in a country like Iraq into conflict, any order that our militaries can impose will be temporary.
Just as force alone cannot impose order internationally, I believe in my core that repression cannot forge the social cohesion that nations need to succeed. The history of the last two decades proves that in today’s world, dictatorships are unstable. The strongmen of today become the spark of revolution tomorrow. You can jail your opponents, but you cannot imprison ideas. You can try to control access to information, but you cannot turn a lie into truth. It is not a conspiracy of United States-backed non-governmental organizations that exposes corruption and raises the expectations of people around the globe — it is technology, social media and the irreducible desire of people everywhere to make their own choices about how they are governed.
Indeed, I believe that in today’s world, the measure of strength is no longer defined by the control of territory. Lasting prosperity does not come solely from
the ability to access and extract raw materials. The strength of nations depends on the success of their people — their knowledge, innovation, imagination, creativity, drive and opportunity — and that, in turn, depends on individual rights, good governance and personal security. Both internal repression and foreign aggression are symptoms of a failure to provide that foundation.
Politics and solidarity that depend on demonizing others, that draw on religious sectarianism, narrow tribalism or jingoism, may at times look like strength in the moment, but over time their weakness will be exposed. And history tells us that the dark forces unleashed by this type of politics surely make all of us less secure. Our world has been there before. We gain nothing from going back.
Instead, I believe that we must go forward in pursuit of our ideals, not abandon them at this critical time. We must give expression to our best hopes, not our deepest fears. This institution was founded because men and women who came before us had the foresight to know that our nations are more secure when we uphold basic laws and norms and pursue a path of cooperation rather than conflict. And strong nations, above all, have a responsibility to uphold that international order.
Let me give a concrete example. After I took office, I made it clear that one of the principal achievements of the United Nations — the nuclear non-proliferation regime — was endangered by Iran’s violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. On that basis, the Security Council tightened sanctions on the Iranian Government, and many nations joined us to enforce them. Together, we showed that laws and agreements mean something. But we also understood that the goal of sanctions was not simply to punish Iran. Our objective was to test whether Iran could change course, accept constraints and allow the world to verify that its nuclear programme would be peaceful. For two years, the United States and our partners, including Russia and China, stuck together in complex negotiations. The result is a lasting, comprehensive deal that prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon while allowing it to access peaceful energy. If the deal is fully implemented, the prohibition on nuclear weapons is strengthened, a potential war is averted and our world is safer. That is the strength of the international system when it works the way it should.
That same fidelity to international order guides our responses to other challenges around the world.
Consider Russia’s annexation of Crimea and further aggression in eastern Ukraine. America has few economic interests in Ukraine, and we recognize the deep and complex history between Russia and Ukraine. But we cannot stand by when the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a nation is flagrantly violated. If that happens without consequence in Ukraine, it could happen to any of the nations gathered here today. That is the basis of the sanctions that the United States and our partners impose on Russia. It is not a desire to return to a cold war.
Now, within Russia, State-controlled media may describe those events as an example of a resurgent Russia — a view shared, by the way, by a number of United States politicians and commentators who have always been deeply sceptical about Russia and seem to be convinced that a new cold war is in fact upon us. And yet look at the results. The Ukrainian people are more interested than ever in aligning with Europe instead of Russia. Sanctions have led to capital flight, a contracting economy, a fallen rouble and the emigration of more educated Russians.
Imagine if, instead, Russia had engaged in true diplomacy and worked with Ukraine and the international community to ensure that its interests were protected. That would be better for Ukraine, but also better for Russia and better for the world, which is why we continue to press for this crisis to be resolved in a way that allows a sovereign and democratic Ukraine to determine its future and control its territory. This is not because we want to isolate Russia — we do not — but because we want a strong Russia that is invested in working with us to strengthen the international system as a whole.
Similarly, in the South China Sea, the United States makes no claim on territory there. We do not adjudicate claims. But like every nation gathered here, we have an interest in upholding the basic principles of freedom of navigation and the free flow of commerce, and in resolving disputes through international law, not the law of force. So we will defend those principles, while encouraging China and other claimants to resolve their differences peacefully. I say this while recognizing that diplomacy is hard, the outcomes are sometimes unsatisfying and it is rarely politically popular. But I believe that leaders of large nations in particular have an obligation to take those risks, precisely because we are strong enough to protect our interests if and when diplomacy fails.
I also believe that to move forward in this new era, we have to be strong enough to acknowledge when what we are doing is not working. For 50 years, the United States pursued a Cuba policy that failed to improve the lives of the Cuban people. We changed that. We continue to have differences with the Cuban Government. We will continue to stand up for human rights. But we address those issues through diplomatic relations, increased commerce and people-to-people ties. As those contacts yield progress, I am confident that our Congress will inevitably lift an embargo that should not be in place any more. Change will not come overnight to Cuba, but I am confident that openness, not coercion, will support the reforms and the better life that the Cuban people deserve, just as I believe that Cuba will find its success if it pursues cooperation with other nations.
Now, if it is in the interest of major Powers to uphold international standards, that is even more true for the rest of the community of nations. Look around the world. From Singapore to Colombia to Senegal, the facts show that nations succeed when they pursue an inclusive peace and prosperity within their borders and work cooperatively with countries beyond those borders.
That path is now available to a nation such as Iran, which, as of this moment, continues to deploy violent proxies to advance its interests. Those efforts may appear to give it leverage in disputes with its neighbours, but they fuel sectarian conflict that endangers the entire region and isolates Iran from the promise of trade and commerce. The Iranian people have a proud history and are filled with extraordinary potential. But chanting “Death to America” does not create jobs or make Iran more secure. If Iran chooses a different path, that will be good for the security of the region, good for the Iranian people and good for the world.
Of course, around the globe, we will continue to be confronted with nations that reject these lessons of history — places where civil strife, border disputes and sectarian wars give rise to terrorist enclaves and humanitarian disasters. Where order has completely broken down, we must act, but we will be stronger when we act together.
In such efforts, the United States will always do its part. We will do so mindful of the lessons of the past — not just the lessons of Iraq, but also the example of Libya, where we joined an international coalition
under a United Nations mandate to prevent a slaughter. Even as we helped the Libyan people bring an end to the reign of a tyrant, our coalition could have and should have done more to fill a vacuum left behind. We are grateful to the United Nations for its efforts to forge a unity Government. We will help any legitimate Libyan Government as it works to bring the country together.
We also have to recognize that we must work more effectively in the future, as an international community, to build capacity for States that are in distress before they collapse. That is why we should celebrate the fact that, later today, the United States will join with more than 50 countries to enlist new capabilities — infantry, intelligence, helicopters, hospitals, and tens of thousands of troops — to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. These new capabilities can prevent mass killing and ensure that peace agreements are more than words on paper. But we have to do it together. Together, we must strengthen our collective capacity to establish security where order has broken down and to support those who seek a just and lasting peace.
Nowhere is our commitment to international order more tested than in Syria. When a dictator slaughters tens of thousands of his own people, that is not just a matter of one nation’s internal affairs. It breeds human suffering on an order of magnitude that affects us all. Likewise, when a terrorist group beheads captives, slaughters the innocent and enslaves women, that is not a single nation’s national security problem. It is an assault on humankind as a whole.
I have said before and I will repeat: there is no room to accommodate an apocalyptic cult like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the United States makes no apologies for using our military, as part of a broad coalition, to go after them. We do so with a determination to ensure that there will never be a safe haven for terrorists who carry out these crimes. We have demonstrated over more than a decade of relentless pursuit of Al-Qaida that we will not be outlasted by extremists.
While military power is necessary, it is not sufficient to resolve the situation in Syria. Lasting stability can take hold only when the people of Syria forge an agreement to live together peacefully. The United States is prepared to work with any nation, including Russia and Iran, to resolve the conflict. But we must recognize that after so much bloodshed, so much carnage, there cannot be a return to the pre-war status quo.
Let us remember how this started. Al-Assad reacted to peaceful protests by escalating repression and killing that, in turn, created the environment for the current strife. And so Al-Assad and his allies cannot simply pacify the broad majority of a population that has been brutalized by chemical weapons and indiscriminate bombing. Yes, realism dictates that compromise will be required to end the fighting and, ultimately, stamp out ISIL. But realism also requires a managed transition away from Al-Assad and to a new leader, and an inclusive Government that recognizes there must be an end to this chaos so that the Syrian people can begin to rebuild.
We know that ISIL — which emerged out of the chaos of Iraq and Syria — depends on perpetual war to survive, but we also know that they gain adherents because of a poisonous ideology. Part of our job, together, is to work to reject such extremism that infects too many of our young people. Part of that effort must be a continued rejection by Muslims of those who distort Islam to preach intolerance and promote violence. It must also involve a rejection by non-Muslims of the ignorance that equates Islam with terrorism.
This work will take time. There are no easy answers to Syria, and there are no simple answers to the changes that are taking place in much of the Middle East and North Africa. But so many families need help right now; they do not have time. That is why the United States is increasing the number of refugees whom we welcome within our borders. That is why we will continue to be the largest donor of assistance to support those refugees. Today we are launching new efforts to ensure that our people and our businesses, our universities and our non-governmental organizations can help as well, because in the faces of suffering families, our nation of immigrants sees itself.
Of course, in the old ways of thinking, the plight of the powerless, the plight of refugees, the plight of the marginalized did not matter. They were on the periphery of the world’s concerns. Today, our concern for them is driven not just by conscience, but should also be driven by self-interest. Helping people who have been pushed to the margins of our world is not mere charity; it is a matter of collective security. The purpose of this institution is not merely to avoid conflict; it is to galvanize the collective action that makes life better on this planet.
The commitments we have made to the Sustainable Development Goals speak to this truth. I believe that 
capitalism has been the greatest creator of wealth and opportunity that the world has ever known. But from big cities to rural villages around the world, we also know that prosperity is still cruelly out of reach for too many. As His Holiness Pope Francis reminds us, we are stronger when we value the least among these and see them as equal in dignity to ourselves and our sons and our daughters.
We can roll back preventable disease and end the scourge of HIV/AIDS. We can stamp out pandemics that recognize no borders. That work may not be on television right now, but as we demonstrated in reversing the spread of Ebola, it can save more lives than anything else we can do. Together, we can eradicate extreme poverty and erase barriers to opportunity. But this requires a sustained commitment to our people so farmers can feed more people, so entrepreneurs can start a business without paying a bribe, so young people have the skills they need to succeed in this modern, knowledge-based economy.
We can promote growth through trade that meets a higher standard, and that is what we are doing through the Trans-Pacific Partnership — a trade agreement that encompasses nearly 40 per cent of the global economy, an agreement that will open markets while protecting the rights of workers and protecting the environment that enables development to be sustained.
We can roll back the pollution that we put in our skies and help economies lift people out of poverty without condemning our children to the ravages of an ever-warming climate. The same ingenuity that produced the Industrial Age and the Computer Age allows us to harness the potential of clean energy. No country can escape the ravages of climate change. And there is no stronger sign of leadership than putting future generations first. The United States will work with every nation that is willing to do its part so that we can come together in Paris to decisively confront this challenge.
Finally, regarding our vision for the future of the Assembly, my belief in moving forward rather than backwards requires us to defend the democratic principles that allow societies to succeed. Let me start from a simple premise. Catastrophes like what we are seeing in Syria do not take place in countries where there is genuine democracy and respect for the universal values this institution is supposed to defend.
I recognize that democracy is going to take different forms in different parts of the world. The very idea of a people governing themselves depends upon government giving expression to their unique culture, their unique history, their unique experiences. But some universal truths are self-evident. No person wants to be imprisoned for peaceful worship. No woman should ever be abused with impunity, no girl should be barred from attending school. There should be freedom to peacefully petition those in power without fear of arbitrary laws. These are not ideas of one country or one culture. They are fundamental to human progress. They are a cornerstone of this institution.
I realize that in many parts of the world there is a different view — a belief that strong leadership must tolerate no dissent. I hear it not only from America’s adversaries, but — privately, at least — I also hear it from some of our friends. I disagree. I believe a Government that suppresses peaceful dissent is not showing strength. It is showing weakness and it is showing fear.
History shows that regimes that fear their own people will eventually crumble, but strong institutions built on the consent of the governed endure long after any one individual is gone. That is why our strongest leaders, from George Washington to Nelson Mandela, have elevated the importance of building strong, democratic institutions over a thirst for perpetual power. Leaders who amend constitutions to stay in office only acknowledge that they failed to build a successful country for their people, because none of us lasts forever. It tells us that power is something they cling to for its own sake rather than for the betterment of those whom they purport to serve.
I understand that democracy is frustrating. Democracy in the United States is certainly imperfect. At times it can be dysfunctional. But democracy — the constant struggle to extend rights to more of our people, to give more people a voice — is what allowed us to become the most powerful nation in the world. It is not simply a matter of principle; it is not an abstraction. Democracy, inclusive democracy, makes countries stronger. When opposition parties can seek power peacefully through the ballot, a country draws upon new ideas. When a free media can inform the public, corruption and abuse are exposed and can be rooted out. When civil society thrives, communities can solve problems that Governments cannot necessarily solve alone. When immigrants are welcomed, countries are 
more productive and more vibrant. When girls can go to school, get a job and pursue unlimited opportunities, that is when a country realizes its full potential.
That is what I believe is America’s greatest strength. Not everybody in America agrees with me. That is part of democracy. I believe that the fact that one can walk the streets of this city right now and pass churches and synagogues and temples and mosques where people worship freely; the fact that our nation of immigrants mirrors the diversity of the world — one can find people from everywhere here in New York City — the fact that in this country everybody can contribute, everybody can participate no matter who they are or what they look like or whom they love — that is what makes us strong.
I believe that what is true for America is true for virtually all mature democracies. That is no accident. We can be proud of our nations without defining ourselves in opposition to some other group. We can be patriotic without demonizing someone else. We can cherish our own identities — our religion, our ethnicity, our traditions — without putting others down. Our systems are premised on the notion that absolute power will corrupt, but that people, ordinary people, are fundamentally good and value family and friendship, faith and the dignity of hard work. And with appropriate checks and balances, Governments can reflect that goodness. I believe that is the future we must seek together — to believe in the dignity of every individual, to believe we can bridge our differences and choose cooperation over conflict. That is not weakness; that is strength. It is a practical necessity in our interconnected world.
Our people understand this. Think of the Liberian doctor who went door to door to search for Ebola cases and to tell families what to do if they show symptoms. Think of the Iranian shopkeeper who said after the nuclear deal, “God willing, now we will be able to offer many more goods at better prices”. Think of the Americans who lowered the flag over our embassy in Havana in 1961, the year I was born, and who returned this summer to raise that flag back up. One of those men said of the Cuban people, “We could do things for them, and they could do things for us. We loved them”. For 50 years we ignored that fact. Think of the families leaving everything they have known behind, risking barren deserts and stormy waters just to find shelter, just to save their children. One Syrian refugee who was met in Hamburg with warm greetings and shelter said,
“We feel there are still some people who love other people”.
The people of our United Nations are not as different as they have been told. They can be made to fear; they can be taught to hate, but they can also respond to hope. History is littered with the failure of false prophets and fallen empires who believed that might always makes right. That will continue to be the case. We can count on it. But we are called upon to offer a different type of leadership, a leadership strong enough to recognize that nations share common interests and people share a common humanity. And, yes, there are certain ideas and principles that are universal. That is what those who shaped the United Nations 70 years ago understood. Let us carry that faith forward into the future, for it is the only way we can ensure that the future will be brighter, for my children and for everyone’s children.I should like to congratulate the President and his country, Denmark, on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventieth session. He has South Africa’s full support for his presidency. The theme that he has chosen, “The United Nations at 70: the road ahead for peace, security and human rights”, is timely and relevant to the current global challenges facing the world today.
Furthermore, allow me to convey our gratitude to the President of the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, Mr. Sam Kutesa of the Republic of Uganda, for the outstanding manner in which he represented Africa at the helm of the General Assembly during that session.
The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations marks a significant moment in the history of global governance. The Charter embodies, through its principles and objectives, the aspirations of oppressed people worldwide. We would also like to acknowledge the role of the United Nations General Assembly over the past 70 years. Rooted in the principle of sovereign equality, the Assembly is the most representative international institution and organ of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has over the years remained central to the provision of support to the disadvantaged, marginalized, occupied, colonized and oppressed peoples of the world. This body elevated the South African struggle for liberation internationally when it declared apartheid a crime against humanity.
Mr. Oliver Tambo, the former President of our liberation movement, the African National Congress, addressed the General Assembly from this very podium on 26 October 1976 (see A/31/PV.41) and spoke from other United Nations platforms as well on other occasions. Many other eminent South Africans were provided an opportunity in various United Nations forums to state our case for freedom, the United Nations providing a voice to the voiceless. A free South Africa has also been honoured by the declaration of 18 July as International Mandela Day, honouring our founding President and world icon, President Nelson Mandela. At this celebration of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations I wish to extend, on behalf of the people
of South Africa, our sincere gratitude to the world for its contribution to our freedom from the shackles of apartheid and institutionalized racism.
The General Assembly continues to provide a voice for the voiceless and the oppressed. In an historic and landmark development the General Assembly approved a resolution to allow the Palestinian flag to fly in front of United Nations Headquarters (resolution 69/320). The resolution was passed by an overwhelming margin, supported by many nations from both the developed North and the developing South. There can be no peace, security and development in the Middle East without a resolution of the Palestinian question. A solution is urgent. Otherwise, if we delay, in the next decade we may no longer have a piece of land to justify the two- State solution.
The historic seventieth anniversary of the United Nations presents an opportunity to reflect on the structure and workings of the Organization. Significantly, this year marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) in 2005, which discussed reform of the United Nations.
A number of significant decisions on reform have been successfully implemented since that Summit. They include the following: the replacement of the Human Rights Commission with a more effective Human Rights Council, the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission as a subsidiary body of both the General Assembly and the Security Council, the reform and streamlining of the United Nations management system, the mainstreaming of gender equality through the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),and the membership-driven responsibility to protect and to assist populations facing genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We welcome that notable progress.
However, almost no progress has been made on the commitment also made by Heads of State and Government in 2005 to the early reform of the Security Council. It is unacceptable and unjustifiable that more than 1 billion people in the African continent are still excluded from permanent membership in the key decision-making structure of the United Nations, the Security Council.
A continent with a smaller population than Africa is represented by three countries on the Security
Council as permanent members. That is unfair. The United Nations cannot pretend that the world has not changed since 1945. We are no longer colonies. We are free, independent sovereign States. We welcome the fact that the push for the reform of the Security Council coming from Africa has had an impact and has given some impetus to the intergovernmental negotiations process that has been looking at the reforms. We will continue working with progressive States towards the expansion of representation.
Another critical matter that needs attention is the selection of the Secretary-General, who is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council. A review of that process is necessary so as to enable more meaningful participation on the part of the General Assembly in the process.
The President has identified human rights, governance, the rule of law, and the gender aspects of the work of the United Nations as important areas of focus for the seventieth session of the General Assembly. We have to build upon the initial work undertaken in the development of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 to enhance protection in areas such as racism, discrimination against women and the promotion of the rights of the child and the rights of people with disabilities.
We also believe that the United Nations human rights system, especially its Human Rights Council, should ensure a balance between civil and political rights, on the one hand, and economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, on the other. The Human Rights Council must also be seen as an independent and impartial mechanism for the entrenchment of a human rights culture throughout the world. It should avoid the pitfalls of its predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights, which was beset by politicization and was caught up in the divide between developed and developing countries.
This year also marks 50 years since the adoption of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. The year 2015 also marks 60 years since the adoption of the Freedom Charter in South Africa, which embodies the fundamental principles and values that are now enshrined in our Constitution. South Africa will continue to champion efforts in the United Nations human rights system to combat the scourges of racism, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerances and to support
work aimed at the promotion of substantive global equality.
The seventieth general debate takes place in the context of growing international concern about the rise of violent extremism, terrorism and untold brutality, which we strongly condemn. We welcome the meetings that will take place on the margins of the General Assembly to review the progress made in countering terrorism in the Middle East and North Africa.
We wish to emphasize that the Security Council must take into account the views of the African continent and its subregional organizations when dealing with conflicts in Africa in future. The current situation in Libya and the Sahel region is a direct consequence of the failure of some members of the Council to heed informed counsel from the African Union. The norm of responsibility to protect was abused for narrow political interests that had nothing to do with the fundamental aspects of the prevention of mass atrocities.
The current refugee crisis in Europe is, sadly, the direct result of the militarization of civilian unrest, which included the massive arming of civilians and opposition groups in Libya, Syria and other affected countries. That kind of problem is a deliberately man- made problem, and it is critical that, in discussing violent extremism and terrorism in parts of Africa and the Middle East, we look into the root causes of the problem and not just the symptoms. Also requiring our serious reflection is the regime change doctrine and its role in perpetuating conflicts and instability in various parts of our continent and the world.
We welcome the recently signed peace agreement between the parties in South Sudan and urge the United Nations and all stakeholders to support the Sudanese people as they work to resolve their challenges. We reaffirm our support for the people of Western Sahara and urge the international community to encourage their struggle for self-determination, freedom, human rights and dignity.
We also welcome the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States and the release of the Cuban Five. We reiterate our call for the lifting of the economic and financial embargo to help the Cuban people to gain their economic freedom. We acknowledge the contribution of His Holiness Pope Francis to the Cuban-United States normalization process. We also warmly welcome the contribution of the Holy Father generally to the global pursuit of
peace, justice and the end of poverty and suffering, as eloquently expressed in the General Assembly and globally.
We commend the United Nations for the key role that it has played in peacekeeping and urge that resources be prioritized for this core role of the United Nations, especially in Africa.
The failure of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to reach an agreement at the 2015 Review Conference — in the year that marks 70 years since the first atomic bombs were detonated in Japan — is a major setback to our commitment to rid the world of weapons of mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. There can be no safe hands where nuclear weapons are concerned. The humanitarian consequences of a possible detonation of a nuclear weapon, whether intentional or accidental, will be catastrophic for humankind.
We welcome the recent agreement reached on the Iranian nuclear programme and the recognition of the right of Iran to the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
The seventieth session of the General Assembly has seen the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda. The outcome document represents a victory for the developing world, as it affirms that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) should build on the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals. Additionally, while the 2030 Agenda is universal in its scope in that the Sustainable Development Goals adopted apply to both developed and developing countries, there is also a clear recognition of the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and capabilities. The Agenda also contains a specific Goal on achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls. That is all the more appropriate given that this year is the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action and the fifteenth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace and security.
As the initiator of the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action — thanks to which the current round of negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is taking place — South Africa has a special interest in and commitment to the success of the Paris session of the Conference of the Parties later this year. We require the fulfilment of all three parts of the Durban mandate,
namely, the closing of the current ambition gap in the pre-2020 period through the honouring of existing legal obligations by developed countries and enhanced action; the entry into force of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol; and the adoption in Paris of a new agreement for the post-2020 period that contains all the essential elements, including the means of implementation and the measures relating to loss, damage and response. We seek a fair, ambitious and legally binding agreement in Paris that is applicable to all parties.
In addition, South Africa, as Chair of the G-77 plus China, would not be able to accept a Paris package that is hollow or weak on finance. South Africa has submitted its intended nationally determined contribution to the UNFCCC secretariat ahead of the 1 October deadline, signalling our readiness for Paris.
We join the world in celebrating the 70 years of existence of the United Nations. As we mark this historic anniversary, the reform of the Security Council and the strengthening of the General Assembly and other organs remain a paramount concern. By the end of this session, we should be in a position to adopt a road map, with clear and implementable time frames, on the priorities of this Organization as well as on its reform. We need to do this in order for the United Nations to remain a relevant force and a force for change in the world.
In conclusion, let me express our deep appreciation of the offer made by China when it was addressing the Assembly, an offer that must go through the United Nations. China spelled out the support it intended to give to Africa: a total of $100 million of free military assistance to the African Union over the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. We would like to underline our gratitude to China.