Every September, global attention is focused on the United Nations and on this stately Assembly Hall. People watch closely what is happening here, hoping that the United Nations will deliver peace, development, harmony  and prosperity to the world. People look to the United Nations to help them realize their dreams for a better life, to a United Nations that is committed to making itself relevant to all people, thereby making our world a better place for everyone to live in.
The contemporary international order, which began with the founding of the United Nations, is based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and is enhanced by the vision and practice of multilateralism. It has brought about general peace and rapid development over the past 70 years or more. A
 
people-centred philosophy has gained wide acceptance, and a broad consensus has formed on the need for interdependence and win-win cooperation.
Yet it is also true that the international  order today faces problems and needs steady reform and improvement. The world is changing. As we celebrate humankind’s proud achievements and progress, we must never lose sight of the challenges and difficulties we face in an ever-changing world. We must remain vigilant. What we see today is that international rules and multilateral mechanisms are under attack, and the international landscape is filled with uncertainties and destabilizing factors. Should we stay committed to multilateralism or let unilateralism have its way? Should we seek to uphold the architecture of the world order or allow it to be eroded and collapse? Those are critical questions bearing on the future of all countries and the destiny of humankind, questions that all countries must carefully reflect on and seek answers to.
China’s answer is clear cut.  All  along,  China  has upheld the international order and pursued multilateralism. Though once kept out of the United Nations for 22 years, China has never wavered in its commitment to multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China stayed true to  its  commitment  throughout  the negotiation process on its return to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and then its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) — negotiations that lasted 15 long years and were concluded at a certain price. China fulfilled its promise and integrated itself into the world economic system. After the international financial crisis broke out, China chose not to stand idly by; instead it worked together with other countries to get through those challenging times. For many years, China has contributed more than 30 per cent of global economic growth. It has played its part in helping with the global recovery. In the face of new developments and severe challenges, China will keep to its commitment and remain a champion of multilateralism.
Standing at this rostrum in 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping, in his statement reflecting the key understanding of humankind’s common interest and the future of  our planet, called for  the building  of a community with a shared future for humankind (seeA/70/PV.13). That initiative is in keeping with the trend of history, and it echoes the call of the times. It adds to our conviction and strength as we pursue our common endeavour to protect this global village. It
points us in the direction where we should work together to open up an even better future for humankind.
To uphold multilateralism in this new era, we believe that the following principles must be adhered to. First, we must pursue win-win cooperation. Our world is undergoing profound changes, never before seen in this century. Also never seen before are the problems and challenges we are facing. No country can meet them alone or stay immune to their impact. We must replace confrontation with cooperation and coercion with consultation. We must remain united as a big family. Instead of forming closed circles, we must promote common development through consultation instead of taking a “winner-takes-all” approach. That is a sure way to usher in a bright future.
Secondly, we must act in accordance with rules and order. State-to-State relations must be based on credibility, not the wilful revocation of commitments. International cooperation should be guided by rules, not impulse. Practising multilateralism is, first and foremost, about upholding the Charter of the United Nations, observing international law and basic norms governing international relations, and honouring international agreements reached through negotiations.
Thirdly, we must uphold the principles of fairness and justice. In international affairs, fairness and justice mean equality among all countries, big or small. They signify the responsibility  of  big  countries  to  help the small, and rich ones to assist the poor. Fairness  and justice also mean respect for other countries’ sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, as well as their choice of  development paths and right to a better life and increased development opportunities.
Fourthly, we must act to deliver real results. Multilateralism is not based on empty rhetoric. It must be pursued to solve problems. Efforts must be targeted, results-oriented and measured by visible progress. Whether a multilateral mechanism works depends on the will and engagement of countries. It is imperative that we work together to uphold the international system with the United Nations at its core, as well as the multilateral trading system centred on the World Trade Organization. Multilateralism requires a strong United Nations. China supports Secretary-General Guterres in advancing reform of the United Nations system in the three critical areas of peace and security, economic development and internal management. That reform should be led by Member States, and it should prioritize
 
the concerns of developing countries, make the United Nations more effective and enhance oversight and accountability. Stable and predictable funding is critical to the proper functioning of the United Nations. China will continue to fulfil its financial obligations and calls on other Member States to pay their membership contributions and peacekeeping assessments on time and in full.
The momentum of humankind’s drive forward towards development and progress is unstoppable. Peace, reconciliation and harmony represent the predominant trend, while war, conflict and terror are opposed by all. Equality, mutual trust and win-win cooperation are key words of our times, whereas power politics and the law of the jungle find no support. As a major responsible country, China is committed to the path of peaceful development, and it will work together with other countries and contribute its share to global peace and security.
Over the past year, the situation on the Korean peninsula has seen a major turnaround thanks to the efforts of all the parties concerned. China,  for  its part, has contributed to that progress. China supports the comprehensive improvement of relations between the north and the south of the peninsula, as well as efforts to facilitate dialogue between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United States. China encourages the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue moving towards denuclearization. We believe that it is also incumbent on the United States to respond in a timely and positive manner so  as to truly meet  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic of Korea halfway. China will continue to honour its international responsibilities and obligations and will strictly implement the Security Council resolutions related to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. China calls on the Security Council to take timely action in the light of developments and changes in the situation so as to create more favourable  conditions for a peaceful settlement of the issue on the peninsula through political and diplomatic means. To effectively settle the issue we need complete denuclearization and the establishment of a peace mechanism. Only when those components move in tandem can the issue be truly resolved and peace achieved.
Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, now is a crucial time for the continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA is a consensus-based multilateral agreement endorsed
by the Security Council. It serves the common interests of all the parties concerned and the international community at large. If it is not implemented, the international nuclear non-proliferation regime  will be undermined, the authority and role of the Security Council challenged, and peace and stability jeopardized both in that region and throughout the world,. That is  a scenario from which no one stands to gain. China urges the parties concerned to continue to observe and implement the JCPOA. On that basis, the possibility could be explored for a platform for dialogue that is inclusive and transparent so as to enable each party’s concerns to be adequately addressed through  talks and consultations.
The question of Palestine must not be marginalized. For more than seven decades, peace and justice have remained elusive in that part of the world. What the international community needs most is not a proposal or an initiative but resolve and action. In order to implement a two-State solution, a new round of peace-promoting efforts must be made with a view to exploring a new mediation mechanism. To that end, China will play its part, and Chinese humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people will continue.
The issue involving Myanmar’s Rakhine state cannot be resolved overnight, and steady progress must be made through a three-phase process involving a cessation of violence, the return of the displaced persons and economic development. Myanmar and Bangladesh are inseparable neighbours and could well be inseparable partners. Yesterday, at my meeting with colleagues from Myanmar and Bangladesh and in the presence of Secretary-General Guterres, an agreement was reached between Myanmar and Bangladesh on accelerating the return of the first wave of displaced persons. We believe that Myanmar and  Bangladesh are capable of resolving the issue properly through friendly negotiations.
China supports the leading role of the United Nations in coordinating responses to non-traditional security challenges. On the new frontiers of global governance, such as cyberspace and outer space, State sovereignty must be upheld, rules observed and responsibilities honoured. Terrorism, a threat to all societies, can never be justified. Security Council resolutions must be vigorously implemented to counter cyberterrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of radical narratives so as to eliminate the breeding grounds of terrorism.
 
Development is essential for our world today. We need to address both insufficient development and, more importantly, imbalance in development. There  is no one-size-fits-all model. Every country is entitled to explore a particular development path aimed at delivering happiness and security to its people and bringing about a future of confidence and hope for its children. Countries face various questions with regard to development. Such questions could be turned into drivers for reform, and solutions to problems could bring about development. Economic globalization should not be a process whereby some profit and others lose; even less should it result in widening the gap between North and South. It is important that we  adapt to the trend  of economic globalization and ensure that the process is open, inclusive, balanced and mutually beneficial so that it can deliver benefits to  all.  International trade is complementary and mutually beneficial in nature.  It should not be a zero-sum game in which one side gains at the expense of the others, and no one should be allowed to place their own interest above the interest of others. Protectionism will only be self-defeating, and unilateral moves will hurt everyone.
With regard to friction in trade, China stands for  a proper settlement of disagreements based on rules and consensus through dialogue and consultation on an equal footing. China will not be blackmailed or yield to pressure. We have not only taken steps to defend our own legitimate rights and interests but also to uphold the free trade system, international rules and the international order for the benefit of global recovery and the common interests of all countries.
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be at the top of the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. We need to incorporate its implementation into Member States’ development strategies and pursue innovation-driven, coordinated, green and open development that benefits all. We need to forge closer partnerships for development and pursue international development cooperation, with the United Nations at its centre and North-South cooperation as the main channel, supplemented by South-South cooperation. To meet the challenges of climate change, it is crucial to achieve sustainable development. China hopes to see the conclusion of the negotiations on the implementation guidelines of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, scheduled for the end of this year, with a view to boosting joint efforts for global ecological conservation.
In pursuing our common cause of humankind’s development and progress, China has worked in partnership with other countries of the international community. This year marks the fortieth anniversary of China’s reform and opening up. Over those 40 years, we have worked hard and forged ahead successfully along a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. That path has brought fundamental changes to China. In the past 40 years, more than 700 million individuals in the Chinese population have been lifted out of absolute poverty, which accounts for more than 70 per cent of the global totals for the same period. A basic medical insurance system has been set up to cover China’s 1.35 billion people, and a social pension network accessible to more than 900 million people has been fully implemented. China has built approximately 25,000 kilometres of high-speed railway. That accounts for two thirds of the global total and helps elevate global infrastructure construction.  According  to polls conducted by authoritative international polling agencies, China is at the top of global rankings in terms of public satisfaction with its development and public confidence in its future. The path  of  development that China is pursuing has provided the world with opportunities for shared development. Over the past 40 years, China’s foreign trade has averaged an annual growth rate of 14.5 per cent. That has sustained the impetus for global growth and provided the world with a huge Chinese market. We have every  confidence that we will maintain that momentum and continue to realize high-quality development. China will accelerate efforts to build an advanced economic system, which will create greater trade opportunities and an even better investment environment for other countries.
China will not reverse course or  shut  its  doors but will rather open its doors even wider to the world. China will not erect market barriers but will expand access to the Chinese market. Of all of the developing countries in the world, China has been the fastest in terms of opening up at a level unparalleled by others. When it comes to overall tariff reduction, China has accomplished more than it committed to when it joined the WTO. The breadth of China’s openness in services is close to the average level of  developed countries.  In November, China will host the first International Import Expo in Shanghai, which will be yet another major step in opening China’s market. Countries are welcome to participate actively in it.
 
The Belt and Road Initiative, proposed by President Xi Jinping, is a public good that China is providing for the world. It has grown into the largest platform for international cooperation. It aims to deliver benefits for all through consultations and cooperation. The Initiative is open, transparent and inclusive. It is  based on international rules and laws, and it aims to achieve green, environment-friendly and sustainable development. It is about pursuing common prosperity through greater complementarity among participating countries. By September, more than 130 countries and international organizations will have signed agreements on Belt and Road cooperation with China. Next year, China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, and we welcome all parties to attend that event.
China is the largest developing country in the world. Strengthening cooperation and solidarity with other developing countries has been and will continue to be a firm strategic priority in China’s diplomacy. That choice has been determined by what defines China as a country and by the system and values that China upholds. No matter how  much  China has increased  in strength, and regardless of how the international landscape might change, that strategic priority of China will not change.
The United Nations is the primary platform for advocating for and practising multilateralism. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will be remembered for its part in upholding multilateralism, world peace and development.  We  hope  that  all  of us in the international community will support the United Nations in its efforts to play a central role in international affairs, and we call on people of all countries to work together to build a community with a shared future for humankind.
A veteran of United Nations diplomacy recently told me that every session of the General Assembly has its own crisis to discuss, its own major topic. So what is the big issue in 2018? Syria? North Korea? The Middle East? Or the dramatic global refugee situation, from the Mediterranean to Venezuela?
If we take a step back, those disparate conflicts reveal a bigger picture and a distinct pattern. It becomes clear that we are  indeed  facing  a  crisis —  a  crisis of multilateralism. And that crisis makes conflicts around the world appear insoluble. When I say that they “appear” insoluble, that reflects the faith that we Germans have in multilateralism. Germany’s post-war success story is also multilateralism’s success story.
 
Europe, which was scarred by war and destruction, was able to integrate in freedom, security and prosperity thanks to our neighbours’ courage in seeking reconciliation. The United States also played  a crucial role in Europe’s reconstruction. The fact that Europe was then able to become the closest partner of the United Nations is a triumph of multilateralism. We believe in the United Nations because international cooperation changed our own fate for the better.
Europe has proved to the world that multilateralism and sovereignty are not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, in a world faced with immense global problems, we can safeguard sovereignty only by working together.
Three words, “we the  peoples”,  express  both our goal and how we will achieve it. That is why the founders of the United Nations chose those as the opening words of the Charter of the United Nations. They wanted to spell out that we need to work together to find solutions. They wanted to leave no doubt as to whom the United Nations and we as representatives of States serve — the people.
The Charter’s promises are addressed to the people, who are assured that their freedom and dignity will be defended at the United Nations in New York. But does a boy in Idlib, who lives in constant fear of the next air strike, feel that? How does a girl in Africa feel when her life expectancy at birth is 30 years lower than it would be if she were born in Germany? If we do not act on their behalf, “we the peoples” will be nothing more than hollow words for them. Kofi Annan once said, “We don’t need any more promises. We need to start keeping the promises we already made.” (SG/SM/9095)
When Germany  joins  the  Security  Council  as  a non-permanent member in a few weeks’ time, that will be what motivates us. I thank the members of the Assembly for the immense trust they have shown in us through their votes. That trust is an incentive for us to play our part in tackling the world’s crises, and to do so with courage and hope, but without overestimating ourselves. We want to work with all Member States as a reliable partner putting dialogue and cooperation at the heart of its action. In our view, “we the peoples” refers in particular to those who find it hard to be heard at the United Nations. That means we will always seek dialogue with civil society, in the Security Council and beyond.
Nevertheless, “we the peoples” also means that the Security Council itself must become more representative and inclusive. The world’s population has more than tripled since 1945, while the number of States Members of the United Nations has almost quadrupled. Yet the Security Council has hardly changed at all. That is why we should stop beating around the bush and finally start real negotiations on Security Council reform, as the vast majority of Member States have wanted for a long time.
The crisis of multilateralism is most painfully evident in Syria. The civil war has long since turned into a widespread regional conflict, with further potential for escalation in an already ravaged part of the world. That sort of war cannot be resolved by military means, because the players in the region are too deeply involved and the individual stakes are too high. However, with united diplomatic efforts, we have managed to prevent escalation in Idlib, which is a glimmer of hope. The agreement between Turkey and Russia must now be permanently implemented. But ultimately, and at long last, we need a political process.
To that end, talks must be held under the auspices of the United Nations. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council itself showed the way. We must finally take the path to free and fair elections. At that point, we will also be willing to shoulder responsibility for reconstruction. However, there is one line that we will not cross: we will not become accomplices to a regime that has forfeited its political legitimacy. Instead, we are doing our utmost to alleviate people’s suffering.
It is shameful that financial support is running  out once again. As the second-largest humanitarian donor, Germany is willing to provide the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a further €116 million — that is, half of the amount currently needed — to help Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon. But others also need to step up. After all, the Charter talks about “we the peoples”.
Disruptive foreign-policy approaches have now also reached the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Many people are keen to make us believe that the notion of a negotiated two-State solution is obsolete. They want us to think that it is now merely a term used in diplomacy and can no longer be achieved. But whatever  way  they twist it, there will be lasting peace only if people can determine the course of their own lives, living in security and dignity on both sides of the 1967 lines.
 
For that very reason, it remains important to work for a negotiated two-State solution, 25 years after Oslo.
The conflict in Ukraine will also continue to compel our attention. Along with France, Russia and Ukraine, we are working hard to implement the Minsk agreements. The focus is on the measures agreed to a long time ago with a view to stabilizing the ceasefire. All efforts, including our discussions on a possible United Nations mission in eastern Ukraine, are aimed at achieving that end.
Let us not forget  that  acute  crisis  management is at best a step towards peace. Lasting peace can be achieved only if we put a stop to the arms race. That is not some sort of nostalgic rhetoric from the days of the Cold War, whose balance of terror seems utterly benign compared to the scenario of a multipolar arms race with far more unpredictable players.
In the case of North Korea, the Security Council’s united stance and sanctions helped to pave the way back to dialogue. That was important. However, North Korea must follow up its words with deeds, and that must lead to complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. Germany is prepared to contribute its know-how, including the expertise we gained during the difficult negotiations with Iran.
The nuclear agreement with Iran may not be perfect. But so far, it has prevented Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons and averted an escalation that was highly likely three years ago. That is not insignificant. We Europeans, together, therefore stand by the agreement. We are working on keeping economic exchange with Iran possible, and we call on Iran to continue to fully live up to its commitments. The fact that we stand by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action does not mean that we are turning a blind eye to Iran’s destructive role in the region or to its ballistic-missile programme. That said, if there were no agreement, that would not make the search for solutions in Yemen, Syria or elsewhere any easier. On the contrary, disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation must generally become more of a focus of the work of the United Nations once again. We share the view of Secretary-General Guterres on this matter.
Our shared rules must keep pace with technological developments. Otherwise, what currently sounds like science fiction may very soon become deadly reality, as exemplified by autonomous weapons systems, or killer robots that kill without any human control. I call
on Members to support, both here in New York and in Geneva, our initiative to ban fully autonomous weapons before it is too late.
It is not only  in that domain that prevention  is  the right answer. The United Nations of the twenty- first century must tackle the root causes of conflict, including climate change. Action based solely on nationalism, with each country seeking to put itself first, reaches its limits in that respect, not least because our climate knows no borders. The alarm bells have rarely sounded as loudly as they did in the summer of 2018 in almost all parts of the world.
Germany and the European Union stand by the Paris Agreement. Moreover, we want to ensure that the Security Council makes the devastating effects that climate change can have on the security and stability of entire countries and regions an even greater priority.
We also need a quantum leap when it comes to post-conflict peacebuilding. That is why Germany will contribute at least €25 million to the Peacebuilding Fund this year. Over the past three years, Germany has tripled its contributions to efforts aimed at promoting stabilization and preventing crises around the world. For example, in Iraq, where Islamic State terrorists have mostly been militarily defeated, instead of leaving the Iraqi authorities to fend for themselves, we are training security forces to support administrative structures and providing civil support for efforts to promote stabilization, reconciliation and inclusive reconstruction.
Only when military measures are embedded in a clear political strategy can peacekeepers truly bring peace. That is also the objective of the peacekeeping reform efforts of Secretary-General Guterres. It would be a mistake to limit our discussion to bartering over decimal points in scales for  assessed  contributions. Of course efficiency is important, including for us in Europe, who are the largest contributors of funding. However, discussing potential cost savings alone  does not do justice to the benefits that peacekeeping missions bring, for example, in countries such as Mali or Lebanon, which have held peaceful elections and enjoyed relative stability, thanks in part to the Blue Helmets and the political efforts of the United Nations.
We Germans will continue to contribute, not only militarily and financially but also, always, politically, through diplomatic efforts and by investing in stability and  reconstruction.  After all,  the  success  of  United
 
Nations missions hinges on the political backing of Member States. That is particularly true for Libya right now. To tackle the Herculean task of making progress on functioning State structures, the United Nations needs our political support.
Peace is more than guns falling silent. Only just societies, societies where men and women enjoy equal rights and where women participate in all societal decision-making, will remain peaceful in the long term. It is not only a matter of fairness and respect; it is simply a question of humanity and reason. Kofi Annan put it this way in his report entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all”:
“we will not enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development, and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights” (A/59/2005, para. 17).
Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that instrument’s proclamation of dignity and personal freedom remains merely a distant promise for many. In the Security Council, the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly, we will demand accountability when human rights are trampled on, be it through human trafficking in Africa or attacks on the Rohingya in Myanmar. Nowhere will impunity stand. Even in war, there are limits.
We must hold to account those who wilfully attack humanitarian aid workers, hospitals and schools. Anyone who violates the most basic rules of human civilization must be punished. That also applies to those who use chemical weapons in breach of a taboo that was respected for decades. That is why it is so important that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has been mandated to seek and identify those responsible. The perpetrators must be fully aware that there can be no impunity for crimes against humanity — never, and not anywhere. In that regard, the International Criminal Court remains indispensable because it sends a clear message to the victims and the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that justice will prevail.
Earlier, I spoke about how we Germans in particular have faith when it comes to multilateralism. That faith is also based on the fact that the United Nations, time and again and despite all disagreements, delivers proof of what we can achieve by working together. I am thinking
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which remains our guiding set of principles for making this a better world for all people. I am also thinking about the successful conclusion of the negotiations on the global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration. The fact that more than 190 Member States — countries of origin, transit and destination — reached agreement on such complex and controversial issues is a victory for multilateralism. That success is an achievement of nations that are truly united.
The United Nations is built on our courage to reach compromises. The Organization grows with our desire to shape things. It thrives on our common pledge to act together first. Common ground is created when we put people at the heart of what we do. The desire for peace and security, and the dream of a prosperous and dignified life, are things that all people can relate to, whether they live in Baghdad, Berlin or Bamako. The United Nations belongs to the people. It is to them — the peoples of “We the peoples” — that we owe allegiance.
All of us here are heirs to the great hope to save future generations from the scourge of war, to build an international order based on law and respect for one’s word, and to lead humankind towards economic, social and moral progress in increasingly secure freedom. We have seen results. The enjoyment of human rights has spread, trade and prosperity have grown, and poverty has declined. That has been our achievement of the past several decades.
We must, however, look honestly at the moment in which we are living. We are experiencing today a deep crisis in the liberal Westphalian international order, which we have known. First, that is because, in part,  it has failed to regulate itself, and to date no solution commensurate with the task of meeting its economic, financial, environmental and climatic failures has been found. Secondly, it is because our collective capacity to
 
respond to crises too often continues to be hindered by divisions within the Security Council. Our Organization is too often reduced to deploring the violations of rights that it has pledged to guarantee. Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly in Paris, a cultural, historical and religious relativism is now challenging the foundations of their universality.
Born of hope, the United Nations can become, like the League of Nations that  preceded  it,  the  symbol of powerlessness. We need not look far to see who is responsible for that crime. They are in this Assembly Hall. They are speaking today. We, the leaders, are responsible. On that basis, I see three main paths for us to follow.
The first path is to think that this is just a passing moment, a historical parenthesis before we return to life as normal. I do not believe that to be the case. I do not believe it because we are going through a crisis of effectiveness and principles in our contemporary world order, which will not be able to restore its previous landmarks and modes of functioning. This moment in time is not a parenthesis; it is a manifestation of our own failures of the past.
The second path would be that of the law of the strongest. Everyone is tempted to follow their own law. That path — the path of unilateralism — leads directly to isolation and conflict, to widespread clashes with everyone pitted against each other, to the detriment of all, even ultimately those who believe themselves to be the strongest. The responsibility for peace cannot be delegated; it cannot be refused; it cannot be pre-empted. It must be exercised collectively.
The law of the strongest does not protect any people from any threat, be it chemical or nuclear. What will truly resolve the situation in Iran and what has already begun to stabilize it? Was it the law of the strongest, the pressure of one individual? No. We know that Iran was on the path to military nuclear power, but what stopped it was the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in Vienna in 2015. Today, as I said a year ago (see A/72/PV.4), we must not exacerbate regional tensions, but rather put forth a broader agenda that addresses all the nuclear, ballistic and regional concerns caused by Iranian policies. We must do so through dialogue and multilateralism, without naivety or complacency, but also without posturing, which would be pointless.
 The problem of trade imbalances and their consequences for our societies will be solved by common rules adapted to today’s reality that make it possible to ensure fair competition on an equal footing, and under no circumstances will a bilateral approach to all our trade disputes or new protectionism do so.
What will resolve the crisis between Israel and Palestine is definitely not unilateral initiatives, or ignoring Palestinians’ legitimate right to  lasting peace, or underestimating Israelis’ legitimate right to their security. There is no credible alternative to two States living side by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as their capital. Israel knows that France is unwavering in its friendship, and it is in the name of that friendship that I call for a quick end to the policy of faits accomplis that threaten the very possibility of reaching a peace agreement. Continuing along that path would be a mistake. On that issue, I am ready, and we must all stand ready, to move beyond dogmas and historical positions in order to take new initiatives, on the condition that it leads to positive changes on the ground. There too, the law of the strongest will only exacerbate frustration and violence. As the Assembly has seen, in the face of  contemporary imbalances, I  do not believe in the law of the strongest, even if it is masked in a form of legitimacy where it has actually lost all claims to legality.
I believe that there is a third possible path ahead of us, probably the most difficult and the most demanding, which requires us to forge a new model and to find a new global balance together. After the Second World War, a balance was built bloc by bloc over the course of decades. Then there was the emergence of a model based on hyperpower. For several years now, we have witnessed a new global instability characterized by the return of multiple centres of power.
The new balance that we must create must be based on new forms of regional and international cooperation and will, in my opinion, be structured around three principles. The first is respect for sovereignty, which is at the very heart of the Charter of the United Nations. The second is the strengthening of our regional cooperation. The third is the provision of more robust international guarantees or safeguards. It is through that method, and on the basis of those three principles, that we must manage contemporary crisis situations.
In Syria, we are pursuing the fight against Islamist terrorism. The military engagements of some countries
 
have allowed the regime to recover at the expense of crimes for which those responsible will one day have to account. The Syrian people have, tragically, paid the price, and there will be no winners in a Syria in ruins. What is needed now is to win peace under the auspices of the United Nations. We cannot decide for the Syrian people, but we must rather build the ways and means of the method that I have just defined and thereby build a solution supported not only by the Astana guarantors, but also by other States of the region and the international community through the Small Group on Syria, under the coordination of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in order to create the means both to resolve the humanitarian crisis and to build an inclusive, lasting political solution through constitutional reform and the holding of free elections. That is what it means to truly respect Syrian sovereignty. It is neither a substitute for the Syrian people in deciding who should be their leader nor an agreement to cover all crimes by accepting that this leader will remain until the end of time, considering that all principles and, ultimately, all law have been cast aside.
In Libya, too, it is that new method that should enable us to achieve a lasting solution. The current status quo allows militias and traffickers to gain ground, which destabilizes the entire region. We will not give the Libyans a way out of the crisis if we remain divided and if Libya becomes a stage, as it still is too often, for confrontations among  foreign  influences. In Paris, the Libyans recently pledged to hold early elections, which will make it possible to reunify State institutions. Those commitments must be fulfilled under the auspices of the United Nations and in close cooperation with the African Union. Yesterday, an important step was taken that I wish to  commend here. It is in the interests of Libyans, their neighbours, Europeans and the international community, who must be united around those objectives to move forward in that way.
We are all strong together in the face of terrorism when States are able to count on their own forces to ensure their security and when such security is based on regional and international solutions, in accordance with the principle I have justset out. That is the decision taken by the States of the Sahel, acting together in the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. That was also the essence of the process launched by the African Union to better assume its responsibilities by deploying
African peacekeeping operations. That is the essence of the initiatives undertaken in the Lake Chad region, together with Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon, with the support of the African Union. That is why we must support the African Union’s initiative and push for better coordination between the African Union and the United Nations. I hope that, by the end of the year, a resolution can be adopted to that effect.
We are strong in the face of terrorism when we take joint responsibility to fight all its forms of financing, and when, as we do in the Alliance for the Sahel, we act together for development, agriculture and education, and against the root causes of despair that have allowed terrorists to win hearts and minds. Some $7.5 billion has already been committed to 500 projects defined jointly with all the States concerned and the partners of the Alliance for the Sahel. We must consolidate those initial results.
As is evident from each of these crises, the answer has not been to leave States alone, to act for them or to proclaim from here the law or solution to be applied, but to know how to conscientiously articulate the principles of the sovereignty of peoples, regional cooperation and the real commitment of the international community. Those three principles form the basis for modern solutions. Only collective action can preserve the sovereignty and equality of the peoples that have given us a mandate. We also need collective action in the face of the demographic, climate and digital challenges before us, which none of us can face alone.
Confronted with the great challenges posed by migration, I do not believe in talk of unconditional openness, which only sparks concern and stokes intolerance. Nor do I believe in the misleading speeches of those who claim, for example, in Europe as elsewhere, that they will be safer behind the protection of a closed border. That is not true. The only effective way to manage the migratory flows affecting all our continents in an organized and controlled manner is to create the conditions for elective rather than forced international mobility, to work together — countries of origin, transit and destination — to address the  root  causes of migration, especially for its victims, to dismantle trafficking networks that are the worst scourge of this phenomenon, and to protect our borders in a respectful manner while ensuring compliance with international law and, in particular, the unconditional protection of those who are entitled to asylum. That is what we have decided to do together through the United Nations pact
 
that is to be adopted in Marrakech in December, which I support.
With regard to climate change, too, there are no free rides or easy solutions either. Even those who have challenged that reality suffer its consequences like everyone else. Extreme weather events are now a daily occurrence. And by weakening collective action, some only expose themselves further.
As for the great digital transformation, here too our duty is to stand together to build modern rules that will allow us to reconcile the development of artificial intelligence with our ethical rules in order to support the digital transformation of our societies.
I firmly believe in the sovereignty of peoples, which today is strong and demanded by all our peoples in the international arena. It also enjoys enhanced cooperation in many forms and a renewed legitimacy of international commitment. The great fight of our elders was achieving peace, and this remains one of our responsibilities. We will win that fight in the twenty- first century only by restoring a robust multilateralism that is truly capable not only of resolving conflicts pragmatically but, also and more broadly, of addressing their causes.
To tell the truth, I do not believe in one great globalized people. That is an illusion. It does not exist. But I do believe in universal values, and on that point we must not compromise. It is not the same thing. I believe in the non-negotiable defence of our values: human rights, the dignity of individuals and gender equality. I believe in our ability to strike a balance that respects peoples and cultures by refusing to negotiate those universal values. That is the reality, and I will in no way leave the principle of the sovereignty of peoples in the hands of nationalists or those who today, before the international community, advocate withdrawal and wish to exploit the sovereignty of peoples to challenge the universality and strength of our values, thanks to which we are all gathered here together in this Hall.
All of us here, even those who criticize it, have benefited from the structuring of the international order that has accompanied globalization. We have enjoyed a period of humanism and have all played a role in making it happen. Today, we must tackle the root causes of our imbalances. Together, we must face the weaknesses of our international order and, beyond the crises I have just mentioned, consider the deep inequalities that have taken root. In my view, that is the
heart of our problem today. What awakens nationalism? What gives rise to doubt in our Assembly? What gives rise crises everywhere? It is those deep inequalities that we have failed to address.
Ten years ago, when the international financial crisis hit, we took emergency action, but we did not solve the root cause. We did not curb the trend of hyperconcentration of wealth on our planet, and we did not truly provide a response to all those left behind by globalization. All those who were marginalized now hold a grudge because of the humiliations they suffered or have been plunged into despair, for which we are now collectively paying the price. We owe all those people a response.
We owe a response to the 265 million children who do not have access to school, more than half of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa, and to the young girls who have equal access to education in less than 40 per cent of countries.
We owe a response to the 700 million children who live in the regions most exposed to the consequences of climate change — the victims of floods, droughts, rising sea levels and the depletion of resources.
We owe a response to the 200 million women who do not have  access to contraception, to the more than 1 billion women who are not protected by law if they are victims of violence in their homes, and to all women whose global average pay is 23 per cent less than men and up to 40 per cent in rural areas.
We owe a response to the 783 million people living below the poverty line, to those suffering from hunger or chronic malnutrition and to those who do not have access to basic health care.
We owe a response to the aspirations of the most important generation of young people in history — our own young people — amounting to nearly 2 billion people who are now between the ages of 10 and 24, and 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries.
We owe a response to all those who look to us because their destiny depends on what we are or are not able to do here together in the Assembly.  And those who forget that we owe an answer to all those people are wrong because they are sowing the seeds for tomorrow’s crises and because they will leave their children and ours in a much worse situation than we are in today.
 
We have made great progress in reducing inequalities among our countries, and we  have created the framework for  that in the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development, but the fight is not behind us. It is far from over. Wealth per capita is 50 times higher in the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development than in low- income countries. Do we think that we can sustainably increase stability and balance in this state of affairs? No, we must take action. That is why, as I announced here last year (see A/72/PV.4), I have decided to increase France’s official development assistance by
€1 billion starting in 2019. Our humanitarian funding will increase by 40 per cent. But it is also why the fight against inequality will be the priority of the French presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7) summit in 2019. After Canada, whose leadership I applaud, France will assume the G-7’s next presidency. I would like to have a major reconsideration of its format in order to improve its association with various other Powers and devise new ways to coordinate.
I also wanted it to be at the United Nations that I made the first announcement that the inequality agenda will be at the centre of the next G-7, and also that I intend to report on the results of the Biarritz G-7 next September, because the time when a club of rich countries could define the balances of power in the  world  by  itself has long since passed and because it is impossible to separate the fate of each of its members from that of all the States members of the Assembly. We must tackle modern inequalities today because they are at the root of the evil that I denounced at the beginning of my statement. We must address inequalities of opportunity, which are a moral aberration and an unsustainable reality. We cannot accept a world in which people do not have the same opportunities because of the country where they were born, or cannot go to school in certain countries because they are women, or do not have access to basic services.
We kept the commitment made here last year with the President of Senegal. The Global Partnership for Education Financing Conference, held in February in Dakar, raised $2.5 billion to increase access to education around the world. That is a historic amount. France has increased its contribution tenfold. The mobilization of the G-7 already begun under the Canadian presidency should make it possible to go even  further. We  are at a key moment on  this issue that will decide whether or not we are capable of dealing with the challenge we
face. Between now and 2030 there will be 620 million more children needing schooling worldwide, including 444 million Africans. Are we going to provide for that? Are we going to give them all that they need for a solid foundation that will enable them to be agents for their own lives, to live as brothers in tomorrow’s world? If not, what kind of world are we creating? That is why I have committed France to this fight and why I insist so much on teacher training, vocational training and gender equality in education. That is why I urge everyone here to join in this great global surge for education. Education and health will not only be the pillars of our societies in the twenty-first century, they will be the fundamental building blocks of our economies.
We must also fight diligently against gender inequality. In France I have made this the signature issue of my five-year term, and I am launching an appeal here to make it a major global issue. Women and girls are the first of us to be affected by poverty, conflict and the consequences of global warming. They are the primary victims of gender-based and sexual violence, which too often hinders their freedom of movement and their ability to work and have control over their bodies. It is our responsibility in the twenty- first century to put an end to such violence, from street harassment to femicide. It is time for our world to stop victimizing women and finally make a place for them, one that they deserve, one where they can be leaders. We must ensure that they have access to education, health care, employment and economic and political decision-making everywhere, and we must fight all forms of violence against them. France therefore proposes to those Governments that want to move forward with us the creation of a coalition for enacting new legislation on equality between women and men. Fifty per cent of our development assistance will be devoted to projects aimed at reducing gender inequality.
We must also mobilize against health inequality at the international level. In Lyon in 2019 we will host the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Replenishment Conference. We will take up the initiative on the fight against counterfeit medicines and will intensify our response to major pandemics. I call on everyone here to mobilize.
Lastly, we must fight urgently, body and soul, against environmental inequality. It is unacceptable that 45 per cent of greenhouse-gas emissions are produced by 10 per cent of the planet’s richest inhabitants. As is the case with solar energy, we have an inefficient situation
 
when the countries with the greatest potential and needs have the least access to appropriate technologies. It is unsustainable that 100 million more people will be condemned to extreme poverty by 2030 if we fail  to meet our commitments to fighting global warming. Here too we must be united in combat. Some countries represented here are suffering more than others, and we owe them our solidarity. But we will all be held accountable for the disasters that are multiplying before our very eyes, before our peoples and our own children. The proclaimed breakdown of the Paris Climate Change Agreement has been thwarted because we have been able to remain united, despite the decision of the United States to withdraw from it. That strength must continue to support us and help us to ward off all the fatalistic predictions.
We are told that solutions exist but that the funding is lacking. So let us go find it, let us innovate. This is what we did last year in Paris, on 12 December, with many of those gathered here, at the One Planet Summit, with concrete commitments and first results. That is what we did at the beginning of the year in Delhi, with the International Solar Alliance. That is what we will do again tomorrow in New York, at the second One Planet Summit. We are told that it is already too late, that we cannot meet the goals. So let us speed up, let us together adopt the rules for implementing the Paris Agreement in December at the 24th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Let us implement the protocol against hydrofluorocarbon gases, which could enable us to reduce the average global temperature by one degree by 2050. Let us set ourselves the goal of concluding an ambitious draft global environmental pact by 2020, and ensuring that the Beijing Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and the 2020 International Union for Conservation of Nature World Conservation Congress in France will be decisive steps.
Let us make a  clear commitment, and let  us all be equally clear, concrete and consistent. This is an emergency. So let us honour the commitments we  have made. Let us no longer sign trade agreements with Powers that do not respect the Paris Agreement. Let us ensure that our business commitments integrate our environmental and social constraints. Let us work harder to involve sovereign wealth funds and financiers in this low-carbon-policy strategy. France will continue to be a global leader in this fight alongside everyone who  wants to join. We  will work  in the G-7  to ensure
that the commitments made at the 2015 Climate Change Conference are increased, and if one of our members does not want to move forward, we will move forward anyway by seeking new coalitions and new formats, because the G-7’s mission is to remain a united group of countries committed to democracy. But today it must also contribute to the creation of new coalitions that will make it possible to improve and restructure the collective global system. So let us build new forms of cooperation to make progress and  take decisions  on those fundamental issues. Only together can we effectively fight the inequalities that have fractured all of our societies and that have fuelled mistrust and the temptation to withdraw — inequalities that we have allowed to grow and to which we have been collectively unable to respond effectively.
But none of us can effectively fight the inequalities I have decried if we act alone. If we do, there are essentially only two solutions. The first is to continually lower the bar and revert to the standards that we know, as we have been doing for decades. We have a trade war, so let us reduce workers’ rights, keep cutting taxes and fuel our inequalities that way in an effort to respond to our trade problems. What does that lead to? It reinforces the inequalities in our societies and the disruption that we are living through. The alternative is to say that it is the rules that are not working, so we should retreat inwards towards isolationism and protectionism. But the only thing that leads to is heightened tensions, which do nothing to address serious inequalities.
What I am proposing instead is that we put in place a collective mechanism to enable us to work together on what we are doing in each of our countries to reduce inequalities, to evaluate our actions but also to coordinate them better and to disseminate best practices. I therefore propose that international institutions — the United Nations, but the OECD as well, of course — support us in setting up such a mechanism, for which the G-7 must be the driving force.
To defeat inequality, we must change our methods. First, we should revise both our trade and social rules. Rather than pursuing protectionism, we should all work together to thoroughly review the World Trade Organization (WTO) rules. We must restore the WTO’s ability to resolve conflicts and establish rules for the unfair trade practices, non-compliance with intellectual property rights and forced technology transfers that make a level playing field impossible. Starting this year, the Group of Twenty summit in Argentina must provide
 
us with a credible road map for rebuilding the WTO. That is also what we will have to do on the social front next year, during the centenary of the International Labour Organization.
Secondly, we must also change the modalities of our action, bringing into the scope of our collective action the major  players who are not  in this Hall or  at the General Assembly, the big  non-State  actors who are helping to change the world but who do not participate enough in reducing the inequalities that these transformations bring, and by that I mean the major  digital players, both in terms of taxation and  of responsibility for combating the manipulation of information. We need to  operate  differently  from  our standard collective action where all our major challenges are concerned and include dialogue with these new private stakeholders and Internet giants.
Thirdly, we must enable Africa to take its rightful place so that it can play a central part in rebuilding the international system. It is not only on that continent that we will collectively win or lose our great battle against inequality — it is with that continent, because today it is in Africa that we find the most fervent defenders of multilateralism and regional integration. Our African partners have fully understood that we can only meet our common challenges together. And this new alliance with Africa will also be a focus of the French presidency of the G-7.
I  firmly  believe  that  despite  these  fractures and challenges in the modern  world  order,  we  can put together a new vocabulary for action while also addressing the root causes of inequality today. And it is the responsibility of France and all its European partners, of the European Union, to be in the vanguard in this fight, to build a new, modern humanism that refuses to yield to attempts to withdraw or to simple-mindedness and at the same time, as mediating Powers, to build these new rules for the international order.
At a  time when our collective system is cracking, I have to say that we have never needed it so much. That is why we will support the agencies working on projects for peace and humanity — UNESCO, the conscience of the United Nations; the Human Rights Council; the International Criminal Court; the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to which we will increase our contribution — because, I want to remind the Assembly, we are simply talking  about enabling
hundreds of thousands of children to go to school, nothing less, nothing more.
We will defend expanding both member categories of the Security Council so that its composition reflects today’s balances of power and so that it is strengthened as a forum for consultation rather than obstruction. We will ensure that by the end of the year, two thirds of the members of the General Assembly can support limiting the right of veto in the case of mass atrocities. We will defend international humanitarian law by supporting staff who take extraordinary risks to help civilians on the ground by negotiating humanitarian access to all theatres, one by one.
On the seventieth anniversary of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we will remind the world that human rights are not a cultural thing. They are not simply values or revocable options, but a legal corpus enshrined in international treaties to which the members of the Assembly have freely consented. We will point out that their universality not only does not run counter to a people’s sovereignty, it is rather the only way to ensure the preservation and exercise of those rights.
France will be there to ensure that the world does not forget that clashing nationalisms only plunge us into the abyss, that when democracies lack the courage to defend their principles, they are weak, and that accumulated resentments, backed only by a fragile international system, can result in a global unleashing of violence twice in the space of one human life. I am speaking from our own experience. In a few weeks’ time, on 11 November, the Paris Peace Forum will present an opportunity for us to see a surge of thoughtfulness and courage as we attempt to rediscover what keeps us together here. For us, united by the tragedies of the twentieth century, it should be a time for renewal and to rediscover the oath we have taken to save future generations from the scourge of war. I want us and our counterparts to take on new responsibilities during the Forum in order to chart the way for concrete actions in the service of peace.
I know that many of us may be tired of multilateralism. In a world that is flooded with information and in which in a sense we are in a free-for-all, in which society is a reality show where it is fashionable and newsworthy to say the worst possible things, I know that denouncing the consequences of causes we have championed can be a successful political tactic and
 
that defending cooperation and multilateralism may no longer be fashionable. Then let us not be fashionable, because we have a duty to those who have made it possible for us to sit in this Hall. Because we must never forget that the genocides that are the reason we are here today were fuelled by the speeches that we are growing accustomed to, by the political spectacles that we applaud. Because we are now seeing international law and every kind of cooperation disintegrate, as if it was nothing, out of fear and complicity and because it looks good.
But I will not do that. I will not do it, because I come from a country that helped to create the declarations that have brought us here, because I come from a country that stands tall, and while it has made many mistakes and done many bad things, it has been able to maintain a kind of universalism at every point in its own history and in international history. This is today. This is now. So we must not get used to it. We must not accept all these kinds of unilateralism. Every day pages are being ripped in a betrayal of our history. And I am not going to get used to it.
This is what I have to say, very clearly. This nascent century is watching us, and our children are waiting. We must resolve our crises. We must work together to combat all our inequalities, but let us do so on a human level and in full accord with our principles, our histories and our universalism. In any case, that is my commitment to everyone here, and I am counting on us all.
On behalf of the United Kingdom, let me begin by paying tribute to an outstanding leader of the United Nations, who, sadly, passed away this summer. Kofi Annan was one of the great Secretaries-General, a tireless campaigner for peace and progress and a champion of human rights and human dignity, whose influence will continue to be felt around the world for years to come. Over the course of his lifetime he witnessed the extraordinary progress that we as a community of nations have made since the Organization was founded: progress in which we have more than halved the number of people living in extreme poverty in this century alone; progress in which the number of people killed in conflicts has fallen by three quarters in just over three decades; and progress in which millions of our citizens lead healthier and longer lives and where, thanks to advances in human knowledge, medicine, science and technology, we are presented with huge opportunities in the years ahead. Yet today many are concerned about whether or not that progress will continue and fearful about what the future holds.
For the end of the Cold War did not, as many once believed, lead to the inevitable supremacy of open economies and liberal democracies cooperating on the global stage for the common good. Today, instead, we face a loss of confidence in those very systems that have delivered so much. The belief in free markets has been challenged by the financial crisis of 2008, the concerns of those feeling left behind by globalization, the anxieties about the pace and scale of technological change and what that will mean for jobs and the unprecedented mass movements of people across borders, with all the pressures that can bring. And after the military interventionism at the beginning of the century, people question the rationale, and indeed legitimacy, of the use of force and involving ourselves in crises and conflicts that are not ours, while at the same time being repelled by the slaughter in Syria and our failure to end it.
Such doubts are entirely understandable; so too is the demand for leadership. Those of us who believe in inclusive societies and open economies have a duty to respond, learn the lessons of the past, meet people’s concerns with practical actions, not beguiling illusions, and renew our confidence in the ideas and values that have done so much to benefit so many for so long. For be in no doubt, if we lack the confidence to step up, others will.
In the last century, whether in the rise of fascism or the spread of communism, we have seen those on the extreme right and extreme left exploit people’s fears, stoke intolerance and racism, close down economies and societies and destroy the peace of nations. And today, once more, we see worrying trends in the rise of such movements in Europe and beyond. We have seen what happens when countries slide into authoritarianism, slowly crushing the basic freedoms and rights of their citizens. We have seen what happens when corrupt oligarchies rob their nations of the wealth, resources and human capital that are so vital to unlocking a brighter future for their citizens.
We have seen what happens when the natural patriotism that is a cornerstone of a healthy society is warped into aggressive nationalism, exploiting fear and
 
uncertainty to promote identity politics at home and belligerent confrontation abroad, while breaking rules and undermining institutions. We see what happens when States like Russia flagrantly breach international norms — from the seizing of sovereign territory to the reckless use of chemical weapons on the streets of Britain by agents of the Russian GRU. We have to show there is a better way to meet the concerns of our people. That way lies in global cooperation between strong and accountable States based on open economies and inclusive societies. It is a way that ensures that strong nation States provide the bonds that bring citizens together and that power remains accountable to those it is there to serve; that celebrates free markets and has the confidence to reform them when they need to work better; and that demonstrates that delivering for one’s citizens at home does not have to be at the expense of global cooperation and the values, rules and ideals that underpin that.
Indeed, cooperation and competition are not mutually exclusive. Only global cooperation based on a set of agreed rules can ensure competition is fair and does not succumb to protectionism, with its certain path to lost jobs and international confrontation. It is only global cooperation that can harness legitimate self- interest towards common goals, producing agreements on global challenges, such as climate change and proliferation, and increasing inclusive economic growth. We see that cooperation here today at the United Nations, as we also saw it at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting earlier this year. And here today, as Chair-in-Office of the Commonwealth, I deliver a clear statement on behalf of the Heads of Government of its 53 equal and independent member States. We reaffirm our shared commitment to working together within a rules-based international system to address shared global challenges and foster a fairer, more secure, more sustainable and more prosperous future. That commitment takes account of the special requirements of the least developed countries and of small and otherwise vulnerable economies and benefits all our citizens and the wider world.
But it is not enough for us merely to make the case for cooperation. We need action, at home and in the community of nations, to show how our ideas and values can deliver practical benefits for all our people in all parts of the world. We must recognize the legitimacy of people’s concerns and act to build a global economy that works for everyone. We must invest in the patient
work of building open societies in which everyone has a stake in the future. And we must act to uphold the international rules-based system and stand up for our values by protecting those who may suffer when it is violated. Let me take each in turn.
First, we must respond to those who feel that the global economy is not working for them; the pace of globalization that has left too many people behind; the fear that our children and grandchildren may lack the education and skills to secure the jobs of tomorrow; and the risk that technological change could become   a source of inequality and division rather than the greatest opportunity in history. In the United Kingdom we are driving investment in industries of the  future to create new jobs, from low-carbon technologies to artificial intelligence. We are investing in education and skills so that workers are ready to make the most of the opportunities that lie ahead. And we are making sure people play by the rules so that business and innovation is celebrated for creating jobs, not demonized because of grievances over tax not paid or rights not respected.
While we strive to make our own economies work for all our people, we should do the same at a global level. In an increasingly global economy, it is not enough to ensure people play by the rules at home. We need global cooperation to set and enforce fair rules on trade, tax and the sharing of data. And those rules need to keep pace with the changing nature of trade and technology. We need to give the World Trade Organization a broad, ambitious and urgent mandate to reform. It must address the areas where it is not functioning effectively, deal with issues that are not currently covered and maintain trust in a system that is critical to preventing a return to the failed protectionism of the past.
Fair and respected rules are essential for business to flourish and drive growth. But recent history shows that that cannot be sustained without deeper partnerships among Governments, business, international financial institutions and civil society to ensure that growth delivers for everyone. That is why I recently visited Africa, along with British businesses, to promote trade and investment and encourage a new partnership based on shared prosperity and shared security. It is why at this General Assembly session I co-hosted an event with Prime Minister Trudeau, President Kagame and President Akufo-Addo, calling for more support for investment and job creation for young people on the continent. It is why the United Kingdom will maintain its commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross
 
national income on official development assistance and put our development budget at the heart of our international agenda. We will do more to create jobs, improve skills and increase investment in emerging economies — in both our interests and theirs, for the best way of resisting protectionism is to ensure that this century is defined by open markets that really deliver for all our people.
Secondly, we must build countries, not only economies, that work for everyone: inclusive societies where every citizen has a stake in the future. Those are the firm foundations on which strong and accountable nations are built. History has consistently taught us that giving people a stake in society is the best way to ensure stability, security and economic growth. There is no one right way to do this. Every country must choose its own path, but the basic tenets are common across the world. They include a Government that is transparent and accountable, an independent judiciary to enforce the rule of law, free and fair elections and a free and open media. They also include freedom of expression, a right to redress, property rights that are reliably enforced, equality, freedom of thought, opinion, religion and conscience — all found in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed 70 years ago.
Those of us who believe in those tenets must set  an example in defending and strengthening them at home and abroad. That is why we must call out hate speech, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia  and  all  forms of prejudice and discrimination against minorities wherever we find  it.  Like  many  leaders,  I  suspect, I do not always enjoy reading what the media in my country writes about me. But I will defend their right to say it, for the independence of our media is one of my country’s greatest achievements and it is the bedrock of our democracy.
So, too, will I defend objectivity and impartiality in the face of those who treat truth as just another opinion to be manipulated. This challenge has only become more complex with the rise in social media and online information. That is why we agreed at the Group of Seven (G-7) Summit in June to step up  our efforts to respond to disinformation and why, together with our partners and with technology companies, we are leading efforts to reclaim the Internet from terrorists and others who would do us harm.
Just as we must stand up for the values that we adhere to, so we must support countries and leaders who
choose to take the often difficult steps towards a more inclusive society. The United Kingdom will use all the levers at its disposal to do so. Through our aid budget and commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals, we will not only protect the most vulnerable, but also bolster States under threat and help others sustain their progress. Through global campaigns, we will help countries to end scourges such as modern slavery and sexual violence in conflict, and we will mobilize wider support through our alliances and membership of multilateral organizations — not only the United Nations, but also international financial institutions, the G-7, the Group of 20 and NATO.
Just as there is no single recipe for an inclusive society, so there is no single model for balancing the democratic demands of our public with the imperative to cooperate internationally. The vote by the British people to leave the European Union (EU) was not a rejection of multilateralism or international cooperation; it was a clear demand for decisions and accountability to lie closer to home. I believe the role of leadership   in these circumstances is clear: it is delivering on the democratic wishes of our people and international cooperation, working with allies and partners in pursuit of our shared values.
Thirdly, we must have the will and confidence to act when the fundamental rules that we live by are broken. This is not about repeating the mistakes of the past by trying to impose democracy on other countries through regime change, but we should not allow those mistakes to prevent us from protecting people in the face of the worst violations of human rights and human dignity. We should not allow those mistakes to paralyse the international community when its long-established norms are violated. We should not let our inability to prevent some of the worst conflicts today stop us from making every effort to ensure they do not happen again in future. If we stand back, we allow the world to become divided into spheres of influence in which the powerful dominate the weak and in which legitimate grievances go unaddressed. This is not just a moral imperative — it is also a matter of self-interest, for when barbarous acts and aggression go unchecked, dictators and terrorists are emboldened.
We must therefore have the confidence to act. When the Syrian regime used chemical weapons on its people again in April, it was Britain — together with France and America — that took military action to degrade the Syrian regime’s chemical-weapons capability and
 
deter their use. Earlier this year, when Russia used a toxic nerve agent in a sickening attack on the streets  of Salisbury, the United Kingdom, with our NATO, EU and other allies, took action, expelling over 150 Russian intelligence officers in the largest collective expulsion ever.
In Burma, following the damning report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, we should sow the same  confidence  to hold accountable those responsible for the appalling atrocities repeatedly inflicted by the Burmese military on the Rohingya, Shan and Kachin peoples since 2011. Similarly, we should gather evidence of Da’esh’s crimes worldwide, show ensuring justice for their victims and deterring those who might conduct such crimes in the future. But accountability alone is not enough. We must do more collectively to prevent such atrocities in the first place and address the causes of instability that can give rise to them.
The United Nations has a critical  role  to  play, and it has a wide range of levers to do so, from sanctions — which show the leaders of Iran and North Korea that they cannot act without consequence — to peacekeeping missions, such as that in South Sudan, which is helping to prevent suffering and the collapse of law and order. To be able to effectively use those levers, the Security Council must find the political  will  to act in our collective interest. United Nations agencies must deliver the reforms that the Secretary-General has started to become more agile, more transparent and better coordinated on the ground. To support those reforms, we must also ensure proper funding is targeted specifically at those parts of the United Nations that deliver results.
Seventy years ago, the General Assembly agreed the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights.  Today we must renew the ideals and values on which that Declaration was founded. In doing so, we must learn the lessons of the past and show through our actions how cooperation between strong and accountable States with open economies and inclusive societies can best deliver security and prosperity for all our people. As Kofi Annan said at the start of his second term as Secretary-General,
“I have sought to turn an unflinching eye to the failures of our recent past, in order to assess more clearly what it will take for us to succeed in the future.” (A/55/PV.105, p.3)
In that spirit, let us show unflinching resolve to renew the promise of freedom, opportunity and fairness, a promise that has delivered for more people, in more places, than at any other period in our history. Let us ensure that promise can be fulfilled for our children and grandchildren and for every generation to come.On my own behalf and on behalf of my country, India, I should like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy- third session. As a woman, I feel doubly proud that this honour has been bestowed on you. I also recall, with equal pride, that the first woman to occupy this eminent position was an Indian — Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit — in 1953, at the General Assembly at its eight session. I also thank former President Miroslav Lajčák for successfully presiding over the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
 
We  received the   tragic   news   this   morning  of a tsunami and an earthquake, which occurred simultaneously. From this rostrum, on behalf of India, I wish to convey our deep condolences to the Government and the people of Indonesia. I would also like to assure them that India will cooperate in helping them during this trying time.
The United Nations is the world’s principal multilateral organization, where nations  seek  balm for the wounds of history and a platform for solutions and where less developed nations sit with their more fortunate brethren to formulate plans that can correct skewed economic imbalances. In 2015, we established 2030 as a critically important horizon for 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A common refrain since 2015 has been that we will reach that horizon only if India finds its way to that destination; otherwise, we will fail.
I assure the General Assembly through you, Madam President, that India will not let us fail. We are totally committed to achieving those objectives for our own people. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, India has initiated an unprecedented economic and social transformation that will help our country achieve its SDG benchmarks well before the deadline. I will provide an overview to illustrate the world’s largest-scale exercise in poverty elimination and social transformation.
Through the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, the world’s largest financial inclusion scheme, more than 320 million Indians who had previously never seen the inside of a bank now have bank accounts.  The programme has enabled the poor to receive direct benefit transfers from the Government’s welfare programmes into their personal accounts, thereby stopping waste and corruption within the system. Similarly, Ayushman Bharat Yojana, the world’s largest health insurance programme, was launched by Prime Minister Modi a few days ago, on 23 September. That revolutionary scheme will benefit 500 million Indians, who will receive insurance coverage of 500,000 rupees per family annually. We have a prayer in India — Sarve Santu Niramaya — which means “May all be free from illness”. The Ayushman Bharat Yojana, or National Health Protection Scheme, is the answer to that prayer.
Similarly, we have launched the largest-scale housing programme in the world aimed at ensuring that everyone  has a  roof  over  their head.  Under  the
programme, we have set for ourselves a target of  nearly 21  million homes by  2022. So  far, more than  5 million homes for the poor have already been built. Two extremely effective programmes have also been initiated to increase the skill levels of those waiting to be employed through the National Skill Development Corporation and the Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency (MUDRA) programme, which seeks to turn the poor into entrepreneurs. I stress that more than 140 million Indians have taken out MUDRA loans. The most significant aspect of the MUDRA scheme is the fact that 76 per cent of its beneficiaries are women. At the heart of Prime Minister Modi’s transformative vision is a radical idea, which is that uplifting any nation is best achieved through the comprehensive empowerment of women. All the programmes that I have just mentioned have the welfare of women at their core. Last year, I spoke about the Ujjwala programme (see A/72/PV.19), through which, I am happy to report,
50 million free liquid-gas connections have been provided so far.
Another such initiative is the maternity benefit programme, in which women in India are provided with 26 weeks of paid leave to care for their newborns. As a woman, Madam President, you will understand better than most how vitally important that programme is for every mother. Some developed nations with huge economies do not provide more than six weeks’ paid leave, thereby leading to a continuing struggle for more time off. In India, we have implemented what women across the world need, namely, 26 weeks of paid maternity leave.
In 2022, free India will be 75 years old. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to build a New India by then. What kind of India will that be? That India will be a clean, healthy, prosperous, secure, educated, developed, energized and strong India. That is our horizon for India in 2022, and we will reach it, as we are sparing no effort to meet that goal.
The greatest challenges of our era are the existential threats of climate change and terrorism. Underdeveloped and developing nations are the most affected victims of climate change. They have neither the capacity nor the resources to meet that crisis. The countries that have exploited nature for their short-term needs cannot abdicate their responsibilities in that matter. If we wish to save the world from the adverse effects of climate change, the developed nations must lift up the deprived with financial and technical resources. The principle
 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities was reiterated in the 2015 Paris Agreement. Prime Minister Modi, together with the Prime Minister of France, launched the International Solar Alliance. Sixty-eight nations have become members of the Alliance so far. In March, India and France chaired the founding conference of the Alliance, in which 120 countries participated. I am pleased to inform the Assembly that Prime Minister Modi has been acknowledged as a champion in that area. He is also working towards realizing the principle of one sun, one grid, since he believes that, as there is only one sun, there should also be a single universal grid.  If that goal is achieved, we will be witness to a major revolution in the energy sector, which will represent a major milestone in combating all phenomena related to climate change.
I mentioned terrorism as the second existential threat to humankind. We imagined that the advent of the twenty-first century would see an age of common good characterized by cooperation but, here in New York, the horrific tragedy of 11 September and, in Mumbai, the catastrophe of 26 November became nightmares that shattered our dreams. The demon of terrorism now stalks the world at a faster pace in some places, and at a slower one in others, but it is life-threatening everywhere. In our case, terrorism is bred not in some faraway land but across our border to the west. Our neighbour’s expertise is not restricted to serving as a spawning ground for terrorism; our neighbour is also an expert in trying to mask malevolence with verbal duplicity. The most startling evidence of that duplicity was the fact that Osama Bin Laden, the architect and ideologue  of  11  September,  was  given  safe  haven in Pakistan.
America  had  declared  Osama  Bin   Laden   to be its most dangerous enemy and had launched an exhaustive, worldwide search to bring him to justice. What America could perhaps not comprehend was that Osama would find sanctuary in a country that claimed to be America’s friend and ally, namely, Pakistan. Eventually, America’s intelligence services discovered the truth of that hypocrisy, and its special forces delivered justice. But Pakistan continued to behave as if nothing had happened. Pakistan’s commitment to terrorism as an instrument of official policy has not abated one bit, nor has its practice of hypocrisy. The killers of 11 September met their fate but the mastermind of 26 November, Hafiz Saeed, continues to roam the
streets of Pakistan with impunity. What is heartening is that the world is no longer ready to believe Islamabad. The Financial Action Task Force, for instance, has put Pakistan on notice with regard to the funding of terror.
We have been accused of sabotaging the process for talks with Pakistan. That is a complete lie. We believe that talks are the only rational means by which to settle even the most complex disputes. Accordingly, talks with Pakistan have been initiated many times. When they failed, it was only because of Pakistan’s behaviour. There have been many Governments of numerous parties in India. Every Government has tried the peace option. By inviting the Heads of State of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation to his swearing-in ceremony, Prime Minister Modi began his attempt for dialogue on his very first day in office. On 9 December 2016, I personally went to Islamabad and proposed a comprehensive bilateral dialogue. But soon afterwards, on 2 January, Pakistan-sponsored terrorists attacked our air force base in Pathankot. It is clear that we could not pursue talks in the middle of terrorist bloodshed. Even now, after the new Government in Pakistan came to power, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, wrote to Prime Minister Modi suggesting a meeting between our Foreign Ministers in New York. We even accepted the proposal but, within hours of our acceptance, news came that terrorists had killed three of our security personnel. Does that indicate a desire for dialogue? Could such a dialogue ever take place?
Time and again, Pakistan has accused India of human rights violations. Who is a greater transgressor of human rights than a terrorist? Those who take innocent lives in pursuit of war by other means are defenders of inhuman behaviour, not of human rights. Pakistan glorifies killers. It refuses to see the blood of innocent victims. It has become something of a habit for Pakistan to throw the dust of deceit and deception up against India in order to provide some thin cover for its own guilt.
The United Nations has seen that before. Last year, using her right of reply, the representative of Pakistan displayed some photographs as proof of alleged human rights violations by India (see A/72/PV.22). The photographs turned out to be from another country. Similar false accusations have become part of its standard rhetoric.
Each year, for the past five years, India has been arguing from this rostrum that lists are not enough if we
 
want to check terrorists and their protectors. We need to bring them to accountability through international law. In 1996, India submitted a document with a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism at the United Nations. That draft remains a draft today only because we cannot agree on a common language. On the one hand, we want to fight terrorism; on the other, we cannot define it.
That has allowed terrorists with a price on their head to be celebrated in Pakistan as “freedom fighters”. Their cruelty and barbarism are being advertised as heroism. The country of Pakistan prints postage stamps glorifying such terrorists. How long can we sit quietly and listen to such claims? If we do not act now, we will have to deal with that demon later on, when it sets fire to the entire world. Once again, I appeal to this body to come to an agreement on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and to adopt it as one of the necessary measures in a long-running war.
I would now like to make some remarks regarding the United Nations. I began by highlighting its unique and positive role, but I must add that, step by slow  step, the importance, influence, respect for and value of this institution are beginning to ebb. It is time to wonder whether we are wandering towards the fate of the League of Nations, which came to an end because it did not adopt the changes that were needed. It was unwilling to accept the need for reforms; we must not make that mistake. The United Nations must accept that it needs fundamental reform. Those reforms cannot be simply cosmetic; we need to change the institution’s head and heart in order to make both compatible with the contemporary reality.
Reform must begin today; tomorrow could be too late. Are all of the challenges that confronted the United Nations at its founding still relevant today? I feel that, in the Security Council, now is the time to start making much-needed changes.
A subject that is often debated is multilateralism. The challenges we face are causing tensions in many countries. I should like to state that India believes that the world is one global family. The United Nations should therefore work as a family. How does a family work? It is shaped by love, not trade; it is nurtured by compassion, not jealousy; it functions by compromising, not by fighting. That is why the United Nations must be based on the principles of the family. It cannot be
run using “I”, “me” and “mine”; this forum needs “we”, “us” and “ours”. Only then will it be sustainable.
India does not believe that only certain countries should be allowed to fulfil their goal or that we should take decisions on behalf of other countries that are not beneficial to them. We should take every country’s goals into account.
This year, India will celebrate the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth. Mahatma’s favourite devotional hymn was “Vaishnav Jan To Tene Kahiye” or “Call those people Vaishnavas who feel the pain of others”. Its essence is that he who understands the pain of another and absorbs it as his own is a good human being. He who sees that pain and helps without becoming arrogant is a good human being.
We have to make the Assembly a platform for understanding, assistance and true justice.  We  have to understand the pain of other nations and work with developed nations to ease and eliminate their pain. Arrogance has no place in our scheme of things; arrogance is counter-productive and self-defeating.  Let us work for the benefit of the less fortunate and towards a world that is free from terrorism, tension and violence. That is the universe we envisage.
It is with that wish in mind that I end with a Sanskrit shloka or song: May all experience well-being; may all experience peace; may all move towards perfection; may all enjoy prosperity; may all achieve serenity.
When I spoke here three years ago (see A/70/PV.22), Israel stood alone among the nations. Of the nearly 200 countries that sit in this Hall, only Israel openly opposed the nuclear deal with Iran. We opposed it because it threatens our future, even our very survival. We opposed it because the deal paved Iran’s path to a nuclear arsenal. By lifting the sanctions, it has fuelled Iran’s campaign of carnage and conquest throughout the Middle East. We opposed it because the deal was based on a fundamental lie, that Iran is not seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
Israel exposed that lie earlier this year. In February 2018, Israel conducted a daring raid on Iran’s secret atomic archive. We obtained more than 100,000 documents and videos that had been stashed in vaults in an innocent-looking building in the heart of Tehran. In May, I presented a short summary of what we obtained to the international media. I provided hard evidence of Iran’s plans to build nuclear weapons and its plans to deceive the international community. Israel shared that information and even more damning evidence that we found with members of the five plus one group and with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Months have passed, and the IAEA has still not taken any action. It has not posed a single question to Iran. It has not demanded to inspect a single new site discovered in that secret archive. Given that inaction,  I have decided, therefore, to reveal today something else that we have shared with the IAEA and with a few intelligence agencies. What I am about to say has not been shared publicly before. Today I am disclosing for the first time that Iran has another secret facility in Tehran, a secret atomic warehouse for storing massive amounts of equipment and materiel from Iran’s secret nuclear-weapon programme.
In May, we exposed the site of Iran’s secret atomic archive. It is in the Shorabad district of Tehran. Today I am revealing the site of a second facility, Iran’s secret atomic warehouse, which is located in the Torquzabad district of Tehran, just three miles away from the archive. Let me show exactly what the secret atomic warehouse looks like. From this image, it looks just like the atomic archive, another innocent-looking compound. For listeners at home using Google Earth, this no-longer-secret atomic warehouse is on Mehr Alley. The coordinates are on the image. Anyone can try to get there. And for those who try to get there, it  is a hundred meters from the Kalishoi, a rug-cleaning operation. By the way, I hear they do a fantastic job of cleaning rugs there. But by now they may be radioactive rags. That is the second secret site.
Now countries with satellite capabilities may notice some increased activity on Mehr Alley in the days and weeks ahead. The people they will see scurrying back and forth are Iranian officials desperately trying to finish the job of cleaning up that site. Since we raided the atomic archive, they have been busy cleaning out the atomic warehouse. Just last month, they removed 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel. What did they do with it? They had to get those 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel out of the site, so they took it out and spread it around Tehran in an effort to hide the evidence. The residents of Tehran, now endangered, may want to know that they can get a Geiger counter on Amazon for only $29.99. At today’s exchange rate, that is just 4 million Iranian rials. But we will get to that later. I will talk about the Iranian economy in a minute.
They took that radioactive material and spread it around Tehran. The Iranian officials cleaning out the site still have a lot of work to do, because they had at least 15 gigantic ship containers full of nuclear-related equipment  and  materiel  stored  there.  Since  each of
 
those containers can hold 20 tons of materiel, the site must have contained as much as 300 tons of nuclear- related equipment and materiel, all in that very place.
We now have to ask ourselves a question. Why did Iran keep a secret atomic archive and a secret atomic warehouse? After all, when South Africa and Libya gave up their nuclear programmes, the first thing they did was to destroy both the archives and the materiel and equipment. The answer to the question is simple. The reason Iran did not destroy its atomic archive and its atomic warehouse is because it has not abandoned its goal to develop nuclear weapons. In fact, it planned to use both of those sites in a few years when the time was right to break out the atom bomb. Delegations may rest assured that that will not happen. It will not happen because what Iran hides Israel will find.
I have a message for  the  Head  of  the  IAEA,  Mr. Yukiya Amano. I believe he is a good man. I believe he wants to do the right thing. I therefore ask him to do the right thing now. The IAEA should inspect that atomic warehouse immediately, before the Iranians finish clearing it out. Do delegations remember the time when we were promised that inspections could take place anytime, anywhere? Well, how about inspections of Mehr Alley right now? And while Mr. Amano is at it, he should inspect the other sites that we told him about. Once and for all, he should tell the world the truth about Iran.
I also have a message today for the tyrants of Tehran. Israel knows what they are doing, and Israel knows where they are doing it. Israel will never let a regime that calls for our destruction develop nuclear weapons — not now, not in 10 years, not ever. And Israel will do whatever it must do to defend itself against Iran’s aggression. We will continue to act against it in Syria. We will act against it in Lebanon. We will act against it in Iraq. We will act against it whenever and wherever we must. We must act to defend our State and to defend our people.
Three years ago, a few weeks after the nuclear deal was completed, I asked this question from this very podium: does anyone seriously believe that flooding Iran’s radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? But many of the deal’s supporters believed just that. They believed that Iran’s regime would become more moderate, more peaceful. They believed that Iran would use the billions of dollars it received in sanctions relief to improve the lives of
its people — solving the water problem, the trucking problem, the electricity problem and improving hospitals and schools. That is what they believed. Perhaps some people here today also believed that.
Well, it did not happen. Instead, Iran used the money to fuel its vast war machine. Just this past year, Iran has attacked Kurds in Iraq, slaughtered Sunnis in Syria, armed Hizbullah in Lebanon, financed Hamas in Gaza, fired missiles into Saudi Arabia and threatened the freedom of navigation in the Strait  of  Hormuz and the Strait of Bab El-Mandeb. That is some peace, some moderation.
If people think that Iran’s aggression has been confined to the Middle East, they need to  think again. Last month, two Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks here in the United States, and several weeks ago, Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks in the heart of Europe. Yet while the United States is confronting Iran with new sanctions, Europe and others are appeasing Iran by trying to help it bypass those new sanctions.
Now, I have just used a tough word,  a  very  strong word: appeasement. I use it reluctantly. But unfortunately that is exactly what we are seeing again in Europe. We need to think about that. The same week that Iran was caught red-handed trying to murder European citizens, European leaders were rolling out the red carpet for President Rouhani, promising to give Iran even more money. As the son of a historian, I have to ask — and I ask it not merely as a historian’s son, but as a Jew, a citizen of the world and someone who has lived through the twentieth century — have these European leaders learned nothing from history? Will they ever wake up?
We in Israel do not need a wake-up call, because Iran threatens us every day. Despite the  best  of  hopes — and there were many hopes around the nuclear deal — that deal did not push war further away. It brought it ever closer to our borders. In Syria, Iran  is trying to establish permanent military bases against us and has already launched missiles and drones into our territory. In Gaza, Iran is arming terror groups to launch rocket attacks on our cities and terror attacks on our civilians. In Lebanon, Iran is directing Hizbullah in the building of secret sites for converting inaccurate projectiles into precision-guided missiles that can hit targets deep inside Israel with an accuracy of within 10 metres.
 
The Assembly needs to listen to this. Hizbullah is deliberately using the innocent people of Beirut as human shields. It has placed three of these missile-conversion sites alongside Beirut’s international airport. I can show a picture that is worth a thousand missiles. In it, we can see Beirut’s international airport, the first missile site, which is in the Ouzai neighbourhood, on the water’s edge, a few blocks away from the runway. There is also a second site, which is underneath a soccer stadium, two blocks away, and a third site, which is adjacent to the airport itself, right next to it.
I therefore have a message for Hizbullah today. Israel also knows what it is doing. Israel knows where it is doing it. And Israel will not let it get away with it. Just as supporters of the nuclear deal were wrong about what would happen when sanctions were removed, they were dead wrong about what would happen when sanctions were restored. They argued that United States sanctions alone would have little economic impact on Iran. That is what they said. It is hard to believe.
Let us take a look at what  has  happened  to  Iran’s economy now that President Trump has forced companies to choose between doing business with Iran and doing business with the United States, whose gross domestic product is 50 times the size of Iran’s gross domestic product. A year ago, Iran’s economy was booming. Now it is collapsing. Iran’s currency is plummeting. Inflation and unemployment are soaring. British airlines, German banks, French oil companies, Japanese oil importers and many others are scrambling to get out. If that is little economic impact, we can imagine what will happen with the next batch of United States sanctions, which will be imposed in November.
The deal’s supporters were also wrong when they argued — and it is hard to believe that they argued this, despite the fact that I have had many arguments with them — that restoring sanctions would rally the Iranian people around the regime. While they are definitely rallying, their rallying is definitely not around the regime. They are rallying against the regime. They are not chanting “Death to America”. They are chanting “Death to the dictator”. They are not chanting “Export the Islamic Revolution”. They are chanting “Leave Syria”, “Leave Lebanon”, “Leave Gaza”, and “Take care of us in Iran”.
I listen to those protests. I talk to Iranian people. I show videos and get so many responses — from Iranians. At first, I thought they were Iranian exiles — in the
safety of London or Paris or Los Angeles. No, these are Iranians from Iran, embracing Israel, criticizing their regime — that is an understatement — with their names. Shortly after the protests broke out, I asked my intelligence people, “What is going on?”
Those protests are an indicator of something extraordinary that has been taking  place there. Through those protests, the Iranian people are showing unbelievable courage. The protests are now embracing the whole of Iran — from the urban centres to distant villages, from the striking merchants in the bazaars to the young women  uncovering their hair.  The people of Iran are bravely standing up to a regime that has brutally repressed them for four decades and that has squandered — and still squanders — their money in bloody wars across the Middle East.
This is what I say to Europe’s leaders and to others. Instead of coddling Iran’s dictators, join the United States and Israel and most of  the Arab world  in supporting new sanctions against a regime that endangers all of us across the world.
Israel is deeply grateful to President Trump for his bold decision to withdraw from the disastrous nuclear deal with Iran. A great many of our Arab neighbours are also grateful. And everyone who cares about the peace and security of the world should also be grateful.
But I have an important confession to make. It  may be surprising, but I have to admit that the Iran deal has had one positive consequence, an unintended but positive consequence. By empowering Iran, it has brought Israel and many Arab States closer than they have ever been before, in an intimacy and friendship that I have not seen in my lifetime and that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.
When friendships are formed around a threat or a challenge, opportunities are quickly seen, not just for security but for how to bring a better life to our peoples, which is what Israel can and wants to contribute to. Israel deeply values those new friendships, and I hope the day will soon arrive when Israel will be able to expand peace, a formal peace, beyond Egypt and Jordan to other Arab neighbours, including the Palestinians. I look forward to working with President Trump and his peace team to achieve that goal.
I also want to take the opportunity now, here at the United Nations, a place I know something about because many years ago I served here as Ambassador
 
for many years, to express Israel’s appreciation to President Trump and Ambassador Haley for the unwavering support they have provided to Israel at  the United Nations. They have unequivocally backed Israel’s right to defend itself.  They rightly pulled out of a history-denying UNESCO and a morally bankrupt Human Rights Council. I think that more resolutions about Israel than about the rest of the world combined have been introduced in those bodies, and tenfold the number of resolutions on Iran, Syria or any other State. It is not even fair to say “tenfold”, because there are no multiples of zero.
President Trump and Ambassador Haley also stopped funding an unreformed United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, an organization that perpetuates the Palestinian refugee problem instead of solving it. Day after day, the Trump Administration has stood up to what has long been a specialty here at the United Nations, slandering Israel. Even though the shameful resolution 3379
(XXX) comparing Zionism to racism was repealed 25 years ago, I am sorry to say that its foul stench still clings to these halls.
Israel airlifted Ethiopian Jews to freedom and a new life in Israel, in the Jewish State. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is absurdly accused of racism. Israel’s Arab citizens vote in our elections, serve in our Parliament, preside over our courts and have exactly the same individual rights as all other Israeli citizens. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is shamefully accused of apartheid. Today there are at least five times as many Palestinians as there were in 1948, the year of Israel’s founding. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is outrageously accused of ethnic cleansing. Do those here know what that is? It is the same old anti-Semitism with a brand-new face. That is all it is.
Once it was the Jewish people who were slandered and held to a different standard; today it is the Jewish State that is slandered and held to a different standard. Here is an example. Take the outlandish attacks that have been levelled against Israel after our Knesset, our Parliament, recently adopted a law declaring Israel the nation-State of the Jewish people. Nevertheless, Israel is a free country. People can oppose that law, and people have done so. People can call for different wording in this or that clause, or add or delete a clause. People can do that.
But when Israel is called racist for making  Hebrew its official language and the Star of  David  its national flag, when Israel is labelled an apartheid State for declaring itself the nation-State of the Jewish people — that is downright preposterous. And does the Assembly know why? Because represented in the Hall today are more than 100 countries that have only one official language, even though many other languages are commonly spoken within those countries. There are more than 50 countries here that have crosses or crescents on their flags, even though they have many non-Muslims and non-Christians living in  their  midst. And there are dozens of countries that define themselves as nation-States of a particular people, even though there are many ethnic and national minorities within their borders. None of those countries have been denigrated or libelled for celebrating their unique national identity. Only Israel is denigrated. Only Israel is libelled. What is unique about the Jewish people is not that we have a nation-State. What is unique is that many still oppose our having a nation-State.
Moments ago, President Abbas outrageously said that Israel’s nation-State law proves that Israel is a racist, apartheid State. President Abbas should know better. He wrote a dissertation denying the Holocaust. His Palestinian National Authority imposes death sentences on Palestinians for selling land to Jews. Let me repeat that. If a Jew buys an apartment or a piece of land anywhere in the Palestinian territories, the Palestinian who sold  him that land is executed. That  is what the law says. President Abbas proudly pays Palestinian terrorists who murder Jews. In fact, the more they slay, the more he pays. That is in their law too. Then how can he condemn Israel’s morality and call Israel racist?
That is not the way to peace. That is not the way  to achieve the peace that we all want and need and to which Israel remains committed. This body should not be applauding the Head of a regime that pays terrorists. The United Nations should condemn such a despicable policy. And the United Nations, which brokered an Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire in 2014, should demand that Hamas release our fallen soldiers Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. The latter was kidnapped when Hamas violated that very ceasefire. Hamas should also release the two Israeli citizens whom it holds captive, Avera Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed.
Every time I stand here I  feel  as  I  do  today.  I am privileged to stand here as the Prime Minister
 
of the State of Israel, a Jewish and democratic State. Some believe that Israel cannot be both Jewish and democratic. That is false. Israel is both, and Israel will always remain both. Ever since Abraham and Sarah made their journey to the promised land, nearly 4,000 years ago, the land of  Israel has been our homeland. It is the place where Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob, Leah and Rachel carried out their eternal covenant with God. It is where Joshua made us a sovereign nation, where David ruled and Isaiah preached, where the Maccabees fought and where Masada fell. It is the place from which we were exiled and to which we returned, rebuilding our ancient and eternal capital, Jerusalem. The nation-State of Israel is the only place where the Jewish people proudly exercise our collective right of self-determination. That right was recognized nearly a century ago by the League of Nations, and more than 70 years ago by the United Nations when it supported the establishment of a Jewish State. That is what resolution 181 (II) said, “a Jewish State”.
At the same time, Israel is a vibrant democracy, where all its citizens, Jews and non-Jews alike, enjoy equal individual rights, and those rights are guaranteed by law. In Israel, whether a person is a Jew or an  Arab, a Christian or a Muslim, a Druze or a Bedouin or anything else, that person’s individual rights are exactly the same and will always  remain the same.  In the Middle East that is not obvious. Now that is an understatement. In the Middle East, where women are often treated as property, minorities are persecuted and gays are hanged, Israel stands out as a shining example of freedom and progress.
I could not be more proud to represent my country, Israel. I am proud that we have made Israel a global technological Power of breathtaking creativity in information technology and precision agriculture. Is the Assembly aware that we target the fertilizer and the water down to the individual plant — not to a field,  not to part of a field, but down to the plant? I am proud of those geniuses that have brought those unbelievable developments in water management, cybersecurity, autonomous vehicles, digital health, medical devices and so many other fields that are improving the lives of billions of people around the world. I am proud of Israel’s brilliant scholars, innovative entrepreneurs, talented artists, devoted teachers and compassionate doctors, and of our search-and-rescue teams who save lives from Haiti to Mexico, from Nepal to the Philippines. I am also proud of Israel’s courageous soldiers, the men
and women who bravely defend our homeland while upholding the highest values. Most of all, I am proud of the people of Israel, who draw extraordinary strength from the deep wellsprings of our heritage, who possess an unbreakable spirit and who are as determined as ever to build a secure and magnificent future for the one and only Jewish State.E nga mana nul o nga whenua o te ao/Tena koutou katoa/Nei ra te reo mihl maioha o Aotearoa/Tena tatau i nga kaupapa korero/Ka arahina e tatau/Me te ngakau pono/Me te kotahitanga o te tangata.
My opening remarks were in Te Reo Maori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand. As is tradition, I acknowledged those who are here, why we are here and the importance of our work. It seems a fitting place to start.
As a leader attending my first General Assembly, I am struck by the power and potential that resides here. In New Zealand we have always been acutely aware of that. We are a  remote nation at  the bottom  of the South Pacific. It takes three hours to reach our nearest neighbours by plane, and anywhere that takes less than 12 hours is considered close. I have no doubt, though, that our geographic isolation has contributed to our values.
We are a self-deprecating people.  We  are  not ones for status. We will celebrate the  local  people who volunteer at their sports clubs as  much  as  we will celebrate successful entrepreneurs. Our empathy and strong sense of justice are matched only by our pragmatism. We are, after all, a country made up of two main islands, one simply named North and the other South. For all of that, our isolation has not made us insular. In fact, our engagement with the world has helped shape who we are.
I am a child of the 1980s, a period in New Zealand’s history where we did not just observe international events, we challenged them. Whether it was apartheid in South Africa or nuclear testing in the Pacific, I grew up learning about my country and who we were by the way that we reacted to international events. Whether it was taking to the streets or changing our laws, we have seen ourselves as members of a community, one that we have a duty to use our voice within.
I am an incredibly proud New Zealander, but much of that pride has come from being a strong and active member of our international community, not in spite of it. At the heart of that international community has been this place. Emerging from a catastrophic war, we have collectively established — through convention, charters and rules — a set of international norms and human rights. All of these are an acknowledgement that we are not isolated, that Governments do have obligations to their people and to one another and that our actions have a global effect.
In 1945, New Zealand’s Prime Minister Peter Fraser said that the Charter of the United Nations offered perhaps a last opportunity to work in unison to realize the hope in the hearts of all of us, for a peace that would be real, lasting and worthy of human dignity. None of those founding principles should be consigned to the history books. In  fact,  given  the  challenges we face today and how truly global they are in their nature and impact, the need for collective action and multilateralism has never been clearer. And yet,  for  all of that, the debate and dialogue we  hear globally is not centred on the relevance and importance of our international institutions. Instead, we find ourselves having to defend their very existence. That surely leaves us all with the questions of how we got here and how we get out.
If anything unites us politically in this place right now it is this: globalization has had a massive impact on our nations and the people we serve. While that impact has been positive for many, for others it has not. The transitions our economies have made have often been jarring and the consequences harsh. Alongside unprecedented global economic growth, we are still seeing a growing sense of isolation, dislocation and insecurity and the erosion of hope. As politicians and Governments, we all have choices in how we respond to those challenges. We can use the environment to blame nameless and faceless others, feed the sense of insecurity and retreat into greater levels of isolationism,
 
or we can acknowledge the problems we have and seek to fix them.
In New Zealand, going it alone is not an option. Aside from our history, we are also a trading nation, and proudly so, but even without those founding principles, there are not just questions of nationhood to consider. There are generational demands on us too. It should hardly come as a surprise that we have seen  a global trend of young people showing dissatisfaction with our political systems and calling on us to do things differently. Why would they not, when they themselves have had to adapt so rapidly to a changing world?
Within a few short decades, we now have a generation that will grow up more connected than ever before. Digital transformation will determine whether the jobs they are training for will even exist in two decades. In education or the job market, they will not just compete with their neighbours but their neighbouring countries. This generation is a borderless one, at least in a virtual sense, and its members increasingly see themselves as global citizens. As their reality changes, they expect that ours will too, that we will see and understand our collective impact and that we will change the way we use our power.
If we are looking for an example of where the next generation is calling on us to make that change, we need look no further than climate change. Two weeks ago, Pacific Island leaders gathered together at the Pacific Islands Forum. It was at that meeting, in the small island nation of Nauru, that climate change was declared the single biggest threat to security in the Pacific. Please, just think about that for a moment. Of all the challenges we debate and discuss, rising sea levels present the single biggest threat to our region.
For those who live in the South Pacific, the impacts of climate change are not academic, or even arguable. They are watching the sea levels rise, the extreme weather events increase and the impact that has on their water supply and food crops. We can talk all we like about the science and what it means and what temperature rises we need to limit in order to survive, but there is a grinding reality in hearing people from  a Pacific island talk about where the sea was when they were children and the potential loss of their entire village now that they are adults.
Our action in the wake of that global challenge remains optional, but the impact  of  inaction  does not. Nations like Tuvalu, the Marshall Islands or
Kiribati — small countries that have contributed the least to global climate change — are suffering, and will suffer, the full force of a warming planet. If my Pacific neighbours do not have the option of opting out of the effects of climate change, why should we be able to opt out of taking action to stop it? Any disintegration of multilateralism and any undermining of climate-related targets and agreements are not interesting footnotes in geopolitical history. They are catastrophic.
In New Zealand we are determined to play our part. We will not issue any further offshore oil and gas exploration permits. We have set a goal of 100 per cent renewable energy generation by 2035, established a green infrastructure fund to encourage innovation and rolled out an initiative to plant 1 billion trees over the next 10 years. Those plans are unashamedly ambitious. The threat that climate change poses demands it. But we represent less than 0.2 per cent of global emissions. That is why, as a global community, not since the inception of the United Nations has there been a greater example than climate change of the importance of collective action and multilateralism. It should be a rallying cry for all of us.
Yet there is a hesitance that we can ill afford and a calculation of personal cost and self-interest. But that is not the only challenge where domestic self-interest is the first response and where an international or collective approach has been diluted at best, or rejected at worst. But it would be both unfair and naive  to argue that retreating to our own borders and interests has meant turning our backs on a perfect system. The international institutions that we have committed to have not been perfect. But they can be fixed.
That is why  the challenge I  want to issue today   is this: together, we must rebuild and recommit to multilateralism. We must redouble our efforts  to  work as a global community. We must rediscover our shared belief in the value, rather than the harm, of connectedness. We must demonstrate that collective international action not only works but is in all of our best interests. We must show the next generation that we are listening and have heard them.
But if we are truly going to take on a reform agenda, we must acknowledge the failings that have led us to this crossroads. International trade, for instance, has helped bring millions of people out of poverty around the world. But some have felt their standard of living slide. We in New Zealand have ourselves seen
 
the hesitancy around trade agreements within our own population. The correct response is not to repeat the mistakes of the past and be seduced by the false promises of protectionism. Rather, we must all work to ensure that the benefits of trade are distributed fairly across our societies.
We cannot rely on international institutions to do that, in the same way that we cannot blame them if they have not delivered those benefits. It is incumbent on us to build productive, sustainable and inclusive economies and demonstrate to our peoples that, when done right, international economic integration can make us all better off. If we want to ensure that everyone is better off, surely we should start with the most vulnerable.
We in New Zealand have set ourselves an ambitious goal. We want to be the best place in the world to be a child. It is hardly the stuff of hard and fast measures — after all, how are play and a feeling of security and happiness measured? But we can measure material deprivation and poverty, and so we will. Moreover, we are making it a law that we report on those numbers every single year alongside our budgets. What better way is there to hold ourselves to account, and what better group to do that for than children?
But if we are focused on nurturing that next generation, we equally have to  worry about  what  it  is that we are handing down to them, including our environment. In the Maori language there is a word that captures the importance of that role, kaitiakitanga, which means guardianship. That is the idea that we have been entrusted with our environment and have a duty to care for it. For us, that has meant taking action to address degradation, such as setting standards to make our rivers swimmable, reducing waste and phasing out single-use plastic bags, right through to eradicating predators and protecting our biodiversity. The race to grow our economies and increase wealth makes us all the poorer if it comes at the cost of our environment. We in New Zealand are determined to prove that it does not have to be that way. But those are all actions and initiatives that we can take domestically that ease the blame and pressure on our international institutions. That does not mean they do not need fixing.
At the heart of the multilateral system, the United Nations must lead the way. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s reform efforts to make the United Nations more responsive, effective and modernized so that it is capable of dealing with today’s challenges.
We encourage him to be ambitious, and  we  stand with him in that ambition. But ultimately it is up  to  us, the Member States, to drive change here at the United Nations. That includes reforming the Security Council. If we want the Council to fulfil its purpose  of maintaining international peace and security, its practices must be updated so that it is not hamstrung by the use of the veto.
New thinking will also be needed if we are to achieve the vision encapsulated in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In New Zealand we have sought to  embed the  principles behind the  SDGs  in a new living-standards framework that is guiding policymaking and the management of our resources. We remain absolutely committed to supporting the rollout of the SDGs alongside international partners through a significant increase in our official development assistance budget.
But revitalizing our international rules-based system is not just about the mechanics of how we work together. It also means renewing our commitment to our values. The Charter of the United Nations recalls that the Organization was formed to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which after two world wars had brought untold sorrow to humankind. If we forget that history and the principles that drove the creation of the United Nations, we will be doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past.
In an increasingly uncertain world it is more important than ever that we remember the core values on which the United Nations was built — that all people are equal, that all are entitled to have their dignity and human rights respected and that we must strive to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom. We must consistently hold ourselves to account on each one.
In addition to renewing that commitment, though, we must acknowledge where accountability must continue, and that is especially the case when it comes to equality. So many gains have been made, and each is worthy of celebration. In New Zealand we have just marked the 125th year since women were granted the right to vote. We were the first country in the world to do so. As a girl I never grew up believing that my gender would stand in the way of my achieving whatever I wanted in life. I am, after all, not the first but the third female Prime Minister of New Zealand.
 
But for all of that, we still have a gender pay gap and an overrepresentation of women in low-paid work and as victims of domestic violence. And we are not alone. It seems surprising that in this modern age we should have to recommit to gender equality, but we  do. I for one will never celebrate the gains we have made for women domestically while internationally other women and girls experience a lack of the most basic opportunities and dignity. #MeToo must become #WeToo. We are all in this together.
I accept that the list of demands, whether domestic or international, on all of us is long. We are operating in challenging times. We face what we in New Zealand would call wicked problems, ones that are intertwined and interrelated. Perhaps then it is time to step back from the chaos and ask what we want. It is in that space that we will find simplicity, the simplicity of peace, prosperity and fairness.
If I could distil it into one concept that we are pursuing in New Zealand it is simple and it is this: kindness. In the face of isolationism, protectionism and racism, the simple concept of looking outwardly and beyond ourselves and of kindness and collectivism might be just as good a starting point as any. Let us therefore start here, with the institutions that have served us well in times of need and will do so again.
In the meantime, I can assure everyone here that New Zealand remains committed to continuing to do its part in building and sustaining international peace and security; promoting and defending an open, inclusive and rules-based international order based on universal values; and being pragmatic, empathetic, strong and kind. The next generation, after all, deserves no less.
The statements delivered during this session’s general debate confirm that international relations are now being conducted in a complex and controversial period of history.
Today, we are all witnessing two opposing trends collide. On the one hand, we  see the strengthening    of polycentric principles of world order, the steady development of new centres of economic growth and peoples’ aspirations to preserve their sovereignty and choose development models that are consistent with their national, cultural and religious identities. On the other hand, we see the desire of a number of Western States to retain their self-proclaimed status as world leaders and slow the irreversible and objective process of establishing multipolarity. To that  end,  they  do not hesitate to use every possible method, including political blackmail, economic pressure and brute force.
Such illegal actions  devalue the  international law that underpins the post-war world order. We hear statements trumpeted that not only call into question the legal validity of international treaties, but also prioritize self-serving unilateral approaches over decisions made within the United Nations. We are seeing an assault  by belligerent revisionism on the modern system of international law. There have been attacks on the basic principles of the Middle East peace process, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, commitments under the framework of  the World Trade Organization, the multilateral Paris Agreement on Climate Change and many more.
At the same time, our Western colleagues continue to seek to replace the supremacy of law in world affairs with some kind of so-called rules-based order. Those
 
rules themselves are invented depending on whatever is politically expedient and are a reflection of double standards. Baseless accusations of interference in the internal affairs of various countries are being made alongside overt attempts to undermine and topple democratically elected Governments. Efforts are being made to draw some countries into military alliances that are designed to further specific agendas against the will of the peoples of those countries, while other States are threatened with punishment for their free choice of partners and allies. It is telling that aggressive attacks on international institutions are being accompanied by attempts to privatize their secretariat structures and grant them the rights of intergovernmental bodies in the hope of manipulating them later.
The shrinking space for constructive international cooperation, escalating confrontations, a growing overall lack of predictability, and a substantially higher risk of spontaneous conflicts all affect the work of this global Organization. The international  community has to pay a high price for the parochial, self-serving ambitions of a small group of countries. The collective mechanisms for responding to common security challenges have stalled. Diplomacy and a culture of negotiation and compromise are increasingly replaced by dictates and unilateral extraterritorial restrictions effected without the consent of the Security Council. Such measures, which have already been applied to dozens of countries, are ineffective as well as illegal, as demonstrated by the more  than  half-century  of the United States blockade of Cuba, which has been condemned by the entire international community.
Once again, however, the lessons are not being drawn from history. The number of those who  want  to hand down verdicts without bothering with charges or trials is not getting any smaller. Today assumptions in the spirit of the notorious “highly likely” approach seem to provide sufficient grounds for some of our Western colleagues to make accusations against anyone they want to. We have already been through that, and we well remember how often spurious pretexts have been used to justify interventions and unleash wars, as was the case in Yugoslavia in 1999, Iraq in 2003 and Libya in 2011. The same methods are being used in Syria today. On 14 April, missile strikes were launched against Syria on a completely invented pretext, just hours before international inspectors were expected to arrive at the site of an incident that had been staged. This is a warning against any further provocations
by terrorists and their patrons involving the use of chemical weapons, which would be unacceptable.
The conflict in Syria has already lasted seven years. The failed attempt to effect regime change, which was orchestrated from outside and relied on extremists, nearly resulted in the country’s disintegration and the emergence of a terrorist caliphate in its place. Russia’s energetic action, in response to the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and supported by diplomatic efforts in the context of the Astana process, helped prevent that devastating  scenario. The Syrian National Dialogue Congress, initiated by Russia, Iran and Turkey in Sochi in January, established the conditions for a political settlement in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and the basis for the intra-Syrian constitutional committee now being established in Geneva. Its agenda includes the restoration of ruined infrastructure in order to facilitate the return of millions of refugees to their homes. Assistance in addressing those issues in the interest of all Syrians, without double standards, must become a priority for international efforts and the activities of United Nations agencies.
Despite the complexity of the situation in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya, we  must  not  lose  sight  of the long-standing Palestinian question. A just and equitable solution to that issue is crucial to improving the situation throughout the Middle East. I want to warn against any unilateral  approaches  in  this area or attempts to monopolize this peace process. Today, as never before, the international community should consolidate its efforts with the aim of restarting talks on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Russia will continue to do its utmost to facilitate the process, including within the Middle East Quartet and in cooperation with the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Mutually acceptable agreements must ensure the peaceful and safe coexistence of the two States of Israel and Palestine.
Here at the United Nations, which was created on the basis of lessons learned from the Second World War, we must all think about a future in which the repetition of past mistakes should have no place. This year marks the eightieth anniversary of the notorious Munich agreement crowning the criminal policy of appeasement of the Third Reich, a sad example of the catastrophic consequences that can result from national
 
egotism, disregard for international law and attempts to solve problems at others’ expense.
Regrettably, in a number of countries today not only has the vaccine against the Nazi plague been weakened, but a rising campaign to rewrite history and whitewash war criminals and their associates is  emerging.  In our view, the campaigns being waged in a number of countries to demolish monuments to the liberators of Europe are an outrage. We call on the Assembly to support the draft of this year’s versin of the annual resolution on the inadmissibility of glorification of the Nazis.
The growth of radical nationalism and neo-fascism in Ukraine, where criminals who fought under Waffen- SS banners have been declared heroes, is one of the main factors in the protracted intra-Ukrainian conflict. The only way to settle that conflict is to ensure the comprehensive and consistent implementation in good faith of the Minsk package of measures, approved unanimously by the Security Council in its resolution 2202 (2015). We support the activities of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and are ready to provide its monitors with United Nations protection.
However, instead of implementing the Minsk agreements and engaging in dialogue with Donetsk and Luhansk, Kyiv continues to harbour the illusion that it may be able to put occupying forces in Donbas with the support of the West and is increasingly threatening to resort to military options. The sponsors of the current Kyiv authorities must bring their clients to their senses, make them lift the blockade of Donbas and end discrimination against ethnic minorities throughout Ukraine.
In Kosovo, the international military presence authorized by the Security Council is being transformed into a United States military base, and Kosovo armed forces are being created. The agreements between Belgrade and Pristina brokered by the European Union are not being implemented. Russia calls on the parties to engage in dialogue in accordance with the principles of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and will support a decision that would be acceptable for Serbia. In general, we urge that the Balkans not be once again transformed into an arena for confrontation or declared to be someone’s particular patrimony. The peoples of the Balkans must not be forced to face a false choice,
and we must prevent new dividing lines from emerging in the region.
We need to shape an architecture of equal and indivisible security elsewhere in the world, including the Asia-Pacific region. We welcome the positive developments on the Korean peninsula following the logic of the Russian-Chinese road map. It is important to encourage that process, which should be based on continuing the rapprochement between the  parties and on promoting the practical implementation of the important arrangements arrived at by Pyongyang and Seoul through the Security Council. We will continue to work to launch a multilateral process aimed at establishing a robust mechanism for peace and security in North-East Asia as soon as possible.
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is among the tasks before the international community in the key security area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Regrettably, serious obstacles to that track continue to pile up. The unilateral withdrawal by the United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, in violation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), and despite Iran’s full compliance with its obligations, came on top of the lack of progress in the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. We will do everything possible to preserve the deal approved by the Security Council.
We are seeing increasingly negative  trends  in  the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) whereby the West is attempting to transform the Technical Secretariat into an instrument for punishing undesirable Governments, which risks compromising the OPCW’s independent professional status, the universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the  exclusive  prerogatives of the Security Council. Those and other problems in the area of non-proliferation were discussed in detail in the Security Council on 26 September (see S/PV.8362), convened at a very timely moment by the United States presidency.
We firmly believe that any problems or concerns that arise in international relations should be addressed through a substantive dialogue. If there are any bones of contention, we should come together around the negotiating table, engage in talks, present facts, heed
 
the our partners’ counterarguments and seek a balance of interests.
In the past couple of years, the debate on abuses in cyberspace has become more intense. I would like to draw attention to the fact that it was Russia that initiated discussion of international information-security issues at the United Nations 20 years ago. Against the backdrop of recent developments, it is becoming ever more urgent that under the auspices of the United Nations we should develop global rules for the responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace, including the principles of the non-use of force, non-interference in internal affairs and respect for State sovereignty. We intend to introduce a draft resolution to that effect in the First Committee. We also believe that it is important to start work on a convention on cybercrime, and we envisage holding the relevant discussions in the Third Committee.
It is more essential than ever to seek mutually acceptable agreements and the mutual consideration of interests in the areas of global trade and economic relations, which today are being subjected to an unprecedented degree of politicization. The values of free trade are being held hostage to trade wars and other forms of unfair competition.
Russia has consistently  promoted  a  philosophy of shared economic development,  as  enshrined  in  the Greater Eurasian Partnership initiative launched by President Vladimir Putin, a large-scale project open to all Asian and European States regardless of their membership in other integration associations. If consistently implemented, it could help to develop a the space for extensive economic cooperation in Eurasia. In the long term, it could lay the foundations for a renewed continental security architecture fit for the realities of the twenty-first century.
Russia will continue to do its utmost to build a world based on law, truth and justice, and we are not alone in that aspiration. Together with us, our allies and partners in the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Community, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) group and an overwhelming majority of other countries are advocating for the democratization of all aspects of international affairs and in the interests of all States, without exception. The West should also heed that voice, which is becoming
more and more evident in the activities of the Group  of 20.
In today’s turbulent circumstances, the growing relevance of the United Nations — the only existing forum for overcoming differences and coordinating the activities of the international community — is an objective reality. Cooperation, with a view to arriving at broadly acceptable solutions, was a priority built into the foundations of the United Nations from the very start. Today we must not fail to live up to the high goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its dedication by the drafters to future generations.
We should recall the art of negotiation in order to be worthy of their legacy. Many of today’s problems can be solved only on a basis of equality and mutual respect. Dictates and coercion, hallmarks of the era of colonialism, should once and for all be filed away in the archives or, better yet, consigned to the dustbin of history.
Some great statesmen of the past have bequeathed to us many words of wisdom that have come to be aphorisms. Let me quote just one, from President Harry Truman: “The responsibility of the great States is to serve and not to dominate the world”.
I hope that a culture of mutually respectful dialogue will finally prevail. Russia will do everything it can to achieve that.
One year ago, I stood before the Assembly for the first time in this Hall (see A/72/ PV.3). I  addressed the  threats facing our world,  and  I presented a vision to achieve  a  brighter future for all of humankind. Today, I stand before the General Assembly to share the extraordinary progress that we have made. In less than two years, my Administration has accomplished more than almost any Administration in the history of our country.
America’s economy is booming like never before. Since my election, we have added $10 trillion in wealth. The stock market is  at  an all-time high in history, and jobless claims are at a 50-year low. African- American, Hispanic-American and Asian-American unemployment have all achieved their lowest levels ever recorded. We have added more than 4 million new jobs, including half a million manufacturing jobs. We passed the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. We started the construction of a major border wall and we have greatly strengthened border security. We have secured record funding for our military — $700 billion this year and $716 billion next year. Our military will soon be more powerful than it has ever been before.
In other words, the United States is a stronger, safer and richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago. We are standing up for America and for the American people. We are also standing up for the world. This is great news for our citizens and for peace-loving people everywhere. We believe that, when nations respect the rights of their neighbours and defend the interests of their people, they can better work together to secure the blessings of safety, prosperity and peace.
Each of us here today is the emissary of a distinct culture, a rich history and a  people  bound  together by ties of memory, tradition and the values that make our homelands like nowhere else on Earth. That  is why America will always choose independence and cooperation over global governance, control and domination. I honour the right of every nation in this Hall to pursue its own customs, beliefs and traditions. The United States will not tell nations how to live or work or worship. We only ask that you honour our sovereignty in return.
From Warsaw to Brussels and from Tokyo to Singapore, it has been my highest honour to represent the United States abroad. I have forged close relationships and friendships and strong partnerships
 
with the leaders of many nations in this Hall, and our approach has always yielded incredible change.
With support from many countries here today, we have engaged with North Korea to replace the spectre of conflict with a bold and new push for peace. In June, I travelled to Singapore to meet face to face with North Korea’s leader, Chairman Kim Jong Un. We had highly productive conversations and meetings. And we agreed that it was in both countries’ interests to pursue the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Since that meeting, we have already seen a number of encouraging measures that few could have imagined only a short time ago.
Missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction, nuclear testing has stopped and some military facilities are already being dismantled. Our hostages have been released and, as promised, the remains of our fallen heroes are being returned home to lay at rest in American soil. I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken, though much work remains to be done. The sanctions will stay in place until denuclearization occurs.
I also want to thank the many  Member  States who helped us reach this moment — which is in fact far greater than people might understand — for their critical support, which we will all need going forward. I would also like to extend special thanks to President Moon of South Korea, Prime Minister Abe of Japan and President Xi of China.
In the Middle East, our new approach is also yielding great strides and historic change. Following my trip to Saudi Arabia last year, the Gulf countries opened a new centre to target terrorist  financing. They are enforcing new sanctions, working with us to identify and track terrorist networks and taking more responsibility for fighting terrorism and extremism in their own region.
The United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have pledged billions of dollars to aid the people of Syria and Yemen. They are pursuing multiple avenues to end Yemen’s horrible, horrific civil war. Ultimately, it is up to the nations of the region to decide what kind of future they want for themselves and their children.
For that reason, the United States is working with the Gulf Cooperation Council, Jordan and Egypt to establish a regional strategic alliance so that MiddleEastern nations can advance prosperity, stability and security across their home region.
Thanks to the United States military and our partnership with many nations, I am pleased to report that the bloodthirsty killers known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have been driven out from the territory they once held in Iraq and Syria. We will continue to work with friends and allies to deny radical Islamic terrorists any funding, territory or support or any means of infiltrating our borders.
The ongoing tragedy in Syria is heartbreaking. Our shared goals must be the de-escalation of military conflict, along with a political solution that honours the will of the Syrian people. In this vein, we urge that the United Nations-led peace process be reinvigorated. Rest assured, the United States will respond if chemical weapons are deployed by the Al-Assad regime.
I commend the people of Jordan and other neighbouring countries for hosting refugees  from  this brutal civil war. As we see in Jordan, the most compassionate policy is to place refugees as close to their homes as possible to ease their eventual return as part of the rebuilding process. This approach also stretches finite resources to help far more people, increasing the impact of every dollar spent.
Every solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria must also include a strategy to address the brutal regime that has fuelled and financed it: the corrupt dictatorship in Iran. Iran’s leaders sow chaos, death and destruction. They do not  respect their neighbours or  borders or  the sovereign rights of nations. Instead, Iran’s leaders plunder the nation’s resources to enrich themselves and spread mayhem across the Middle East and far beyond. The Iranian people are rightly outraged that their leaders have embezzled billions of dollars from Iran’s treasury, seized valuable portions of the economy and looted the people’s religious endowments — all to line their own pockets and send their proxies to wage war. Not good.
Iran’s neighbours have paid a heavy toll for the regime’s agenda of aggression and expansion. That is why so many countries in the Middle East strongly supported my decision to withdraw the United States from the horrible 2015 Iran nuclear deal and reimpose nuclear sanctions. The Iran deal was a windfall for Iran’s leaders. In the years since the deal was reached, Iran’s military budget grew nearly 40 per cent. The dictatorship used the funds to build nuclear-capable
 
missiles, increase internal repression, finance terrorism and fund havoc and slaughter in Syria and Yemen.
The United States has launched a campaign of economic pressure to deny the regime the funds it needs to advance its bloody agenda. Last month, we began reimposing hard-hitting nuclear sanctions that had been lifted under the Iran deal. Additional sanctions will resume 5 November, and more will follow. And we are working with countries that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases substantially. We cannot allow the world’s leading sponsor of terrorism to possess the planet’s most dangerous weapons. We cannot allow a regime that chants “Death to America” and threatens Israel with annihilation to possess the means to deliver a nuclear warhead to any city on Earth. We just cannot do it. We ask all nations to isolate Iran’s regime as long as its aggression continues. And we ask all nations to support Iran’s people as they struggle to reclaim their religious and righteous destiny.
This year, we also took another significant step forward in the Middle East. In recognition of every sovereign State’s right to determine its own capital, I moved the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. The United States is committed to a future of peace and stability in the region, including peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. That aim is advanced, not harmed, by acknowledging the obvious facts. America’s policy of principled realism means we will not be held hostage to old dogmas, discredited ideologies and so- called experts who have been proven wrong over the years, time and time again. That is true not only in matters of peace, but in matters of prosperity.
We believe that trade must be fair and reciprocal. The United States will not be taken advantage of any longer. For decades, the United States opened its economy — the largest, by far, on Earth — with few conditions. We allowed foreign goods from all over the world to flow freely across our borders. Yet other countries did not grant us fair and reciprocal  access to  their markets  in return. Even worse, some countries abused their openness to dump their products, subsidize their goods, target our industries and manipulate their currencies to gain unfair advantage over our country. As a result, our trade deficit ballooned to nearly $800 billion a year. For that reason, we are systematically renegotiating broken and bad trade deals.
Last month, we announced a ground-breaking United States-Mexico trade agreement. And just yesterday, I
stood with President Moon to announce the successful completion of the brand new United States-Korea trade deal. And that is just the beginning. Many nations in this Hall will agree that the world trading system is in dire need of change. For example, countries were admitted to the World Trade Organization (WTO) that violate every single principle on which the organization is based. While the United States and many other nations play by the rules, those countries use Government-run industrial planning and State-owned enterprises to rig the system in their favour. They engage in relentless product dumping, forced technology transfer and the theft of intellectual property.
The United States lost more than 3 million manufacturing jobs, nearly a quarter of all steel jobs and 60,000 factories after China joined the  WTO. And we have racked up $13 trillion in trade deficits over the past two decades. But those days are over. We will no longer tolerate such abuse. We will not allow our workers to be victimized, our companies to be cheated and our wealth to be plundered and transferred. America will never apologize for protecting its citizens. The United States has just announced tariffs on another
$200 billion in Chinese-made goods — for a total, so far, of $250 billion. I have great respect and affection for my friend President Xi, but I have made it clear that our trade imbalance is just not acceptable. China’s market distortions and the way they deal cannot be tolerated. As my Administration has demonstrated, America will always act in our national interests.
I spoke before this body last year (see A/72/PV.3) and warned that the Human Rights Council had become a grave embarrassment to this institution, shielding egregious human rights abusers while bashing America and its many friends. Our Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, laid out a clear agenda for reform, but despite reported and repeated warnings,  no action at all was taken. The United States took the only responsible course. We withdrew from the Human Rights Council, and we will not return until real reform is enacted. For similar reasons, the United States will provide no support or recognition to the International Criminal Court (ICC). As far as America is concerned, the ICC has no jurisdiction, no legitimacy and no authority. The ICC claims near-universal jurisdiction over the citizens of every country, violating all principles of justice, fairness and due process. We will never surrender America’s sovereignty to an unelected, unaccountable global bureaucracy. America is governed
 
by Americans. We reject the ideology of globalism and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism. Around the world, responsible nations must defend against threats to sovereignty not just from global governance, but also from other new forms of coercion and domination.
In America, we believe strongly in energy security for ourselves and for our allies. We have become the largest energy producer anywhere on the face of the Earth. The United States stands ready to export our abundant, affordable supply of oil, clean coal and natural gas. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and OPEC nations, are, as usual, ripping off the rest of the world, and I do not like it. Nobody should like it. We defend many of those nations for nothing, and then they take advantage of us by giving us high oil prices. Not good. We want them to stop raising prices. We want them to start lowering prices. And they must contribute substantially to military protection from now on. We are not going to put up with such horrible prices much longer. Reliance on a single foreign supplier can leave a nation vulnerable to extortion and intimidation. That is why we congratulate European States, such as Poland, for leading the construction of a Baltic pipeline so that nations are not dependent on Russia to meet their energy needs. Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change its course.
Here, in the western hemisphere, we are committed to maintaining our independence from the encroachment of expansionist foreign powers. It has been the formal policy of our country since President Monroe to reject the interference of foreign nations in this hemisphere and in our own affairs.
The United States recently strengthened our laws to better screen foreign investments in our country for national security threats, and we welcome cooperation with countries in the region and around  the  world that wish to do the same. You need to do it for your own protection.
The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance of human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It is horrible thing that is going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It is very cruel. Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hard-working citizens and has produced a vicious
cycle of crime, violence and poverty. Only by upholding national borders and destroying criminal gangs  can we break that cycle and establish a  real foundation  for prosperity.
We recognize the right of every nation in this Hall to set its own immigration policy in accordance with its national interests, just as we  ask other countries   to respect our own right to  do  the  same —  which  we are doing. That is one reason the United States  will not participate in the new global compact for migration. Migration should not be governed by an international body that is unaccountable to our own citizens. Ultimately, the only long-term solution to the migration crisis is to help people build more hopeful futures in their home countries, to make their countries great again.
Currently, we are witnessing a human tragedy, to give an example, in Venezuela. More than 2 million people have fled the anguish inflicted by the socialist Maduro regime and its Cuban sponsors. Not long ago, Venezuela was one of the richest countries on Earth. Today socialism has bankrupted the oil-rich nation and driven its people into abject poverty. Almost everywhere socialism or communism has been tried, it has produced suffering, corruption and decay.
Socialism’s thirst for power leads to expansion, incursion and oppression. All nations of the world should resist socialism and the misery that it  brings  to everyone. In that spirit, we ask the nations that are gathered here to join us in calling for the restoration  of democracy in Venezuela. Today we are announcing additional sanctions against the repressive regime, targeting Maduro’s inner circle and close advisers.
We are grateful for all the work the United Nations does around the world to help people build better lives for  themselves and their families. The United States  is by far the world’s largest giver of foreign aid, but few give anything to us. That is why we are taking a hard look at United States foreign assistance. That will be headed up by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. We will examine what is working, what is not working  and whether the countries that receive our dollars and our protection also have our interests at heart. Moving forward, we are only going to give foreign aid to those that respect us and, frankly, are our friends. We expect other countries to pay their fair share of the cost of their defence.
 
The United States is committed to making the United Nations more effective and accountable. I have said many times that the United Nations has unlimited potential. As part of our reform effort, I have told our negotiators that the United States will not pay more than 25 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget. That will encourage other countries to step up, get involved and share the very large burden. We are working to shift more of  our funding from assessed  to voluntary contributions, so that we can target American resources to the programmes with the best record of success. Only when each of us does its part and contributes its share can we realize the highest aspirations of the United Nations.
We must pursue peace without fear, hope without despair and security without apology. Looking around this Hall, where so much history has transpired, we think of the many before us who have come here to address the challenges of their nations and times. Our thoughts turn to the same question that ran through all their speeches and resolutions, through every word and every hope. It is a question of what kind of world we will leave for our children and what kind of nations they will inherit. The dreams that fill this Hall today are as diverse as the people that have stood at this rostrum, and as varied as the countries represented here in this body. It really is something. It really is great history.
There  is  India,  a  free  society  with  more  than 1 billion people, successfully lifting countless millions out of poverty and into the middle class. There is Saudi Arabia, where King Salman and the Crown Prince are pursuing bold new reforms. There is Israel, proudly celebrating its seventieth anniversary as a thriving democracy in the holy land. In Poland, a great people are standing up for their independence, security and sovereignty. Many countries are pursuing their own unique visions, building their own hopeful futures and chasing their own wonderful dreams of destiny, legacy and a home. The whole world is richer and humanity is better because of this beautiful constellation of nations, each very special, each very unique and each shining brightly in its part of the world. In each one, we see the awesome promise of a people bound together by a shared past and working towards a common future.
As for Americans, we know what kind of future we want for ourselves. We know what kind of nation America must always be. In America we believe in the majesty of freedom and the dignity of the individual. We believe in self-government and the rule of law. And we prize
the culture that sustains our liberty — a culture built on strong families, deep faith and fierce independence. We celebrate our heroes, we treasure our traditions and, above all, we love our country.
Inside everyone in this great Hall today, and everyone listening around the globe, there is the heart of a patriot that feels the same powerful love for your nation and the same intense loyalty to your homeland. The passion that burns in the hearts of patriots and the souls of nations has inspired reform and revolution, sacrifice and selflessness, scientific breakthroughs and magnificent works of art. Our task is not to erase it, but to embrace it — to build with it, to draw on its ancient wisdom and to find within it the will to make our nations greater, our regions safer and the world better.
To unleash that incredible potential in our people, we must defend the foundations that make it all possible. Sovereign and independent nations are the only vehicles where freedom has ever survived, democracy has ever endured and peace has ever prospered. And so we must protect our sovereignty and our cherished independence above all. When we do, we will find new avenues for cooperation unfolding before us. We will find a new passion for peacemaking rising within us. We will find new purpose, new resolve and new spirit flourishing all around us and making this a more beautiful world in which to live.
Together let us choose a future of patriotism, prosperity and pride. Let us choose peace and freedom over domination and defeat. Let us  come here to this place to stand up for our people and their nations — forever strong, forever sovereign, forever just and forever thankful for the grace, goodness and glory of God. God bless you and God bless the nations of the world.
I have the honour to address the General Assembly for the first time as President of the Republic of South Africa.
It is nearly a quarter of a century since the founding father of our democracy, President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, stood at this rostrum to declare that
“The millions across our globe who stand expectant at the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them peace, to bring them
life, to bring them a life worth living.” (A/49/PV.14, p. 10)
As we mark the centenary of the birth of this great global leader, Nelson Mandela, we are bound to ask whether the United Nations has met the needs and expectations of the millions who stand at the gates of hope. We are bound to ask what contribution the United Nations has made to a more peaceful, more prosperous and more equal world. More important, we are called upon to ask — as we did yesterday during the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit (see A/73/PV.5), which was held here — what the United Nations and the assembled global leadership must do to secure lasting peace, reconciliation and stability across the globe.
Allow me to express the deep gratitude of the Government and the people of South Africa to the international community for convening the Peace Summit to honour the memory of Nelson Mandela and advance his legacy. We applaud the political declaration of the Summit (resolution 73/1), which recognizes the period from 2019 to 2028 as the Nelson Mandela Decade of Peace. It reflects a new and sincere commitment by the world’s leaders to comprehensively advance peace and security and resolve all conflicts and wars. To succeed in giving effect to that commitment, the United Nations must become what billions of people across the world want it to be, that is, a representative and truly democratic global parliament of the people of the world.
Throughout its seven decades, the United Nations has been a source of hope for the oppressed, exploited and poor around the world. During the dark days of colonialism and apartheid, we drew strength, inspiration and encouragement from the United Nations and its Charter in our quest for freedom and self-determination. With the support of the United Nations, 24 years ago, we as South Africans were able to  bring an  end  to the nightmare of apartheid. Nelson Mandela led us to freedom and gave us the great opportunity to transform our country. We have now embarked upon a journey of transformation and are making progress to deal with the ugly legacy of the past system of apartheid.
Madiba’s vision continues to guide us as we seek to improve the lives of our people in many respects, among others, by improving educational outcomes for our youth and transforming our economy, which was constituted to serve the interests of a few. We have started a comprehensive dialogue on the question of land reform in our country, which is guided by our
 
Constitution and the rule of law, as we seek ways to ensure that the land is shared among all who work it, as set out in our Freedom Charter. Even as our country is experiencing difficult economic challenges, we  have made progress. We are reforming our economy and creating an environment that is conducive to investment and have embarked upon an investment drive to attract $100 billion in the next five years. To the poor, vulnerable and marginalized, the United Nations today is a beacon of promise in a landscape of doubt. To billions across the world, the United Nations is the most powerful instrument we possess to achieve a more equal, humane and inclusive world.
There are men and women with dreams and aspirations that transcend the hardships of the present, who want to contribute to a new global civilization defined by care, justice and solidarity. They want an end to the greed, ignorance and conceit that is driving the destruction of our only home, the Earth. It is within our ability, as the leaders assembled here today, to forge a more representative, equal and fair United Nations that is empowered and equipped to lead the struggle to end poverty, unemployment and inequality in the world.
We are a youthful world: more than half the global population is under the age of 30. That is even more pronounced on our continent of Africa, where two thirds of our people were not yet born when Nelson Mandela was released from 27 years in prison. We are living in the age of youth. That places a responsibility on us as leaders not only to put the interests of young people at the centre of our efforts, but also to empower women and young people to be more prominent in directing the course of global affairs. It is young people who are fighting the wars that we started. It is women who are bearing the brunt and hardships of the wars that continue to destroy their lives and their families. As we speak, young lives are being lost and futures are being destroyed.
There is an urgency to the measures we must take to end conflict and war. Not only must we stop the death, destruction and human suffering that is visited daily on millions of people, but we  must act with purpose  to prevent the loss of another entire generation to its aftermath. We must accept our shared responsibility for, and our shared interests in, ending conflict and using the outcomes of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit to empower the United Nations to be a more effective instrument for mediation, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction.
Our resolve to end ongoing conflicts and our determination to root out terrorism must be matched by action and the appropriate deployment of resources. We must act with the same urgency to resolve some of the world’s most protracted and intractable disputes. The fact that the people of Palestine have endured occupation and suffering for nearly as long as the United Nations has existed makes their plight no less pressing and their suffering no more acceptable. We must likewise intensify our efforts to secure the right of the people of Western Sahara to self-determination and full national sovereignty.
One of the greatest challenges to the achievement of global prosperity and development is the continued exclusion of millions of women and young people from meaningful economic participation. It is therefore vital that we deploy all the means at our disposal to address youth unemployment and ensure universal access to educational opportunities appropriate to the changing world of work. We need a deliberate programme to ensure that the digital revolution, which carries such great potential for both disruption and empowerment, is effectively harnessed to promote social justice as well as human progress. The call to leave no one behind requires that we strengthen the institutions of global governance and make them more responsive to the needs of young people, particularly in the developing world.
Institutions such as the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization need to be reshaped and enhanced so that they may more effectively meet the challenges of the contemporary world and better serve the interests of the poor and marginalized around the globe. Reform of the United Nations, and of the Security Council in particular, must be a priority if we are to give full effect to the values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
We must resist any and all efforts to undermine the multilateral approach to international trade, which is essential to the promotion of stability and predictability in the global economy. The history of the global economy informs us that no country can prosper at the expense of all others and that no people can hope to live in comfort and security as long as millions of others languish in poverty.
It is therefore essential that we take collective responsibility for the development of all nations and for the improvement of the lives of all people. That
 
responsibility is manifest in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development, among other agreements. Together they represent our common commitment to tackle poverty, underdevelopment and environmental degradation. They represent our common commitment to tackle diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, diabetes and cancer. Our task as global leaders is to pursue the policies required to turn intent into implementation and mobilize the resources needed to turn implementation into impact.
We have made significant strides as Africans in addressing the challenges that have confronted our continent for many decades. We continue vigorously to implement our commitments set out in the African Union Agenda 2063, which is our collective plan as Africans to rid our continent of under-development,  poverty and conflict and to improve democratic governance, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. We have recently reached agreement on the establishment of an African Continental Free Trade Area, which will fundamentally transform African economies, giving rise to a new industrial age on the continent. We are working to silence the guns in Africa by 2020, to bring an end to conflicts that have cost the lives of millions of our people, displaced more and stunted economic growth and human development.
As the continent  with  the  youngest  population in the world, Africa has the potential to be the next great frontier for global growth and development. With effective investment in education, improved health care, good governance and greater economic integration, Africa has the potential to develop its productive capacity on a scale and at a rate that will lift tens of millions out of poverty. The youth of Africa are poised to transform their continent.
We the people of South Africa are committed to being part of that transformation. From the ashes of a system that was described by the General Assembly as a crime against humanity, we are building a new, democratic nation, united in its diversity. We are working to correct the injustices of our past and to build a society that is free, inclusive and sustainable. We are pursuing an economic path that draws on the resources and capabilities of all our people to eradicate poverty, unemployment and inequality. We are determined through our international relations to be a force for progress, good, peace and global equality, and
will continue to advance the interests of the African continent and the global South.
Allow me to conclude by once more drawing on the wisdom of Nelson Mandela, who said, “Sometimes it falls on a generation to be great.” This is not the generation that will stand expectant at the gates of hope; this is the generation that will change the world. It is the generation of young people who want to see change. This is their time and this is their age. Let their greatness blossom.
Every September, global attention is focused on the United Nations and on this stately Assembly Hall. People watch closely what is happening here, hoping that the United Nations will deliver peace, development, harmony  and prosperity to the world. People look to the United Nations to help them realize their dreams for a better life, to a United Nations that is committed to making itself relevant to all people, thereby making our world a better place for everyone to live in.
The contemporary international order, which began with the founding of the United Nations, is based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and is enhanced by the vision and practice of multilateralism. It has brought about general peace and rapid development over the past 70 years or more. A
 
people-centred philosophy has gained wide acceptance, and a broad consensus has formed on the need for interdependence and win-win cooperation.
Yet it is also true that the international  order today faces problems and needs steady reform and improvement. The world is changing. As we celebrate humankind’s proud achievements and progress, we must never lose sight of the challenges and difficulties we face in an ever-changing world. We must remain vigilant. What we see today is that international rules and multilateral mechanisms are under attack, and the international landscape is filled with uncertainties and destabilizing factors. Should we stay committed to multilateralism or let unilateralism have its way? Should we seek to uphold the architecture of the world order or allow it to be eroded and collapse? Those are critical questions bearing on the future of all countries and the destiny of humankind, questions that all countries must carefully reflect on and seek answers to.
China’s answer is clear cut.  All  along,  China  has upheld the international order and pursued multilateralism. Though once kept out of the United Nations for 22 years, China has never wavered in its commitment to multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China stayed true to  its  commitment  throughout  the negotiation process on its return to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and then its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) — negotiations that lasted 15 long years and were concluded at a certain price. China fulfilled its promise and integrated itself into the world economic system. After the international financial crisis broke out, China chose not to stand idly by; instead it worked together with other countries to get through those challenging times. For many years, China has contributed more than 30 per cent of global economic growth. It has played its part in helping with the global recovery. In the face of new developments and severe challenges, China will keep to its commitment and remain a champion of multilateralism.
Standing at this rostrum in 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping, in his statement reflecting the key understanding of humankind’s common interest and the future of  our planet, called for  the building  of a community with a shared future for humankind (seeA/70/PV.13). That initiative is in keeping with the trend of history, and it echoes the call of the times. It adds to our conviction and strength as we pursue our common endeavour to protect this global village. It
points us in the direction where we should work together to open up an even better future for humankind.
To uphold multilateralism in this new era, we believe that the following principles must be adhered to. First, we must pursue win-win cooperation. Our world is undergoing profound changes, never before seen in this century. Also never seen before are the problems and challenges we are facing. No country can meet them alone or stay immune to their impact. We must replace confrontation with cooperation and coercion with consultation. We must remain united as a big family. Instead of forming closed circles, we must promote common development through consultation instead of taking a “winner-takes-all” approach. That is a sure way to usher in a bright future.
Secondly, we must act in accordance with rules and order. State-to-State relations must be based on credibility, not the wilful revocation of commitments. International cooperation should be guided by rules, not impulse. Practising multilateralism is, first and foremost, about upholding the Charter of the United Nations, observing international law and basic norms governing international relations, and honouring international agreements reached through negotiations.
Thirdly, we must uphold the principles of fairness and justice. In international affairs, fairness and justice mean equality among all countries, big or small. They signify the responsibility  of  big  countries  to  help the small, and rich ones to assist the poor. Fairness  and justice also mean respect for other countries’ sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, as well as their choice of  development paths and right to a better life and increased development opportunities.
Fourthly, we must act to deliver real results. Multilateralism is not based on empty rhetoric. It must be pursued to solve problems. Efforts must be targeted, results-oriented and measured by visible progress. Whether a multilateral mechanism works depends on the will and engagement of countries. It is imperative that we work together to uphold the international system with the United Nations at its core, as well as the multilateral trading system centred on the World Trade Organization. Multilateralism requires a strong United Nations. China supports Secretary-General Guterres in advancing reform of the United Nations system in the three critical areas of peace and security, economic development and internal management. That reform should be led by Member States, and it should prioritize
 
the concerns of developing countries, make the United Nations more effective and enhance oversight and accountability. Stable and predictable funding is critical to the proper functioning of the United Nations. China will continue to fulfil its financial obligations and calls on other Member States to pay their membership contributions and peacekeeping assessments on time and in full.
The momentum of humankind’s drive forward towards development and progress is unstoppable. Peace, reconciliation and harmony represent the predominant trend, while war, conflict and terror are opposed by all. Equality, mutual trust and win-win cooperation are key words of our times, whereas power politics and the law of the jungle find no support. As a major responsible country, China is committed to the path of peaceful development, and it will work together with other countries and contribute its share to global peace and security.
Over the past year, the situation on the Korean peninsula has seen a major turnaround thanks to the efforts of all the parties concerned. China,  for  its part, has contributed to that progress. China supports the comprehensive improvement of relations between the north and the south of the peninsula, as well as efforts to facilitate dialogue between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United States. China encourages the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue moving towards denuclearization. We believe that it is also incumbent on the United States to respond in a timely and positive manner so  as to truly meet  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic of Korea halfway. China will continue to honour its international responsibilities and obligations and will strictly implement the Security Council resolutions related to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. China calls on the Security Council to take timely action in the light of developments and changes in the situation so as to create more favourable  conditions for a peaceful settlement of the issue on the peninsula through political and diplomatic means. To effectively settle the issue we need complete denuclearization and the establishment of a peace mechanism. Only when those components move in tandem can the issue be truly resolved and peace achieved.
Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, now is a crucial time for the continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA is a consensus-based multilateral agreement endorsed
by the Security Council. It serves the common interests of all the parties concerned and the international community at large. If it is not implemented, the international nuclear non-proliferation regime  will be undermined, the authority and role of the Security Council challenged, and peace and stability jeopardized both in that region and throughout the world,. That is  a scenario from which no one stands to gain. China urges the parties concerned to continue to observe and implement the JCPOA. On that basis, the possibility could be explored for a platform for dialogue that is inclusive and transparent so as to enable each party’s concerns to be adequately addressed through  talks and consultations.
The question of Palestine must not be marginalized. For more than seven decades, peace and justice have remained elusive in that part of the world. What the international community needs most is not a proposal or an initiative but resolve and action. In order to implement a two-State solution, a new round of peace-promoting efforts must be made with a view to exploring a new mediation mechanism. To that end, China will play its part, and Chinese humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people will continue.
The issue involving Myanmar’s Rakhine state cannot be resolved overnight, and steady progress must be made through a three-phase process involving a cessation of violence, the return of the displaced persons and economic development. Myanmar and Bangladesh are inseparable neighbours and could well be inseparable partners. Yesterday, at my meeting with colleagues from Myanmar and Bangladesh and in the presence of Secretary-General Guterres, an agreement was reached between Myanmar and Bangladesh on accelerating the return of the first wave of displaced persons. We believe that Myanmar and  Bangladesh are capable of resolving the issue properly through friendly negotiations.
China supports the leading role of the United Nations in coordinating responses to non-traditional security challenges. On the new frontiers of global governance, such as cyberspace and outer space, State sovereignty must be upheld, rules observed and responsibilities honoured. Terrorism, a threat to all societies, can never be justified. Security Council resolutions must be vigorously implemented to counter cyberterrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of radical narratives so as to eliminate the breeding grounds of terrorism.
 
Development is essential for our world today. We need to address both insufficient development and, more importantly, imbalance in development. There  is no one-size-fits-all model. Every country is entitled to explore a particular development path aimed at delivering happiness and security to its people and bringing about a future of confidence and hope for its children. Countries face various questions with regard to development. Such questions could be turned into drivers for reform, and solutions to problems could bring about development. Economic globalization should not be a process whereby some profit and others lose; even less should it result in widening the gap between North and South. It is important that we  adapt to the trend  of economic globalization and ensure that the process is open, inclusive, balanced and mutually beneficial so that it can deliver benefits to  all.  International trade is complementary and mutually beneficial in nature.  It should not be a zero-sum game in which one side gains at the expense of the others, and no one should be allowed to place their own interest above the interest of others. Protectionism will only be self-defeating, and unilateral moves will hurt everyone.
With regard to friction in trade, China stands for  a proper settlement of disagreements based on rules and consensus through dialogue and consultation on an equal footing. China will not be blackmailed or yield to pressure. We have not only taken steps to defend our own legitimate rights and interests but also to uphold the free trade system, international rules and the international order for the benefit of global recovery and the common interests of all countries.
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be at the top of the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. We need to incorporate its implementation into Member States’ development strategies and pursue innovation-driven, coordinated, green and open development that benefits all. We need to forge closer partnerships for development and pursue international development cooperation, with the United Nations at its centre and North-South cooperation as the main channel, supplemented by South-South cooperation. To meet the challenges of climate change, it is crucial to achieve sustainable development. China hopes to see the conclusion of the negotiations on the implementation guidelines of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, scheduled for the end of this year, with a view to boosting joint efforts for global ecological conservation.
In pursuing our common cause of humankind’s development and progress, China has worked in partnership with other countries of the international community. This year marks the fortieth anniversary of China’s reform and opening up. Over those 40 years, we have worked hard and forged ahead successfully along a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. That path has brought fundamental changes to China. In the past 40 years, more than 700 million individuals in the Chinese population have been lifted out of absolute poverty, which accounts for more than 70 per cent of the global totals for the same period. A basic medical insurance system has been set up to cover China’s 1.35 billion people, and a social pension network accessible to more than 900 million people has been fully implemented. China has built approximately 25,000 kilometres of high-speed railway. That accounts for two thirds of the global total and helps elevate global infrastructure construction.  According  to polls conducted by authoritative international polling agencies, China is at the top of global rankings in terms of public satisfaction with its development and public confidence in its future. The path  of  development that China is pursuing has provided the world with opportunities for shared development. Over the past 40 years, China’s foreign trade has averaged an annual growth rate of 14.5 per cent. That has sustained the impetus for global growth and provided the world with a huge Chinese market. We have every  confidence that we will maintain that momentum and continue to realize high-quality development. China will accelerate efforts to build an advanced economic system, which will create greater trade opportunities and an even better investment environment for other countries.
China will not reverse course or  shut  its  doors but will rather open its doors even wider to the world. China will not erect market barriers but will expand access to the Chinese market. Of all of the developing countries in the world, China has been the fastest in terms of opening up at a level unparalleled by others. When it comes to overall tariff reduction, China has accomplished more than it committed to when it joined the WTO. The breadth of China’s openness in services is close to the average level of  developed countries.  In November, China will host the first International Import Expo in Shanghai, which will be yet another major step in opening China’s market. Countries are welcome to participate actively in it.
 
The Belt and Road Initiative, proposed by President Xi Jinping, is a public good that China is providing for the world. It has grown into the largest platform for international cooperation. It aims to deliver benefits for all through consultations and cooperation. The Initiative is open, transparent and inclusive. It is  based on international rules and laws, and it aims to achieve green, environment-friendly and sustainable development. It is about pursuing common prosperity through greater complementarity among participating countries. By September, more than 130 countries and international organizations will have signed agreements on Belt and Road cooperation with China. Next year, China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, and we welcome all parties to attend that event.
China is the largest developing country in the world. Strengthening cooperation and solidarity with other developing countries has been and will continue to be a firm strategic priority in China’s diplomacy. That choice has been determined by what defines China as a country and by the system and values that China upholds. No matter how  much  China has increased  in strength, and regardless of how the international landscape might change, that strategic priority of China will not change.
The United Nations is the primary platform for advocating for and practising multilateralism. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will be remembered for its part in upholding multilateralism, world peace and development.  We  hope  that  all  of us in the international community will support the United Nations in its efforts to play a central role in international affairs, and we call on people of all countries to work together to build a community with a shared future for humankind.
A veteran of United Nations diplomacy recently told me that every session of the General Assembly has its own crisis to discuss, its own major topic. So what is the big issue in 2018? Syria? North Korea? The Middle East? Or the dramatic global refugee situation, from the Mediterranean to Venezuela?
If we take a step back, those disparate conflicts reveal a bigger picture and a distinct pattern. It becomes clear that we are  indeed  facing  a  crisis —  a  crisis of multilateralism. And that crisis makes conflicts around the world appear insoluble. When I say that they “appear” insoluble, that reflects the faith that we Germans have in multilateralism. Germany’s post-war success story is also multilateralism’s success story.
 
Europe, which was scarred by war and destruction, was able to integrate in freedom, security and prosperity thanks to our neighbours’ courage in seeking reconciliation. The United States also played  a crucial role in Europe’s reconstruction. The fact that Europe was then able to become the closest partner of the United Nations is a triumph of multilateralism. We believe in the United Nations because international cooperation changed our own fate for the better.
Europe has proved to the world that multilateralism and sovereignty are not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, in a world faced with immense global problems, we can safeguard sovereignty only by working together.
Three words, “we the  peoples”,  express  both our goal and how we will achieve it. That is why the founders of the United Nations chose those as the opening words of the Charter of the United Nations. They wanted to spell out that we need to work together to find solutions. They wanted to leave no doubt as to whom the United Nations and we as representatives of States serve — the people.
The Charter’s promises are addressed to the people, who are assured that their freedom and dignity will be defended at the United Nations in New York. But does a boy in Idlib, who lives in constant fear of the next air strike, feel that? How does a girl in Africa feel when her life expectancy at birth is 30 years lower than it would be if she were born in Germany? If we do not act on their behalf, “we the peoples” will be nothing more than hollow words for them. Kofi Annan once said, “We don’t need any more promises. We need to start keeping the promises we already made.” (SG/SM/9095)
When Germany  joins  the  Security  Council  as  a non-permanent member in a few weeks’ time, that will be what motivates us. I thank the members of the Assembly for the immense trust they have shown in us through their votes. That trust is an incentive for us to play our part in tackling the world’s crises, and to do so with courage and hope, but without overestimating ourselves. We want to work with all Member States as a reliable partner putting dialogue and cooperation at the heart of its action. In our view, “we the peoples” refers in particular to those who find it hard to be heard at the United Nations. That means we will always seek dialogue with civil society, in the Security Council and beyond.
Nevertheless, “we the peoples” also means that the Security Council itself must become more representative and inclusive. The world’s population has more than tripled since 1945, while the number of States Members of the United Nations has almost quadrupled. Yet the Security Council has hardly changed at all. That is why we should stop beating around the bush and finally start real negotiations on Security Council reform, as the vast majority of Member States have wanted for a long time.
The crisis of multilateralism is most painfully evident in Syria. The civil war has long since turned into a widespread regional conflict, with further potential for escalation in an already ravaged part of the world. That sort of war cannot be resolved by military means, because the players in the region are too deeply involved and the individual stakes are too high. However, with united diplomatic efforts, we have managed to prevent escalation in Idlib, which is a glimmer of hope. The agreement between Turkey and Russia must now be permanently implemented. But ultimately, and at long last, we need a political process.
To that end, talks must be held under the auspices of the United Nations. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council itself showed the way. We must finally take the path to free and fair elections. At that point, we will also be willing to shoulder responsibility for reconstruction. However, there is one line that we will not cross: we will not become accomplices to a regime that has forfeited its political legitimacy. Instead, we are doing our utmost to alleviate people’s suffering.
It is shameful that financial support is running  out once again. As the second-largest humanitarian donor, Germany is willing to provide the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a further €116 million — that is, half of the amount currently needed — to help Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon. But others also need to step up. After all, the Charter talks about “we the peoples”.
Disruptive foreign-policy approaches have now also reached the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Many people are keen to make us believe that the notion of a negotiated two-State solution is obsolete. They want us to think that it is now merely a term used in diplomacy and can no longer be achieved. But whatever  way  they twist it, there will be lasting peace only if people can determine the course of their own lives, living in security and dignity on both sides of the 1967 lines.
 
For that very reason, it remains important to work for a negotiated two-State solution, 25 years after Oslo.
The conflict in Ukraine will also continue to compel our attention. Along with France, Russia and Ukraine, we are working hard to implement the Minsk agreements. The focus is on the measures agreed to a long time ago with a view to stabilizing the ceasefire. All efforts, including our discussions on a possible United Nations mission in eastern Ukraine, are aimed at achieving that end.
Let us not forget  that  acute  crisis  management is at best a step towards peace. Lasting peace can be achieved only if we put a stop to the arms race. That is not some sort of nostalgic rhetoric from the days of the Cold War, whose balance of terror seems utterly benign compared to the scenario of a multipolar arms race with far more unpredictable players.
In the case of North Korea, the Security Council’s united stance and sanctions helped to pave the way back to dialogue. That was important. However, North Korea must follow up its words with deeds, and that must lead to complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. Germany is prepared to contribute its know-how, including the expertise we gained during the difficult negotiations with Iran.
The nuclear agreement with Iran may not be perfect. But so far, it has prevented Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons and averted an escalation that was highly likely three years ago. That is not insignificant. We Europeans, together, therefore stand by the agreement. We are working on keeping economic exchange with Iran possible, and we call on Iran to continue to fully live up to its commitments. The fact that we stand by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action does not mean that we are turning a blind eye to Iran’s destructive role in the region or to its ballistic-missile programme. That said, if there were no agreement, that would not make the search for solutions in Yemen, Syria or elsewhere any easier. On the contrary, disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation must generally become more of a focus of the work of the United Nations once again. We share the view of Secretary-General Guterres on this matter.
Our shared rules must keep pace with technological developments. Otherwise, what currently sounds like science fiction may very soon become deadly reality, as exemplified by autonomous weapons systems, or killer robots that kill without any human control. I call
on Members to support, both here in New York and in Geneva, our initiative to ban fully autonomous weapons before it is too late.
It is not only  in that domain that prevention  is  the right answer. The United Nations of the twenty- first century must tackle the root causes of conflict, including climate change. Action based solely on nationalism, with each country seeking to put itself first, reaches its limits in that respect, not least because our climate knows no borders. The alarm bells have rarely sounded as loudly as they did in the summer of 2018 in almost all parts of the world.
Germany and the European Union stand by the Paris Agreement. Moreover, we want to ensure that the Security Council makes the devastating effects that climate change can have on the security and stability of entire countries and regions an even greater priority.
We also need a quantum leap when it comes to post-conflict peacebuilding. That is why Germany will contribute at least €25 million to the Peacebuilding Fund this year. Over the past three years, Germany has tripled its contributions to efforts aimed at promoting stabilization and preventing crises around the world. For example, in Iraq, where Islamic State terrorists have mostly been militarily defeated, instead of leaving the Iraqi authorities to fend for themselves, we are training security forces to support administrative structures and providing civil support for efforts to promote stabilization, reconciliation and inclusive reconstruction.
Only when military measures are embedded in a clear political strategy can peacekeepers truly bring peace. That is also the objective of the peacekeeping reform efforts of Secretary-General Guterres. It would be a mistake to limit our discussion to bartering over decimal points in scales for  assessed  contributions. Of course efficiency is important, including for us in Europe, who are the largest contributors of funding. However, discussing potential cost savings alone  does not do justice to the benefits that peacekeeping missions bring, for example, in countries such as Mali or Lebanon, which have held peaceful elections and enjoyed relative stability, thanks in part to the Blue Helmets and the political efforts of the United Nations.
We Germans will continue to contribute, not only militarily and financially but also, always, politically, through diplomatic efforts and by investing in stability and  reconstruction.  After all,  the  success  of  United
 
Nations missions hinges on the political backing of Member States. That is particularly true for Libya right now. To tackle the Herculean task of making progress on functioning State structures, the United Nations needs our political support.
Peace is more than guns falling silent. Only just societies, societies where men and women enjoy equal rights and where women participate in all societal decision-making, will remain peaceful in the long term. It is not only a matter of fairness and respect; it is simply a question of humanity and reason. Kofi Annan put it this way in his report entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all”:
“we will not enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development, and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights” (A/59/2005, para. 17).
Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that instrument’s proclamation of dignity and personal freedom remains merely a distant promise for many. In the Security Council, the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly, we will demand accountability when human rights are trampled on, be it through human trafficking in Africa or attacks on the Rohingya in Myanmar. Nowhere will impunity stand. Even in war, there are limits.
We must hold to account those who wilfully attack humanitarian aid workers, hospitals and schools. Anyone who violates the most basic rules of human civilization must be punished. That also applies to those who use chemical weapons in breach of a taboo that was respected for decades. That is why it is so important that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has been mandated to seek and identify those responsible. The perpetrators must be fully aware that there can be no impunity for crimes against humanity — never, and not anywhere. In that regard, the International Criminal Court remains indispensable because it sends a clear message to the victims and the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that justice will prevail.
Earlier, I spoke about how we Germans in particular have faith when it comes to multilateralism. That faith is also based on the fact that the United Nations, time and again and despite all disagreements, delivers proof of what we can achieve by working together. I am thinking
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which remains our guiding set of principles for making this a better world for all people. I am also thinking about the successful conclusion of the negotiations on the global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration. The fact that more than 190 Member States — countries of origin, transit and destination — reached agreement on such complex and controversial issues is a victory for multilateralism. That success is an achievement of nations that are truly united.
The United Nations is built on our courage to reach compromises. The Organization grows with our desire to shape things. It thrives on our common pledge to act together first. Common ground is created when we put people at the heart of what we do. The desire for peace and security, and the dream of a prosperous and dignified life, are things that all people can relate to, whether they live in Baghdad, Berlin or Bamako. The United Nations belongs to the people. It is to them — the peoples of “We the peoples” — that we owe allegiance.
All of us here are heirs to the great hope to save future generations from the scourge of war, to build an international order based on law and respect for one’s word, and to lead humankind towards economic, social and moral progress in increasingly secure freedom. We have seen results. The enjoyment of human rights has spread, trade and prosperity have grown, and poverty has declined. That has been our achievement of the past several decades.
We must, however, look honestly at the moment in which we are living. We are experiencing today a deep crisis in the liberal Westphalian international order, which we have known. First, that is because, in part,  it has failed to regulate itself, and to date no solution commensurate with the task of meeting its economic, financial, environmental and climatic failures has been found. Secondly, it is because our collective capacity to
 
respond to crises too often continues to be hindered by divisions within the Security Council. Our Organization is too often reduced to deploring the violations of rights that it has pledged to guarantee. Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly in Paris, a cultural, historical and religious relativism is now challenging the foundations of their universality.
Born of hope, the United Nations can become, like the League of Nations that  preceded  it,  the  symbol of powerlessness. We need not look far to see who is responsible for that crime. They are in this Assembly Hall. They are speaking today. We, the leaders, are responsible. On that basis, I see three main paths for us to follow.
The first path is to think that this is just a passing moment, a historical parenthesis before we return to life as normal. I do not believe that to be the case. I do not believe it because we are going through a crisis of effectiveness and principles in our contemporary world order, which will not be able to restore its previous landmarks and modes of functioning. This moment in time is not a parenthesis; it is a manifestation of our own failures of the past.
The second path would be that of the law of the strongest. Everyone is tempted to follow their own law. That path — the path of unilateralism — leads directly to isolation and conflict, to widespread clashes with everyone pitted against each other, to the detriment of all, even ultimately those who believe themselves to be the strongest. The responsibility for peace cannot be delegated; it cannot be refused; it cannot be pre-empted. It must be exercised collectively.
The law of the strongest does not protect any people from any threat, be it chemical or nuclear. What will truly resolve the situation in Iran and what has already begun to stabilize it? Was it the law of the strongest, the pressure of one individual? No. We know that Iran was on the path to military nuclear power, but what stopped it was the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in Vienna in 2015. Today, as I said a year ago (see A/72/PV.4), we must not exacerbate regional tensions, but rather put forth a broader agenda that addresses all the nuclear, ballistic and regional concerns caused by Iranian policies. We must do so through dialogue and multilateralism, without naivety or complacency, but also without posturing, which would be pointless.
 The problem of trade imbalances and their consequences for our societies will be solved by common rules adapted to today’s reality that make it possible to ensure fair competition on an equal footing, and under no circumstances will a bilateral approach to all our trade disputes or new protectionism do so.
What will resolve the crisis between Israel and Palestine is definitely not unilateral initiatives, or ignoring Palestinians’ legitimate right to  lasting peace, or underestimating Israelis’ legitimate right to their security. There is no credible alternative to two States living side by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as their capital. Israel knows that France is unwavering in its friendship, and it is in the name of that friendship that I call for a quick end to the policy of faits accomplis that threaten the very possibility of reaching a peace agreement. Continuing along that path would be a mistake. On that issue, I am ready, and we must all stand ready, to move beyond dogmas and historical positions in order to take new initiatives, on the condition that it leads to positive changes on the ground. There too, the law of the strongest will only exacerbate frustration and violence. As the Assembly has seen, in the face of  contemporary imbalances, I  do not believe in the law of the strongest, even if it is masked in a form of legitimacy where it has actually lost all claims to legality.
I believe that there is a third possible path ahead of us, probably the most difficult and the most demanding, which requires us to forge a new model and to find a new global balance together. After the Second World War, a balance was built bloc by bloc over the course of decades. Then there was the emergence of a model based on hyperpower. For several years now, we have witnessed a new global instability characterized by the return of multiple centres of power.
The new balance that we must create must be based on new forms of regional and international cooperation and will, in my opinion, be structured around three principles. The first is respect for sovereignty, which is at the very heart of the Charter of the United Nations. The second is the strengthening of our regional cooperation. The third is the provision of more robust international guarantees or safeguards. It is through that method, and on the basis of those three principles, that we must manage contemporary crisis situations.
In Syria, we are pursuing the fight against Islamist terrorism. The military engagements of some countries
 
have allowed the regime to recover at the expense of crimes for which those responsible will one day have to account. The Syrian people have, tragically, paid the price, and there will be no winners in a Syria in ruins. What is needed now is to win peace under the auspices of the United Nations. We cannot decide for the Syrian people, but we must rather build the ways and means of the method that I have just defined and thereby build a solution supported not only by the Astana guarantors, but also by other States of the region and the international community through the Small Group on Syria, under the coordination of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in order to create the means both to resolve the humanitarian crisis and to build an inclusive, lasting political solution through constitutional reform and the holding of free elections. That is what it means to truly respect Syrian sovereignty. It is neither a substitute for the Syrian people in deciding who should be their leader nor an agreement to cover all crimes by accepting that this leader will remain until the end of time, considering that all principles and, ultimately, all law have been cast aside.
In Libya, too, it is that new method that should enable us to achieve a lasting solution. The current status quo allows militias and traffickers to gain ground, which destabilizes the entire region. We will not give the Libyans a way out of the crisis if we remain divided and if Libya becomes a stage, as it still is too often, for confrontations among  foreign  influences. In Paris, the Libyans recently pledged to hold early elections, which will make it possible to reunify State institutions. Those commitments must be fulfilled under the auspices of the United Nations and in close cooperation with the African Union. Yesterday, an important step was taken that I wish to  commend here. It is in the interests of Libyans, their neighbours, Europeans and the international community, who must be united around those objectives to move forward in that way.
We are all strong together in the face of terrorism when States are able to count on their own forces to ensure their security and when such security is based on regional and international solutions, in accordance with the principle I have justset out. That is the decision taken by the States of the Sahel, acting together in the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. That was also the essence of the process launched by the African Union to better assume its responsibilities by deploying
African peacekeeping operations. That is the essence of the initiatives undertaken in the Lake Chad region, together with Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon, with the support of the African Union. That is why we must support the African Union’s initiative and push for better coordination between the African Union and the United Nations. I hope that, by the end of the year, a resolution can be adopted to that effect.
We are strong in the face of terrorism when we take joint responsibility to fight all its forms of financing, and when, as we do in the Alliance for the Sahel, we act together for development, agriculture and education, and against the root causes of despair that have allowed terrorists to win hearts and minds. Some $7.5 billion has already been committed to 500 projects defined jointly with all the States concerned and the partners of the Alliance for the Sahel. We must consolidate those initial results.
As is evident from each of these crises, the answer has not been to leave States alone, to act for them or to proclaim from here the law or solution to be applied, but to know how to conscientiously articulate the principles of the sovereignty of peoples, regional cooperation and the real commitment of the international community. Those three principles form the basis for modern solutions. Only collective action can preserve the sovereignty and equality of the peoples that have given us a mandate. We also need collective action in the face of the demographic, climate and digital challenges before us, which none of us can face alone.
Confronted with the great challenges posed by migration, I do not believe in talk of unconditional openness, which only sparks concern and stokes intolerance. Nor do I believe in the misleading speeches of those who claim, for example, in Europe as elsewhere, that they will be safer behind the protection of a closed border. That is not true. The only effective way to manage the migratory flows affecting all our continents in an organized and controlled manner is to create the conditions for elective rather than forced international mobility, to work together — countries of origin, transit and destination — to address the  root  causes of migration, especially for its victims, to dismantle trafficking networks that are the worst scourge of this phenomenon, and to protect our borders in a respectful manner while ensuring compliance with international law and, in particular, the unconditional protection of those who are entitled to asylum. That is what we have decided to do together through the United Nations pact
 
that is to be adopted in Marrakech in December, which I support.
With regard to climate change, too, there are no free rides or easy solutions either. Even those who have challenged that reality suffer its consequences like everyone else. Extreme weather events are now a daily occurrence. And by weakening collective action, some only expose themselves further.
As for the great digital transformation, here too our duty is to stand together to build modern rules that will allow us to reconcile the development of artificial intelligence with our ethical rules in order to support the digital transformation of our societies.
I firmly believe in the sovereignty of peoples, which today is strong and demanded by all our peoples in the international arena. It also enjoys enhanced cooperation in many forms and a renewed legitimacy of international commitment. The great fight of our elders was achieving peace, and this remains one of our responsibilities. We will win that fight in the twenty- first century only by restoring a robust multilateralism that is truly capable not only of resolving conflicts pragmatically but, also and more broadly, of addressing their causes.
To tell the truth, I do not believe in one great globalized people. That is an illusion. It does not exist. But I do believe in universal values, and on that point we must not compromise. It is not the same thing. I believe in the non-negotiable defence of our values: human rights, the dignity of individuals and gender equality. I believe in our ability to strike a balance that respects peoples and cultures by refusing to negotiate those universal values. That is the reality, and I will in no way leave the principle of the sovereignty of peoples in the hands of nationalists or those who today, before the international community, advocate withdrawal and wish to exploit the sovereignty of peoples to challenge the universality and strength of our values, thanks to which we are all gathered here together in this Hall.
All of us here, even those who criticize it, have benefited from the structuring of the international order that has accompanied globalization. We have enjoyed a period of humanism and have all played a role in making it happen. Today, we must tackle the root causes of our imbalances. Together, we must face the weaknesses of our international order and, beyond the crises I have just mentioned, consider the deep inequalities that have taken root. In my view, that is the
heart of our problem today. What awakens nationalism? What gives rise to doubt in our Assembly? What gives rise crises everywhere? It is those deep inequalities that we have failed to address.
Ten years ago, when the international financial crisis hit, we took emergency action, but we did not solve the root cause. We did not curb the trend of hyperconcentration of wealth on our planet, and we did not truly provide a response to all those left behind by globalization. All those who were marginalized now hold a grudge because of the humiliations they suffered or have been plunged into despair, for which we are now collectively paying the price. We owe all those people a response.
We owe a response to the 265 million children who do not have access to school, more than half of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa, and to the young girls who have equal access to education in less than 40 per cent of countries.
We owe a response to the 700 million children who live in the regions most exposed to the consequences of climate change — the victims of floods, droughts, rising sea levels and the depletion of resources.
We owe a response to the 200 million women who do not have  access to contraception, to the more than 1 billion women who are not protected by law if they are victims of violence in their homes, and to all women whose global average pay is 23 per cent less than men and up to 40 per cent in rural areas.
We owe a response to the 783 million people living below the poverty line, to those suffering from hunger or chronic malnutrition and to those who do not have access to basic health care.
We owe a response to the aspirations of the most important generation of young people in history — our own young people — amounting to nearly 2 billion people who are now between the ages of 10 and 24, and 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries.
We owe a response to all those who look to us because their destiny depends on what we are or are not able to do here together in the Assembly.  And those who forget that we owe an answer to all those people are wrong because they are sowing the seeds for tomorrow’s crises and because they will leave their children and ours in a much worse situation than we are in today.
 
We have made great progress in reducing inequalities among our countries, and we  have created the framework for  that in the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development, but the fight is not behind us. It is far from over. Wealth per capita is 50 times higher in the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development than in low- income countries. Do we think that we can sustainably increase stability and balance in this state of affairs? No, we must take action. That is why, as I announced here last year (see A/72/PV.4), I have decided to increase France’s official development assistance by
€1 billion starting in 2019. Our humanitarian funding will increase by 40 per cent. But it is also why the fight against inequality will be the priority of the French presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7) summit in 2019. After Canada, whose leadership I applaud, France will assume the G-7’s next presidency. I would like to have a major reconsideration of its format in order to improve its association with various other Powers and devise new ways to coordinate.
I also wanted it to be at the United Nations that I made the first announcement that the inequality agenda will be at the centre of the next G-7, and also that I intend to report on the results of the Biarritz G-7 next September, because the time when a club of rich countries could define the balances of power in the  world  by  itself has long since passed and because it is impossible to separate the fate of each of its members from that of all the States members of the Assembly. We must tackle modern inequalities today because they are at the root of the evil that I denounced at the beginning of my statement. We must address inequalities of opportunity, which are a moral aberration and an unsustainable reality. We cannot accept a world in which people do not have the same opportunities because of the country where they were born, or cannot go to school in certain countries because they are women, or do not have access to basic services.
We kept the commitment made here last year with the President of Senegal. The Global Partnership for Education Financing Conference, held in February in Dakar, raised $2.5 billion to increase access to education around the world. That is a historic amount. France has increased its contribution tenfold. The mobilization of the G-7 already begun under the Canadian presidency should make it possible to go even  further. We  are at a key moment on  this issue that will decide whether or not we are capable of dealing with the challenge we
face. Between now and 2030 there will be 620 million more children needing schooling worldwide, including 444 million Africans. Are we going to provide for that? Are we going to give them all that they need for a solid foundation that will enable them to be agents for their own lives, to live as brothers in tomorrow’s world? If not, what kind of world are we creating? That is why I have committed France to this fight and why I insist so much on teacher training, vocational training and gender equality in education. That is why I urge everyone here to join in this great global surge for education. Education and health will not only be the pillars of our societies in the twenty-first century, they will be the fundamental building blocks of our economies.
We must also fight diligently against gender inequality. In France I have made this the signature issue of my five-year term, and I am launching an appeal here to make it a major global issue. Women and girls are the first of us to be affected by poverty, conflict and the consequences of global warming. They are the primary victims of gender-based and sexual violence, which too often hinders their freedom of movement and their ability to work and have control over their bodies. It is our responsibility in the twenty- first century to put an end to such violence, from street harassment to femicide. It is time for our world to stop victimizing women and finally make a place for them, one that they deserve, one where they can be leaders. We must ensure that they have access to education, health care, employment and economic and political decision-making everywhere, and we must fight all forms of violence against them. France therefore proposes to those Governments that want to move forward with us the creation of a coalition for enacting new legislation on equality between women and men. Fifty per cent of our development assistance will be devoted to projects aimed at reducing gender inequality.
We must also mobilize against health inequality at the international level. In Lyon in 2019 we will host the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Replenishment Conference. We will take up the initiative on the fight against counterfeit medicines and will intensify our response to major pandemics. I call on everyone here to mobilize.
Lastly, we must fight urgently, body and soul, against environmental inequality. It is unacceptable that 45 per cent of greenhouse-gas emissions are produced by 10 per cent of the planet’s richest inhabitants. As is the case with solar energy, we have an inefficient situation
 
when the countries with the greatest potential and needs have the least access to appropriate technologies. It is unsustainable that 100 million more people will be condemned to extreme poverty by 2030 if we fail  to meet our commitments to fighting global warming. Here too we must be united in combat. Some countries represented here are suffering more than others, and we owe them our solidarity. But we will all be held accountable for the disasters that are multiplying before our very eyes, before our peoples and our own children. The proclaimed breakdown of the Paris Climate Change Agreement has been thwarted because we have been able to remain united, despite the decision of the United States to withdraw from it. That strength must continue to support us and help us to ward off all the fatalistic predictions.
We are told that solutions exist but that the funding is lacking. So let us go find it, let us innovate. This is what we did last year in Paris, on 12 December, with many of those gathered here, at the One Planet Summit, with concrete commitments and first results. That is what we did at the beginning of the year in Delhi, with the International Solar Alliance. That is what we will do again tomorrow in New York, at the second One Planet Summit. We are told that it is already too late, that we cannot meet the goals. So let us speed up, let us together adopt the rules for implementing the Paris Agreement in December at the 24th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Let us implement the protocol against hydrofluorocarbon gases, which could enable us to reduce the average global temperature by one degree by 2050. Let us set ourselves the goal of concluding an ambitious draft global environmental pact by 2020, and ensuring that the Beijing Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and the 2020 International Union for Conservation of Nature World Conservation Congress in France will be decisive steps.
Let us make a  clear commitment, and let  us all be equally clear, concrete and consistent. This is an emergency. So let us honour the commitments we  have made. Let us no longer sign trade agreements with Powers that do not respect the Paris Agreement. Let us ensure that our business commitments integrate our environmental and social constraints. Let us work harder to involve sovereign wealth funds and financiers in this low-carbon-policy strategy. France will continue to be a global leader in this fight alongside everyone who  wants to join. We  will work  in the G-7  to ensure
that the commitments made at the 2015 Climate Change Conference are increased, and if one of our members does not want to move forward, we will move forward anyway by seeking new coalitions and new formats, because the G-7’s mission is to remain a united group of countries committed to democracy. But today it must also contribute to the creation of new coalitions that will make it possible to improve and restructure the collective global system. So let us build new forms of cooperation to make progress and  take decisions  on those fundamental issues. Only together can we effectively fight the inequalities that have fractured all of our societies and that have fuelled mistrust and the temptation to withdraw — inequalities that we have allowed to grow and to which we have been collectively unable to respond effectively.
But none of us can effectively fight the inequalities I have decried if we act alone. If we do, there are essentially only two solutions. The first is to continually lower the bar and revert to the standards that we know, as we have been doing for decades. We have a trade war, so let us reduce workers’ rights, keep cutting taxes and fuel our inequalities that way in an effort to respond to our trade problems. What does that lead to? It reinforces the inequalities in our societies and the disruption that we are living through. The alternative is to say that it is the rules that are not working, so we should retreat inwards towards isolationism and protectionism. But the only thing that leads to is heightened tensions, which do nothing to address serious inequalities.
What I am proposing instead is that we put in place a collective mechanism to enable us to work together on what we are doing in each of our countries to reduce inequalities, to evaluate our actions but also to coordinate them better and to disseminate best practices. I therefore propose that international institutions — the United Nations, but the OECD as well, of course — support us in setting up such a mechanism, for which the G-7 must be the driving force.
To defeat inequality, we must change our methods. First, we should revise both our trade and social rules. Rather than pursuing protectionism, we should all work together to thoroughly review the World Trade Organization (WTO) rules. We must restore the WTO’s ability to resolve conflicts and establish rules for the unfair trade practices, non-compliance with intellectual property rights and forced technology transfers that make a level playing field impossible. Starting this year, the Group of Twenty summit in Argentina must provide
 
us with a credible road map for rebuilding the WTO. That is also what we will have to do on the social front next year, during the centenary of the International Labour Organization.
Secondly, we must also change the modalities of our action, bringing into the scope of our collective action the major  players who are not  in this Hall or  at the General Assembly, the big  non-State  actors who are helping to change the world but who do not participate enough in reducing the inequalities that these transformations bring, and by that I mean the major  digital players, both in terms of taxation and  of responsibility for combating the manipulation of information. We need to  operate  differently  from  our standard collective action where all our major challenges are concerned and include dialogue with these new private stakeholders and Internet giants.
Thirdly, we must enable Africa to take its rightful place so that it can play a central part in rebuilding the international system. It is not only on that continent that we will collectively win or lose our great battle against inequality — it is with that continent, because today it is in Africa that we find the most fervent defenders of multilateralism and regional integration. Our African partners have fully understood that we can only meet our common challenges together. And this new alliance with Africa will also be a focus of the French presidency of the G-7.
I  firmly  believe  that  despite  these  fractures and challenges in the modern  world  order,  we  can put together a new vocabulary for action while also addressing the root causes of inequality today. And it is the responsibility of France and all its European partners, of the European Union, to be in the vanguard in this fight, to build a new, modern humanism that refuses to yield to attempts to withdraw or to simple-mindedness and at the same time, as mediating Powers, to build these new rules for the international order.
At a  time when our collective system is cracking, I have to say that we have never needed it so much. That is why we will support the agencies working on projects for peace and humanity — UNESCO, the conscience of the United Nations; the Human Rights Council; the International Criminal Court; the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to which we will increase our contribution — because, I want to remind the Assembly, we are simply talking  about enabling
hundreds of thousands of children to go to school, nothing less, nothing more.
We will defend expanding both member categories of the Security Council so that its composition reflects today’s balances of power and so that it is strengthened as a forum for consultation rather than obstruction. We will ensure that by the end of the year, two thirds of the members of the General Assembly can support limiting the right of veto in the case of mass atrocities. We will defend international humanitarian law by supporting staff who take extraordinary risks to help civilians on the ground by negotiating humanitarian access to all theatres, one by one.
On the seventieth anniversary of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we will remind the world that human rights are not a cultural thing. They are not simply values or revocable options, but a legal corpus enshrined in international treaties to which the members of the Assembly have freely consented. We will point out that their universality not only does not run counter to a people’s sovereignty, it is rather the only way to ensure the preservation and exercise of those rights.
France will be there to ensure that the world does not forget that clashing nationalisms only plunge us into the abyss, that when democracies lack the courage to defend their principles, they are weak, and that accumulated resentments, backed only by a fragile international system, can result in a global unleashing of violence twice in the space of one human life. I am speaking from our own experience. In a few weeks’ time, on 11 November, the Paris Peace Forum will present an opportunity for us to see a surge of thoughtfulness and courage as we attempt to rediscover what keeps us together here. For us, united by the tragedies of the twentieth century, it should be a time for renewal and to rediscover the oath we have taken to save future generations from the scourge of war. I want us and our counterparts to take on new responsibilities during the Forum in order to chart the way for concrete actions in the service of peace.
I know that many of us may be tired of multilateralism. In a world that is flooded with information and in which in a sense we are in a free-for-all, in which society is a reality show where it is fashionable and newsworthy to say the worst possible things, I know that denouncing the consequences of causes we have championed can be a successful political tactic and
 
that defending cooperation and multilateralism may no longer be fashionable. Then let us not be fashionable, because we have a duty to those who have made it possible for us to sit in this Hall. Because we must never forget that the genocides that are the reason we are here today were fuelled by the speeches that we are growing accustomed to, by the political spectacles that we applaud. Because we are now seeing international law and every kind of cooperation disintegrate, as if it was nothing, out of fear and complicity and because it looks good.
But I will not do that. I will not do it, because I come from a country that helped to create the declarations that have brought us here, because I come from a country that stands tall, and while it has made many mistakes and done many bad things, it has been able to maintain a kind of universalism at every point in its own history and in international history. This is today. This is now. So we must not get used to it. We must not accept all these kinds of unilateralism. Every day pages are being ripped in a betrayal of our history. And I am not going to get used to it.
This is what I have to say, very clearly. This nascent century is watching us, and our children are waiting. We must resolve our crises. We must work together to combat all our inequalities, but let us do so on a human level and in full accord with our principles, our histories and our universalism. In any case, that is my commitment to everyone here, and I am counting on us all.
On behalf of the United Kingdom, let me begin by paying tribute to an outstanding leader of the United Nations, who, sadly, passed away this summer. Kofi Annan was one of the great Secretaries-General, a tireless campaigner for peace and progress and a champion of human rights and human dignity, whose influence will continue to be felt around the world for years to come. Over the course of his lifetime he witnessed the extraordinary progress that we as a community of nations have made since the Organization was founded: progress in which we have more than halved the number of people living in extreme poverty in this century alone; progress in which the number of people killed in conflicts has fallen by three quarters in just over three decades; and progress in which millions of our citizens lead healthier and longer lives and where, thanks to advances in human knowledge, medicine, science and technology, we are presented with huge opportunities in the years ahead. Yet today many are concerned about whether or not that progress will continue and fearful about what the future holds.
For the end of the Cold War did not, as many once believed, lead to the inevitable supremacy of open economies and liberal democracies cooperating on the global stage for the common good. Today, instead, we face a loss of confidence in those very systems that have delivered so much. The belief in free markets has been challenged by the financial crisis of 2008, the concerns of those feeling left behind by globalization, the anxieties about the pace and scale of technological change and what that will mean for jobs and the unprecedented mass movements of people across borders, with all the pressures that can bring. And after the military interventionism at the beginning of the century, people question the rationale, and indeed legitimacy, of the use of force and involving ourselves in crises and conflicts that are not ours, while at the same time being repelled by the slaughter in Syria and our failure to end it.
Such doubts are entirely understandable; so too is the demand for leadership. Those of us who believe in inclusive societies and open economies have a duty to respond, learn the lessons of the past, meet people’s concerns with practical actions, not beguiling illusions, and renew our confidence in the ideas and values that have done so much to benefit so many for so long. For be in no doubt, if we lack the confidence to step up, others will.
In the last century, whether in the rise of fascism or the spread of communism, we have seen those on the extreme right and extreme left exploit people’s fears, stoke intolerance and racism, close down economies and societies and destroy the peace of nations. And today, once more, we see worrying trends in the rise of such movements in Europe and beyond. We have seen what happens when countries slide into authoritarianism, slowly crushing the basic freedoms and rights of their citizens. We have seen what happens when corrupt oligarchies rob their nations of the wealth, resources and human capital that are so vital to unlocking a brighter future for their citizens.
We have seen what happens when the natural patriotism that is a cornerstone of a healthy society is warped into aggressive nationalism, exploiting fear and
 
uncertainty to promote identity politics at home and belligerent confrontation abroad, while breaking rules and undermining institutions. We see what happens when States like Russia flagrantly breach international norms — from the seizing of sovereign territory to the reckless use of chemical weapons on the streets of Britain by agents of the Russian GRU. We have to show there is a better way to meet the concerns of our people. That way lies in global cooperation between strong and accountable States based on open economies and inclusive societies. It is a way that ensures that strong nation States provide the bonds that bring citizens together and that power remains accountable to those it is there to serve; that celebrates free markets and has the confidence to reform them when they need to work better; and that demonstrates that delivering for one’s citizens at home does not have to be at the expense of global cooperation and the values, rules and ideals that underpin that.
Indeed, cooperation and competition are not mutually exclusive. Only global cooperation based on a set of agreed rules can ensure competition is fair and does not succumb to protectionism, with its certain path to lost jobs and international confrontation. It is only global cooperation that can harness legitimate self- interest towards common goals, producing agreements on global challenges, such as climate change and proliferation, and increasing inclusive economic growth. We see that cooperation here today at the United Nations, as we also saw it at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting earlier this year. And here today, as Chair-in-Office of the Commonwealth, I deliver a clear statement on behalf of the Heads of Government of its 53 equal and independent member States. We reaffirm our shared commitment to working together within a rules-based international system to address shared global challenges and foster a fairer, more secure, more sustainable and more prosperous future. That commitment takes account of the special requirements of the least developed countries and of small and otherwise vulnerable economies and benefits all our citizens and the wider world.
But it is not enough for us merely to make the case for cooperation. We need action, at home and in the community of nations, to show how our ideas and values can deliver practical benefits for all our people in all parts of the world. We must recognize the legitimacy of people’s concerns and act to build a global economy that works for everyone. We must invest in the patient
work of building open societies in which everyone has a stake in the future. And we must act to uphold the international rules-based system and stand up for our values by protecting those who may suffer when it is violated. Let me take each in turn.
First, we must respond to those who feel that the global economy is not working for them; the pace of globalization that has left too many people behind; the fear that our children and grandchildren may lack the education and skills to secure the jobs of tomorrow; and the risk that technological change could become   a source of inequality and division rather than the greatest opportunity in history. In the United Kingdom we are driving investment in industries of the  future to create new jobs, from low-carbon technologies to artificial intelligence. We are investing in education and skills so that workers are ready to make the most of the opportunities that lie ahead. And we are making sure people play by the rules so that business and innovation is celebrated for creating jobs, not demonized because of grievances over tax not paid or rights not respected.
While we strive to make our own economies work for all our people, we should do the same at a global level. In an increasingly global economy, it is not enough to ensure people play by the rules at home. We need global cooperation to set and enforce fair rules on trade, tax and the sharing of data. And those rules need to keep pace with the changing nature of trade and technology. We need to give the World Trade Organization a broad, ambitious and urgent mandate to reform. It must address the areas where it is not functioning effectively, deal with issues that are not currently covered and maintain trust in a system that is critical to preventing a return to the failed protectionism of the past.
Fair and respected rules are essential for business to flourish and drive growth. But recent history shows that that cannot be sustained without deeper partnerships among Governments, business, international financial institutions and civil society to ensure that growth delivers for everyone. That is why I recently visited Africa, along with British businesses, to promote trade and investment and encourage a new partnership based on shared prosperity and shared security. It is why at this General Assembly session I co-hosted an event with Prime Minister Trudeau, President Kagame and President Akufo-Addo, calling for more support for investment and job creation for young people on the continent. It is why the United Kingdom will maintain its commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross
 
national income on official development assistance and put our development budget at the heart of our international agenda. We will do more to create jobs, improve skills and increase investment in emerging economies — in both our interests and theirs, for the best way of resisting protectionism is to ensure that this century is defined by open markets that really deliver for all our people.
Secondly, we must build countries, not only economies, that work for everyone: inclusive societies where every citizen has a stake in the future. Those are the firm foundations on which strong and accountable nations are built. History has consistently taught us that giving people a stake in society is the best way to ensure stability, security and economic growth. There is no one right way to do this. Every country must choose its own path, but the basic tenets are common across the world. They include a Government that is transparent and accountable, an independent judiciary to enforce the rule of law, free and fair elections and a free and open media. They also include freedom of expression, a right to redress, property rights that are reliably enforced, equality, freedom of thought, opinion, religion and conscience — all found in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed 70 years ago.
Those of us who believe in those tenets must set  an example in defending and strengthening them at home and abroad. That is why we must call out hate speech, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia  and  all  forms of prejudice and discrimination against minorities wherever we find  it.  Like  many  leaders,  I  suspect, I do not always enjoy reading what the media in my country writes about me. But I will defend their right to say it, for the independence of our media is one of my country’s greatest achievements and it is the bedrock of our democracy.
So, too, will I defend objectivity and impartiality in the face of those who treat truth as just another opinion to be manipulated. This challenge has only become more complex with the rise in social media and online information. That is why we agreed at the Group of Seven (G-7) Summit in June to step up  our efforts to respond to disinformation and why, together with our partners and with technology companies, we are leading efforts to reclaim the Internet from terrorists and others who would do us harm.
Just as we must stand up for the values that we adhere to, so we must support countries and leaders who
choose to take the often difficult steps towards a more inclusive society. The United Kingdom will use all the levers at its disposal to do so. Through our aid budget and commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals, we will not only protect the most vulnerable, but also bolster States under threat and help others sustain their progress. Through global campaigns, we will help countries to end scourges such as modern slavery and sexual violence in conflict, and we will mobilize wider support through our alliances and membership of multilateral organizations — not only the United Nations, but also international financial institutions, the G-7, the Group of 20 and NATO.
Just as there is no single recipe for an inclusive society, so there is no single model for balancing the democratic demands of our public with the imperative to cooperate internationally. The vote by the British people to leave the European Union (EU) was not a rejection of multilateralism or international cooperation; it was a clear demand for decisions and accountability to lie closer to home. I believe the role of leadership   in these circumstances is clear: it is delivering on the democratic wishes of our people and international cooperation, working with allies and partners in pursuit of our shared values.
Thirdly, we must have the will and confidence to act when the fundamental rules that we live by are broken. This is not about repeating the mistakes of the past by trying to impose democracy on other countries through regime change, but we should not allow those mistakes to prevent us from protecting people in the face of the worst violations of human rights and human dignity. We should not allow those mistakes to paralyse the international community when its long-established norms are violated. We should not let our inability to prevent some of the worst conflicts today stop us from making every effort to ensure they do not happen again in future. If we stand back, we allow the world to become divided into spheres of influence in which the powerful dominate the weak and in which legitimate grievances go unaddressed. This is not just a moral imperative — it is also a matter of self-interest, for when barbarous acts and aggression go unchecked, dictators and terrorists are emboldened.
We must therefore have the confidence to act. When the Syrian regime used chemical weapons on its people again in April, it was Britain — together with France and America — that took military action to degrade the Syrian regime’s chemical-weapons capability and
 
deter their use. Earlier this year, when Russia used a toxic nerve agent in a sickening attack on the streets  of Salisbury, the United Kingdom, with our NATO, EU and other allies, took action, expelling over 150 Russian intelligence officers in the largest collective expulsion ever.
In Burma, following the damning report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, we should sow the same  confidence  to hold accountable those responsible for the appalling atrocities repeatedly inflicted by the Burmese military on the Rohingya, Shan and Kachin peoples since 2011. Similarly, we should gather evidence of Da’esh’s crimes worldwide, show ensuring justice for their victims and deterring those who might conduct such crimes in the future. But accountability alone is not enough. We must do more collectively to prevent such atrocities in the first place and address the causes of instability that can give rise to them.
The United Nations has a critical  role  to  play, and it has a wide range of levers to do so, from sanctions — which show the leaders of Iran and North Korea that they cannot act without consequence — to peacekeeping missions, such as that in South Sudan, which is helping to prevent suffering and the collapse of law and order. To be able to effectively use those levers, the Security Council must find the political  will  to act in our collective interest. United Nations agencies must deliver the reforms that the Secretary-General has started to become more agile, more transparent and better coordinated on the ground. To support those reforms, we must also ensure proper funding is targeted specifically at those parts of the United Nations that deliver results.
Seventy years ago, the General Assembly agreed the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights.  Today we must renew the ideals and values on which that Declaration was founded. In doing so, we must learn the lessons of the past and show through our actions how cooperation between strong and accountable States with open economies and inclusive societies can best deliver security and prosperity for all our people. As Kofi Annan said at the start of his second term as Secretary-General,
“I have sought to turn an unflinching eye to the failures of our recent past, in order to assess more clearly what it will take for us to succeed in the future.” (A/55/PV.105, p.3)
In that spirit, let us show unflinching resolve to renew the promise of freedom, opportunity and fairness, a promise that has delivered for more people, in more places, than at any other period in our history. Let us ensure that promise can be fulfilled for our children and grandchildren and for every generation to come.On my own behalf and on behalf of my country, India, I should like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy- third session. As a woman, I feel doubly proud that this honour has been bestowed on you. I also recall, with equal pride, that the first woman to occupy this eminent position was an Indian — Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit — in 1953, at the General Assembly at its eight session. I also thank former President Miroslav Lajčák for successfully presiding over the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
 
We  received the   tragic   news   this   morning  of a tsunami and an earthquake, which occurred simultaneously. From this rostrum, on behalf of India, I wish to convey our deep condolences to the Government and the people of Indonesia. I would also like to assure them that India will cooperate in helping them during this trying time.
The United Nations is the world’s principal multilateral organization, where nations  seek  balm for the wounds of history and a platform for solutions and where less developed nations sit with their more fortunate brethren to formulate plans that can correct skewed economic imbalances. In 2015, we established 2030 as a critically important horizon for 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A common refrain since 2015 has been that we will reach that horizon only if India finds its way to that destination; otherwise, we will fail.
I assure the General Assembly through you, Madam President, that India will not let us fail. We are totally committed to achieving those objectives for our own people. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, India has initiated an unprecedented economic and social transformation that will help our country achieve its SDG benchmarks well before the deadline. I will provide an overview to illustrate the world’s largest-scale exercise in poverty elimination and social transformation.
Through the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, the world’s largest financial inclusion scheme, more than 320 million Indians who had previously never seen the inside of a bank now have bank accounts.  The programme has enabled the poor to receive direct benefit transfers from the Government’s welfare programmes into their personal accounts, thereby stopping waste and corruption within the system. Similarly, Ayushman Bharat Yojana, the world’s largest health insurance programme, was launched by Prime Minister Modi a few days ago, on 23 September. That revolutionary scheme will benefit 500 million Indians, who will receive insurance coverage of 500,000 rupees per family annually. We have a prayer in India — Sarve Santu Niramaya — which means “May all be free from illness”. The Ayushman Bharat Yojana, or National Health Protection Scheme, is the answer to that prayer.
Similarly, we have launched the largest-scale housing programme in the world aimed at ensuring that everyone  has a  roof  over  their head.  Under  the
programme, we have set for ourselves a target of  nearly 21  million homes by  2022. So  far, more than  5 million homes for the poor have already been built. Two extremely effective programmes have also been initiated to increase the skill levels of those waiting to be employed through the National Skill Development Corporation and the Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency (MUDRA) programme, which seeks to turn the poor into entrepreneurs. I stress that more than 140 million Indians have taken out MUDRA loans. The most significant aspect of the MUDRA scheme is the fact that 76 per cent of its beneficiaries are women. At the heart of Prime Minister Modi’s transformative vision is a radical idea, which is that uplifting any nation is best achieved through the comprehensive empowerment of women. All the programmes that I have just mentioned have the welfare of women at their core. Last year, I spoke about the Ujjwala programme (see A/72/PV.19), through which, I am happy to report,
50 million free liquid-gas connections have been provided so far.
Another such initiative is the maternity benefit programme, in which women in India are provided with 26 weeks of paid leave to care for their newborns. As a woman, Madam President, you will understand better than most how vitally important that programme is for every mother. Some developed nations with huge economies do not provide more than six weeks’ paid leave, thereby leading to a continuing struggle for more time off. In India, we have implemented what women across the world need, namely, 26 weeks of paid maternity leave.
In 2022, free India will be 75 years old. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to build a New India by then. What kind of India will that be? That India will be a clean, healthy, prosperous, secure, educated, developed, energized and strong India. That is our horizon for India in 2022, and we will reach it, as we are sparing no effort to meet that goal.
The greatest challenges of our era are the existential threats of climate change and terrorism. Underdeveloped and developing nations are the most affected victims of climate change. They have neither the capacity nor the resources to meet that crisis. The countries that have exploited nature for their short-term needs cannot abdicate their responsibilities in that matter. If we wish to save the world from the adverse effects of climate change, the developed nations must lift up the deprived with financial and technical resources. The principle
 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities was reiterated in the 2015 Paris Agreement. Prime Minister Modi, together with the Prime Minister of France, launched the International Solar Alliance. Sixty-eight nations have become members of the Alliance so far. In March, India and France chaired the founding conference of the Alliance, in which 120 countries participated. I am pleased to inform the Assembly that Prime Minister Modi has been acknowledged as a champion in that area. He is also working towards realizing the principle of one sun, one grid, since he believes that, as there is only one sun, there should also be a single universal grid.  If that goal is achieved, we will be witness to a major revolution in the energy sector, which will represent a major milestone in combating all phenomena related to climate change.
I mentioned terrorism as the second existential threat to humankind. We imagined that the advent of the twenty-first century would see an age of common good characterized by cooperation but, here in New York, the horrific tragedy of 11 September and, in Mumbai, the catastrophe of 26 November became nightmares that shattered our dreams. The demon of terrorism now stalks the world at a faster pace in some places, and at a slower one in others, but it is life-threatening everywhere. In our case, terrorism is bred not in some faraway land but across our border to the west. Our neighbour’s expertise is not restricted to serving as a spawning ground for terrorism; our neighbour is also an expert in trying to mask malevolence with verbal duplicity. The most startling evidence of that duplicity was the fact that Osama Bin Laden, the architect and ideologue  of  11  September,  was  given  safe  haven in Pakistan.
America  had  declared  Osama  Bin   Laden   to be its most dangerous enemy and had launched an exhaustive, worldwide search to bring him to justice. What America could perhaps not comprehend was that Osama would find sanctuary in a country that claimed to be America’s friend and ally, namely, Pakistan. Eventually, America’s intelligence services discovered the truth of that hypocrisy, and its special forces delivered justice. But Pakistan continued to behave as if nothing had happened. Pakistan’s commitment to terrorism as an instrument of official policy has not abated one bit, nor has its practice of hypocrisy. The killers of 11 September met their fate but the mastermind of 26 November, Hafiz Saeed, continues to roam the
streets of Pakistan with impunity. What is heartening is that the world is no longer ready to believe Islamabad. The Financial Action Task Force, for instance, has put Pakistan on notice with regard to the funding of terror.
We have been accused of sabotaging the process for talks with Pakistan. That is a complete lie. We believe that talks are the only rational means by which to settle even the most complex disputes. Accordingly, talks with Pakistan have been initiated many times. When they failed, it was only because of Pakistan’s behaviour. There have been many Governments of numerous parties in India. Every Government has tried the peace option. By inviting the Heads of State of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation to his swearing-in ceremony, Prime Minister Modi began his attempt for dialogue on his very first day in office. On 9 December 2016, I personally went to Islamabad and proposed a comprehensive bilateral dialogue. But soon afterwards, on 2 January, Pakistan-sponsored terrorists attacked our air force base in Pathankot. It is clear that we could not pursue talks in the middle of terrorist bloodshed. Even now, after the new Government in Pakistan came to power, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, wrote to Prime Minister Modi suggesting a meeting between our Foreign Ministers in New York. We even accepted the proposal but, within hours of our acceptance, news came that terrorists had killed three of our security personnel. Does that indicate a desire for dialogue? Could such a dialogue ever take place?
Time and again, Pakistan has accused India of human rights violations. Who is a greater transgressor of human rights than a terrorist? Those who take innocent lives in pursuit of war by other means are defenders of inhuman behaviour, not of human rights. Pakistan glorifies killers. It refuses to see the blood of innocent victims. It has become something of a habit for Pakistan to throw the dust of deceit and deception up against India in order to provide some thin cover for its own guilt.
The United Nations has seen that before. Last year, using her right of reply, the representative of Pakistan displayed some photographs as proof of alleged human rights violations by India (see A/72/PV.22). The photographs turned out to be from another country. Similar false accusations have become part of its standard rhetoric.
Each year, for the past five years, India has been arguing from this rostrum that lists are not enough if we
 
want to check terrorists and their protectors. We need to bring them to accountability through international law. In 1996, India submitted a document with a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism at the United Nations. That draft remains a draft today only because we cannot agree on a common language. On the one hand, we want to fight terrorism; on the other, we cannot define it.
That has allowed terrorists with a price on their head to be celebrated in Pakistan as “freedom fighters”. Their cruelty and barbarism are being advertised as heroism. The country of Pakistan prints postage stamps glorifying such terrorists. How long can we sit quietly and listen to such claims? If we do not act now, we will have to deal with that demon later on, when it sets fire to the entire world. Once again, I appeal to this body to come to an agreement on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and to adopt it as one of the necessary measures in a long-running war.
I would now like to make some remarks regarding the United Nations. I began by highlighting its unique and positive role, but I must add that, step by slow  step, the importance, influence, respect for and value of this institution are beginning to ebb. It is time to wonder whether we are wandering towards the fate of the League of Nations, which came to an end because it did not adopt the changes that were needed. It was unwilling to accept the need for reforms; we must not make that mistake. The United Nations must accept that it needs fundamental reform. Those reforms cannot be simply cosmetic; we need to change the institution’s head and heart in order to make both compatible with the contemporary reality.
Reform must begin today; tomorrow could be too late. Are all of the challenges that confronted the United Nations at its founding still relevant today? I feel that, in the Security Council, now is the time to start making much-needed changes.
A subject that is often debated is multilateralism. The challenges we face are causing tensions in many countries. I should like to state that India believes that the world is one global family. The United Nations should therefore work as a family. How does a family work? It is shaped by love, not trade; it is nurtured by compassion, not jealousy; it functions by compromising, not by fighting. That is why the United Nations must be based on the principles of the family. It cannot be
run using “I”, “me” and “mine”; this forum needs “we”, “us” and “ours”. Only then will it be sustainable.
India does not believe that only certain countries should be allowed to fulfil their goal or that we should take decisions on behalf of other countries that are not beneficial to them. We should take every country’s goals into account.
This year, India will celebrate the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth. Mahatma’s favourite devotional hymn was “Vaishnav Jan To Tene Kahiye” or “Call those people Vaishnavas who feel the pain of others”. Its essence is that he who understands the pain of another and absorbs it as his own is a good human being. He who sees that pain and helps without becoming arrogant is a good human being.
We have to make the Assembly a platform for understanding, assistance and true justice.  We  have to understand the pain of other nations and work with developed nations to ease and eliminate their pain. Arrogance has no place in our scheme of things; arrogance is counter-productive and self-defeating.  Let us work for the benefit of the less fortunate and towards a world that is free from terrorism, tension and violence. That is the universe we envisage.
It is with that wish in mind that I end with a Sanskrit shloka or song: May all experience well-being; may all experience peace; may all move towards perfection; may all enjoy prosperity; may all achieve serenity.
When I spoke here three years ago (see A/70/PV.22), Israel stood alone among the nations. Of the nearly 200 countries that sit in this Hall, only Israel openly opposed the nuclear deal with Iran. We opposed it because it threatens our future, even our very survival. We opposed it because the deal paved Iran’s path to a nuclear arsenal. By lifting the sanctions, it has fuelled Iran’s campaign of carnage and conquest throughout the Middle East. We opposed it because the deal was based on a fundamental lie, that Iran is not seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
Israel exposed that lie earlier this year. In February 2018, Israel conducted a daring raid on Iran’s secret atomic archive. We obtained more than 100,000 documents and videos that had been stashed in vaults in an innocent-looking building in the heart of Tehran. In May, I presented a short summary of what we obtained to the international media. I provided hard evidence of Iran’s plans to build nuclear weapons and its plans to deceive the international community. Israel shared that information and even more damning evidence that we found with members of the five plus one group and with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Months have passed, and the IAEA has still not taken any action. It has not posed a single question to Iran. It has not demanded to inspect a single new site discovered in that secret archive. Given that inaction,  I have decided, therefore, to reveal today something else that we have shared with the IAEA and with a few intelligence agencies. What I am about to say has not been shared publicly before. Today I am disclosing for the first time that Iran has another secret facility in Tehran, a secret atomic warehouse for storing massive amounts of equipment and materiel from Iran’s secret nuclear-weapon programme.
In May, we exposed the site of Iran’s secret atomic archive. It is in the Shorabad district of Tehran. Today I am revealing the site of a second facility, Iran’s secret atomic warehouse, which is located in the Torquzabad district of Tehran, just three miles away from the archive. Let me show exactly what the secret atomic warehouse looks like. From this image, it looks just like the atomic archive, another innocent-looking compound. For listeners at home using Google Earth, this no-longer-secret atomic warehouse is on Mehr Alley. The coordinates are on the image. Anyone can try to get there. And for those who try to get there, it  is a hundred meters from the Kalishoi, a rug-cleaning operation. By the way, I hear they do a fantastic job of cleaning rugs there. But by now they may be radioactive rags. That is the second secret site.
Now countries with satellite capabilities may notice some increased activity on Mehr Alley in the days and weeks ahead. The people they will see scurrying back and forth are Iranian officials desperately trying to finish the job of cleaning up that site. Since we raided the atomic archive, they have been busy cleaning out the atomic warehouse. Just last month, they removed 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel. What did they do with it? They had to get those 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel out of the site, so they took it out and spread it around Tehran in an effort to hide the evidence. The residents of Tehran, now endangered, may want to know that they can get a Geiger counter on Amazon for only $29.99. At today’s exchange rate, that is just 4 million Iranian rials. But we will get to that later. I will talk about the Iranian economy in a minute.
They took that radioactive material and spread it around Tehran. The Iranian officials cleaning out the site still have a lot of work to do, because they had at least 15 gigantic ship containers full of nuclear-related equipment  and  materiel  stored  there.  Since  each of
 
those containers can hold 20 tons of materiel, the site must have contained as much as 300 tons of nuclear- related equipment and materiel, all in that very place.
We now have to ask ourselves a question. Why did Iran keep a secret atomic archive and a secret atomic warehouse? After all, when South Africa and Libya gave up their nuclear programmes, the first thing they did was to destroy both the archives and the materiel and equipment. The answer to the question is simple. The reason Iran did not destroy its atomic archive and its atomic warehouse is because it has not abandoned its goal to develop nuclear weapons. In fact, it planned to use both of those sites in a few years when the time was right to break out the atom bomb. Delegations may rest assured that that will not happen. It will not happen because what Iran hides Israel will find.
I have a message for  the  Head  of  the  IAEA,  Mr. Yukiya Amano. I believe he is a good man. I believe he wants to do the right thing. I therefore ask him to do the right thing now. The IAEA should inspect that atomic warehouse immediately, before the Iranians finish clearing it out. Do delegations remember the time when we were promised that inspections could take place anytime, anywhere? Well, how about inspections of Mehr Alley right now? And while Mr. Amano is at it, he should inspect the other sites that we told him about. Once and for all, he should tell the world the truth about Iran.
I also have a message today for the tyrants of Tehran. Israel knows what they are doing, and Israel knows where they are doing it. Israel will never let a regime that calls for our destruction develop nuclear weapons — not now, not in 10 years, not ever. And Israel will do whatever it must do to defend itself against Iran’s aggression. We will continue to act against it in Syria. We will act against it in Lebanon. We will act against it in Iraq. We will act against it whenever and wherever we must. We must act to defend our State and to defend our people.
Three years ago, a few weeks after the nuclear deal was completed, I asked this question from this very podium: does anyone seriously believe that flooding Iran’s radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? But many of the deal’s supporters believed just that. They believed that Iran’s regime would become more moderate, more peaceful. They believed that Iran would use the billions of dollars it received in sanctions relief to improve the lives of
its people — solving the water problem, the trucking problem, the electricity problem and improving hospitals and schools. That is what they believed. Perhaps some people here today also believed that.
Well, it did not happen. Instead, Iran used the money to fuel its vast war machine. Just this past year, Iran has attacked Kurds in Iraq, slaughtered Sunnis in Syria, armed Hizbullah in Lebanon, financed Hamas in Gaza, fired missiles into Saudi Arabia and threatened the freedom of navigation in the Strait  of  Hormuz and the Strait of Bab El-Mandeb. That is some peace, some moderation.
If people think that Iran’s aggression has been confined to the Middle East, they need to  think again. Last month, two Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks here in the United States, and several weeks ago, Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks in the heart of Europe. Yet while the United States is confronting Iran with new sanctions, Europe and others are appeasing Iran by trying to help it bypass those new sanctions.
Now, I have just used a tough word,  a  very  strong word: appeasement. I use it reluctantly. But unfortunately that is exactly what we are seeing again in Europe. We need to think about that. The same week that Iran was caught red-handed trying to murder European citizens, European leaders were rolling out the red carpet for President Rouhani, promising to give Iran even more money. As the son of a historian, I have to ask — and I ask it not merely as a historian’s son, but as a Jew, a citizen of the world and someone who has lived through the twentieth century — have these European leaders learned nothing from history? Will they ever wake up?
We in Israel do not need a wake-up call, because Iran threatens us every day. Despite the  best  of  hopes — and there were many hopes around the nuclear deal — that deal did not push war further away. It brought it ever closer to our borders. In Syria, Iran  is trying to establish permanent military bases against us and has already launched missiles and drones into our territory. In Gaza, Iran is arming terror groups to launch rocket attacks on our cities and terror attacks on our civilians. In Lebanon, Iran is directing Hizbullah in the building of secret sites for converting inaccurate projectiles into precision-guided missiles that can hit targets deep inside Israel with an accuracy of within 10 metres.
 
The Assembly needs to listen to this. Hizbullah is deliberately using the innocent people of Beirut as human shields. It has placed three of these missile-conversion sites alongside Beirut’s international airport. I can show a picture that is worth a thousand missiles. In it, we can see Beirut’s international airport, the first missile site, which is in the Ouzai neighbourhood, on the water’s edge, a few blocks away from the runway. There is also a second site, which is underneath a soccer stadium, two blocks away, and a third site, which is adjacent to the airport itself, right next to it.
I therefore have a message for Hizbullah today. Israel also knows what it is doing. Israel knows where it is doing it. And Israel will not let it get away with it. Just as supporters of the nuclear deal were wrong about what would happen when sanctions were removed, they were dead wrong about what would happen when sanctions were restored. They argued that United States sanctions alone would have little economic impact on Iran. That is what they said. It is hard to believe.
Let us take a look at what  has  happened  to  Iran’s economy now that President Trump has forced companies to choose between doing business with Iran and doing business with the United States, whose gross domestic product is 50 times the size of Iran’s gross domestic product. A year ago, Iran’s economy was booming. Now it is collapsing. Iran’s currency is plummeting. Inflation and unemployment are soaring. British airlines, German banks, French oil companies, Japanese oil importers and many others are scrambling to get out. If that is little economic impact, we can imagine what will happen with the next batch of United States sanctions, which will be imposed in November.
The deal’s supporters were also wrong when they argued — and it is hard to believe that they argued this, despite the fact that I have had many arguments with them — that restoring sanctions would rally the Iranian people around the regime. While they are definitely rallying, their rallying is definitely not around the regime. They are rallying against the regime. They are not chanting “Death to America”. They are chanting “Death to the dictator”. They are not chanting “Export the Islamic Revolution”. They are chanting “Leave Syria”, “Leave Lebanon”, “Leave Gaza”, and “Take care of us in Iran”.
I listen to those protests. I talk to Iranian people. I show videos and get so many responses — from Iranians. At first, I thought they were Iranian exiles — in the
safety of London or Paris or Los Angeles. No, these are Iranians from Iran, embracing Israel, criticizing their regime — that is an understatement — with their names. Shortly after the protests broke out, I asked my intelligence people, “What is going on?”
Those protests are an indicator of something extraordinary that has been taking  place there. Through those protests, the Iranian people are showing unbelievable courage. The protests are now embracing the whole of Iran — from the urban centres to distant villages, from the striking merchants in the bazaars to the young women  uncovering their hair.  The people of Iran are bravely standing up to a regime that has brutally repressed them for four decades and that has squandered — and still squanders — their money in bloody wars across the Middle East.
This is what I say to Europe’s leaders and to others. Instead of coddling Iran’s dictators, join the United States and Israel and most of  the Arab world  in supporting new sanctions against a regime that endangers all of us across the world.
Israel is deeply grateful to President Trump for his bold decision to withdraw from the disastrous nuclear deal with Iran. A great many of our Arab neighbours are also grateful. And everyone who cares about the peace and security of the world should also be grateful.
But I have an important confession to make. It  may be surprising, but I have to admit that the Iran deal has had one positive consequence, an unintended but positive consequence. By empowering Iran, it has brought Israel and many Arab States closer than they have ever been before, in an intimacy and friendship that I have not seen in my lifetime and that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.
When friendships are formed around a threat or a challenge, opportunities are quickly seen, not just for security but for how to bring a better life to our peoples, which is what Israel can and wants to contribute to. Israel deeply values those new friendships, and I hope the day will soon arrive when Israel will be able to expand peace, a formal peace, beyond Egypt and Jordan to other Arab neighbours, including the Palestinians. I look forward to working with President Trump and his peace team to achieve that goal.
I also want to take the opportunity now, here at the United Nations, a place I know something about because many years ago I served here as Ambassador
 
for many years, to express Israel’s appreciation to President Trump and Ambassador Haley for the unwavering support they have provided to Israel at  the United Nations. They have unequivocally backed Israel’s right to defend itself.  They rightly pulled out of a history-denying UNESCO and a morally bankrupt Human Rights Council. I think that more resolutions about Israel than about the rest of the world combined have been introduced in those bodies, and tenfold the number of resolutions on Iran, Syria or any other State. It is not even fair to say “tenfold”, because there are no multiples of zero.
President Trump and Ambassador Haley also stopped funding an unreformed United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, an organization that perpetuates the Palestinian refugee problem instead of solving it. Day after day, the Trump Administration has stood up to what has long been a specialty here at the United Nations, slandering Israel. Even though the shameful resolution 3379
(XXX) comparing Zionism to racism was repealed 25 years ago, I am sorry to say that its foul stench still clings to these halls.
Israel airlifted Ethiopian Jews to freedom and a new life in Israel, in the Jewish State. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is absurdly accused of racism. Israel’s Arab citizens vote in our elections, serve in our Parliament, preside over our courts and have exactly the same individual rights as all other Israeli citizens. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is shamefully accused of apartheid. Today there are at least five times as many Palestinians as there were in 1948, the year of Israel’s founding. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is outrageously accused of ethnic cleansing. Do those here know what that is? It is the same old anti-Semitism with a brand-new face. That is all it is.
Once it was the Jewish people who were slandered and held to a different standard; today it is the Jewish State that is slandered and held to a different standard. Here is an example. Take the outlandish attacks that have been levelled against Israel after our Knesset, our Parliament, recently adopted a law declaring Israel the nation-State of the Jewish people. Nevertheless, Israel is a free country. People can oppose that law, and people have done so. People can call for different wording in this or that clause, or add or delete a clause. People can do that.
But when Israel is called racist for making  Hebrew its official language and the Star of  David  its national flag, when Israel is labelled an apartheid State for declaring itself the nation-State of the Jewish people — that is downright preposterous. And does the Assembly know why? Because represented in the Hall today are more than 100 countries that have only one official language, even though many other languages are commonly spoken within those countries. There are more than 50 countries here that have crosses or crescents on their flags, even though they have many non-Muslims and non-Christians living in  their  midst. And there are dozens of countries that define themselves as nation-States of a particular people, even though there are many ethnic and national minorities within their borders. None of those countries have been denigrated or libelled for celebrating their unique national identity. Only Israel is denigrated. Only Israel is libelled. What is unique about the Jewish people is not that we have a nation-State. What is unique is that many still oppose our having a nation-State.
Moments ago, President Abbas outrageously said that Israel’s nation-State law proves that Israel is a racist, apartheid State. President Abbas should know better. He wrote a dissertation denying the Holocaust. His Palestinian National Authority imposes death sentences on Palestinians for selling land to Jews. Let me repeat that. If a Jew buys an apartment or a piece of land anywhere in the Palestinian territories, the Palestinian who sold  him that land is executed. That  is what the law says. President Abbas proudly pays Palestinian terrorists who murder Jews. In fact, the more they slay, the more he pays. That is in their law too. Then how can he condemn Israel’s morality and call Israel racist?
That is not the way to peace. That is not the way  to achieve the peace that we all want and need and to which Israel remains committed. This body should not be applauding the Head of a regime that pays terrorists. The United Nations should condemn such a despicable policy. And the United Nations, which brokered an Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire in 2014, should demand that Hamas release our fallen soldiers Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. The latter was kidnapped when Hamas violated that very ceasefire. Hamas should also release the two Israeli citizens whom it holds captive, Avera Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed.
Every time I stand here I  feel  as  I  do  today.  I am privileged to stand here as the Prime Minister
 
of the State of Israel, a Jewish and democratic State. Some believe that Israel cannot be both Jewish and democratic. That is false. Israel is both, and Israel will always remain both. Ever since Abraham and Sarah made their journey to the promised land, nearly 4,000 years ago, the land of  Israel has been our homeland. It is the place where Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob, Leah and Rachel carried out their eternal covenant with God. It is where Joshua made us a sovereign nation, where David ruled and Isaiah preached, where the Maccabees fought and where Masada fell. It is the place from which we were exiled and to which we returned, rebuilding our ancient and eternal capital, Jerusalem. The nation-State of Israel is the only place where the Jewish people proudly exercise our collective right of self-determination. That right was recognized nearly a century ago by the League of Nations, and more than 70 years ago by the United Nations when it supported the establishment of a Jewish State. That is what resolution 181 (II) said, “a Jewish State”.
At the same time, Israel is a vibrant democracy, where all its citizens, Jews and non-Jews alike, enjoy equal individual rights, and those rights are guaranteed by law. In Israel, whether a person is a Jew or an  Arab, a Christian or a Muslim, a Druze or a Bedouin or anything else, that person’s individual rights are exactly the same and will always  remain the same.  In the Middle East that is not obvious. Now that is an understatement. In the Middle East, where women are often treated as property, minorities are persecuted and gays are hanged, Israel stands out as a shining example of freedom and progress.
I could not be more proud to represent my country, Israel. I am proud that we have made Israel a global technological Power of breathtaking creativity in information technology and precision agriculture. Is the Assembly aware that we target the fertilizer and the water down to the individual plant — not to a field,  not to part of a field, but down to the plant? I am proud of those geniuses that have brought those unbelievable developments in water management, cybersecurity, autonomous vehicles, digital health, medical devices and so many other fields that are improving the lives of billions of people around the world. I am proud of Israel’s brilliant scholars, innovative entrepreneurs, talented artists, devoted teachers and compassionate doctors, and of our search-and-rescue teams who save lives from Haiti to Mexico, from Nepal to the Philippines. I am also proud of Israel’s courageous soldiers, the men
and women who bravely defend our homeland while upholding the highest values. Most of all, I am proud of the people of Israel, who draw extraordinary strength from the deep wellsprings of our heritage, who possess an unbreakable spirit and who are as determined as ever to build a secure and magnificent future for the one and only Jewish State.E nga mana nul o nga whenua o te ao/Tena koutou katoa/Nei ra te reo mihl maioha o Aotearoa/Tena tatau i nga kaupapa korero/Ka arahina e tatau/Me te ngakau pono/Me te kotahitanga o te tangata.
My opening remarks were in Te Reo Maori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand. As is tradition, I acknowledged those who are here, why we are here and the importance of our work. It seems a fitting place to start.
As a leader attending my first General Assembly, I am struck by the power and potential that resides here. In New Zealand we have always been acutely aware of that. We are a  remote nation at  the bottom  of the South Pacific. It takes three hours to reach our nearest neighbours by plane, and anywhere that takes less than 12 hours is considered close. I have no doubt, though, that our geographic isolation has contributed to our values.
We are a self-deprecating people.  We  are  not ones for status. We will celebrate the  local  people who volunteer at their sports clubs as  much  as  we will celebrate successful entrepreneurs. Our empathy and strong sense of justice are matched only by our pragmatism. We are, after all, a country made up of two main islands, one simply named North and the other South. For all of that, our isolation has not made us insular. In fact, our engagement with the world has helped shape who we are.
I am a child of the 1980s, a period in New Zealand’s history where we did not just observe international events, we challenged them. Whether it was apartheid in South Africa or nuclear testing in the Pacific, I grew up learning about my country and who we were by the way that we reacted to international events. Whether it was taking to the streets or changing our laws, we have seen ourselves as members of a community, one that we have a duty to use our voice within.
I am an incredibly proud New Zealander, but much of that pride has come from being a strong and active member of our international community, not in spite of it. At the heart of that international community has been this place. Emerging from a catastrophic war, we have collectively established — through convention, charters and rules — a set of international norms and human rights. All of these are an acknowledgement that we are not isolated, that Governments do have obligations to their people and to one another and that our actions have a global effect.
In 1945, New Zealand’s Prime Minister Peter Fraser said that the Charter of the United Nations offered perhaps a last opportunity to work in unison to realize the hope in the hearts of all of us, for a peace that would be real, lasting and worthy of human dignity. None of those founding principles should be consigned to the history books. In  fact,  given  the  challenges we face today and how truly global they are in their nature and impact, the need for collective action and multilateralism has never been clearer. And yet,  for  all of that, the debate and dialogue we  hear globally is not centred on the relevance and importance of our international institutions. Instead, we find ourselves having to defend their very existence. That surely leaves us all with the questions of how we got here and how we get out.
If anything unites us politically in this place right now it is this: globalization has had a massive impact on our nations and the people we serve. While that impact has been positive for many, for others it has not. The transitions our economies have made have often been jarring and the consequences harsh. Alongside unprecedented global economic growth, we are still seeing a growing sense of isolation, dislocation and insecurity and the erosion of hope. As politicians and Governments, we all have choices in how we respond to those challenges. We can use the environment to blame nameless and faceless others, feed the sense of insecurity and retreat into greater levels of isolationism,
 
or we can acknowledge the problems we have and seek to fix them.
In New Zealand, going it alone is not an option. Aside from our history, we are also a trading nation, and proudly so, but even without those founding principles, there are not just questions of nationhood to consider. There are generational demands on us too. It should hardly come as a surprise that we have seen  a global trend of young people showing dissatisfaction with our political systems and calling on us to do things differently. Why would they not, when they themselves have had to adapt so rapidly to a changing world?
Within a few short decades, we now have a generation that will grow up more connected than ever before. Digital transformation will determine whether the jobs they are training for will even exist in two decades. In education or the job market, they will not just compete with their neighbours but their neighbouring countries. This generation is a borderless one, at least in a virtual sense, and its members increasingly see themselves as global citizens. As their reality changes, they expect that ours will too, that we will see and understand our collective impact and that we will change the way we use our power.
If we are looking for an example of where the next generation is calling on us to make that change, we need look no further than climate change. Two weeks ago, Pacific Island leaders gathered together at the Pacific Islands Forum. It was at that meeting, in the small island nation of Nauru, that climate change was declared the single biggest threat to security in the Pacific. Please, just think about that for a moment. Of all the challenges we debate and discuss, rising sea levels present the single biggest threat to our region.
For those who live in the South Pacific, the impacts of climate change are not academic, or even arguable. They are watching the sea levels rise, the extreme weather events increase and the impact that has on their water supply and food crops. We can talk all we like about the science and what it means and what temperature rises we need to limit in order to survive, but there is a grinding reality in hearing people from  a Pacific island talk about where the sea was when they were children and the potential loss of their entire village now that they are adults.
Our action in the wake of that global challenge remains optional, but the impact  of  inaction  does not. Nations like Tuvalu, the Marshall Islands or
Kiribati — small countries that have contributed the least to global climate change — are suffering, and will suffer, the full force of a warming planet. If my Pacific neighbours do not have the option of opting out of the effects of climate change, why should we be able to opt out of taking action to stop it? Any disintegration of multilateralism and any undermining of climate-related targets and agreements are not interesting footnotes in geopolitical history. They are catastrophic.
In New Zealand we are determined to play our part. We will not issue any further offshore oil and gas exploration permits. We have set a goal of 100 per cent renewable energy generation by 2035, established a green infrastructure fund to encourage innovation and rolled out an initiative to plant 1 billion trees over the next 10 years. Those plans are unashamedly ambitious. The threat that climate change poses demands it. But we represent less than 0.2 per cent of global emissions. That is why, as a global community, not since the inception of the United Nations has there been a greater example than climate change of the importance of collective action and multilateralism. It should be a rallying cry for all of us.
Yet there is a hesitance that we can ill afford and a calculation of personal cost and self-interest. But that is not the only challenge where domestic self-interest is the first response and where an international or collective approach has been diluted at best, or rejected at worst. But it would be both unfair and naive  to argue that retreating to our own borders and interests has meant turning our backs on a perfect system. The international institutions that we have committed to have not been perfect. But they can be fixed.
That is why  the challenge I  want to issue today   is this: together, we must rebuild and recommit to multilateralism. We must redouble our efforts  to  work as a global community. We must rediscover our shared belief in the value, rather than the harm, of connectedness. We must demonstrate that collective international action not only works but is in all of our best interests. We must show the next generation that we are listening and have heard them.
But if we are truly going to take on a reform agenda, we must acknowledge the failings that have led us to this crossroads. International trade, for instance, has helped bring millions of people out of poverty around the world. But some have felt their standard of living slide. We in New Zealand have ourselves seen
 
the hesitancy around trade agreements within our own population. The correct response is not to repeat the mistakes of the past and be seduced by the false promises of protectionism. Rather, we must all work to ensure that the benefits of trade are distributed fairly across our societies.
We cannot rely on international institutions to do that, in the same way that we cannot blame them if they have not delivered those benefits. It is incumbent on us to build productive, sustainable and inclusive economies and demonstrate to our peoples that, when done right, international economic integration can make us all better off. If we want to ensure that everyone is better off, surely we should start with the most vulnerable.
We in New Zealand have set ourselves an ambitious goal. We want to be the best place in the world to be a child. It is hardly the stuff of hard and fast measures — after all, how are play and a feeling of security and happiness measured? But we can measure material deprivation and poverty, and so we will. Moreover, we are making it a law that we report on those numbers every single year alongside our budgets. What better way is there to hold ourselves to account, and what better group to do that for than children?
But if we are focused on nurturing that next generation, we equally have to  worry about  what  it  is that we are handing down to them, including our environment. In the Maori language there is a word that captures the importance of that role, kaitiakitanga, which means guardianship. That is the idea that we have been entrusted with our environment and have a duty to care for it. For us, that has meant taking action to address degradation, such as setting standards to make our rivers swimmable, reducing waste and phasing out single-use plastic bags, right through to eradicating predators and protecting our biodiversity. The race to grow our economies and increase wealth makes us all the poorer if it comes at the cost of our environment. We in New Zealand are determined to prove that it does not have to be that way. But those are all actions and initiatives that we can take domestically that ease the blame and pressure on our international institutions. That does not mean they do not need fixing.
At the heart of the multilateral system, the United Nations must lead the way. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s reform efforts to make the United Nations more responsive, effective and modernized so that it is capable of dealing with today’s challenges.
We encourage him to be ambitious, and  we  stand with him in that ambition. But ultimately it is up  to  us, the Member States, to drive change here at the United Nations. That includes reforming the Security Council. If we want the Council to fulfil its purpose  of maintaining international peace and security, its practices must be updated so that it is not hamstrung by the use of the veto.
New thinking will also be needed if we are to achieve the vision encapsulated in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In New Zealand we have sought to  embed the  principles behind the  SDGs  in a new living-standards framework that is guiding policymaking and the management of our resources. We remain absolutely committed to supporting the rollout of the SDGs alongside international partners through a significant increase in our official development assistance budget.
But revitalizing our international rules-based system is not just about the mechanics of how we work together. It also means renewing our commitment to our values. The Charter of the United Nations recalls that the Organization was formed to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which after two world wars had brought untold sorrow to humankind. If we forget that history and the principles that drove the creation of the United Nations, we will be doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past.
In an increasingly uncertain world it is more important than ever that we remember the core values on which the United Nations was built — that all people are equal, that all are entitled to have their dignity and human rights respected and that we must strive to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom. We must consistently hold ourselves to account on each one.
In addition to renewing that commitment, though, we must acknowledge where accountability must continue, and that is especially the case when it comes to equality. So many gains have been made, and each is worthy of celebration. In New Zealand we have just marked the 125th year since women were granted the right to vote. We were the first country in the world to do so. As a girl I never grew up believing that my gender would stand in the way of my achieving whatever I wanted in life. I am, after all, not the first but the third female Prime Minister of New Zealand.
 
But for all of that, we still have a gender pay gap and an overrepresentation of women in low-paid work and as victims of domestic violence. And we are not alone. It seems surprising that in this modern age we should have to recommit to gender equality, but we  do. I for one will never celebrate the gains we have made for women domestically while internationally other women and girls experience a lack of the most basic opportunities and dignity. #MeToo must become #WeToo. We are all in this together.
I accept that the list of demands, whether domestic or international, on all of us is long. We are operating in challenging times. We face what we in New Zealand would call wicked problems, ones that are intertwined and interrelated. Perhaps then it is time to step back from the chaos and ask what we want. It is in that space that we will find simplicity, the simplicity of peace, prosperity and fairness.
If I could distil it into one concept that we are pursuing in New Zealand it is simple and it is this: kindness. In the face of isolationism, protectionism and racism, the simple concept of looking outwardly and beyond ourselves and of kindness and collectivism might be just as good a starting point as any. Let us therefore start here, with the institutions that have served us well in times of need and will do so again.
In the meantime, I can assure everyone here that New Zealand remains committed to continuing to do its part in building and sustaining international peace and security; promoting and defending an open, inclusive and rules-based international order based on universal values; and being pragmatic, empathetic, strong and kind. The next generation, after all, deserves no less.
The statements delivered during this session’s general debate confirm that international relations are now being conducted in a complex and controversial period of history.
Today, we are all witnessing two opposing trends collide. On the one hand, we  see the strengthening    of polycentric principles of world order, the steady development of new centres of economic growth and peoples’ aspirations to preserve their sovereignty and choose development models that are consistent with their national, cultural and religious identities. On the other hand, we see the desire of a number of Western States to retain their self-proclaimed status as world leaders and slow the irreversible and objective process of establishing multipolarity. To that  end,  they  do not hesitate to use every possible method, including political blackmail, economic pressure and brute force.
Such illegal actions  devalue the  international law that underpins the post-war world order. We hear statements trumpeted that not only call into question the legal validity of international treaties, but also prioritize self-serving unilateral approaches over decisions made within the United Nations. We are seeing an assault  by belligerent revisionism on the modern system of international law. There have been attacks on the basic principles of the Middle East peace process, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, commitments under the framework of  the World Trade Organization, the multilateral Paris Agreement on Climate Change and many more.
At the same time, our Western colleagues continue to seek to replace the supremacy of law in world affairs with some kind of so-called rules-based order. Those
 
rules themselves are invented depending on whatever is politically expedient and are a reflection of double standards. Baseless accusations of interference in the internal affairs of various countries are being made alongside overt attempts to undermine and topple democratically elected Governments. Efforts are being made to draw some countries into military alliances that are designed to further specific agendas against the will of the peoples of those countries, while other States are threatened with punishment for their free choice of partners and allies. It is telling that aggressive attacks on international institutions are being accompanied by attempts to privatize their secretariat structures and grant them the rights of intergovernmental bodies in the hope of manipulating them later.
The shrinking space for constructive international cooperation, escalating confrontations, a growing overall lack of predictability, and a substantially higher risk of spontaneous conflicts all affect the work of this global Organization. The international  community has to pay a high price for the parochial, self-serving ambitions of a small group of countries. The collective mechanisms for responding to common security challenges have stalled. Diplomacy and a culture of negotiation and compromise are increasingly replaced by dictates and unilateral extraterritorial restrictions effected without the consent of the Security Council. Such measures, which have already been applied to dozens of countries, are ineffective as well as illegal, as demonstrated by the more  than  half-century  of the United States blockade of Cuba, which has been condemned by the entire international community.
Once again, however, the lessons are not being drawn from history. The number of those who  want  to hand down verdicts without bothering with charges or trials is not getting any smaller. Today assumptions in the spirit of the notorious “highly likely” approach seem to provide sufficient grounds for some of our Western colleagues to make accusations against anyone they want to. We have already been through that, and we well remember how often spurious pretexts have been used to justify interventions and unleash wars, as was the case in Yugoslavia in 1999, Iraq in 2003 and Libya in 2011. The same methods are being used in Syria today. On 14 April, missile strikes were launched against Syria on a completely invented pretext, just hours before international inspectors were expected to arrive at the site of an incident that had been staged. This is a warning against any further provocations
by terrorists and their patrons involving the use of chemical weapons, which would be unacceptable.
The conflict in Syria has already lasted seven years. The failed attempt to effect regime change, which was orchestrated from outside and relied on extremists, nearly resulted in the country’s disintegration and the emergence of a terrorist caliphate in its place. Russia’s energetic action, in response to the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and supported by diplomatic efforts in the context of the Astana process, helped prevent that devastating  scenario. The Syrian National Dialogue Congress, initiated by Russia, Iran and Turkey in Sochi in January, established the conditions for a political settlement in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and the basis for the intra-Syrian constitutional committee now being established in Geneva. Its agenda includes the restoration of ruined infrastructure in order to facilitate the return of millions of refugees to their homes. Assistance in addressing those issues in the interest of all Syrians, without double standards, must become a priority for international efforts and the activities of United Nations agencies.
Despite the complexity of the situation in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya, we  must  not  lose  sight  of the long-standing Palestinian question. A just and equitable solution to that issue is crucial to improving the situation throughout the Middle East. I want to warn against any unilateral  approaches  in  this area or attempts to monopolize this peace process. Today, as never before, the international community should consolidate its efforts with the aim of restarting talks on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Russia will continue to do its utmost to facilitate the process, including within the Middle East Quartet and in cooperation with the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Mutually acceptable agreements must ensure the peaceful and safe coexistence of the two States of Israel and Palestine.
Here at the United Nations, which was created on the basis of lessons learned from the Second World War, we must all think about a future in which the repetition of past mistakes should have no place. This year marks the eightieth anniversary of the notorious Munich agreement crowning the criminal policy of appeasement of the Third Reich, a sad example of the catastrophic consequences that can result from national
 
egotism, disregard for international law and attempts to solve problems at others’ expense.
Regrettably, in a number of countries today not only has the vaccine against the Nazi plague been weakened, but a rising campaign to rewrite history and whitewash war criminals and their associates is  emerging.  In our view, the campaigns being waged in a number of countries to demolish monuments to the liberators of Europe are an outrage. We call on the Assembly to support the draft of this year’s versin of the annual resolution on the inadmissibility of glorification of the Nazis.
The growth of radical nationalism and neo-fascism in Ukraine, where criminals who fought under Waffen- SS banners have been declared heroes, is one of the main factors in the protracted intra-Ukrainian conflict. The only way to settle that conflict is to ensure the comprehensive and consistent implementation in good faith of the Minsk package of measures, approved unanimously by the Security Council in its resolution 2202 (2015). We support the activities of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and are ready to provide its monitors with United Nations protection.
However, instead of implementing the Minsk agreements and engaging in dialogue with Donetsk and Luhansk, Kyiv continues to harbour the illusion that it may be able to put occupying forces in Donbas with the support of the West and is increasingly threatening to resort to military options. The sponsors of the current Kyiv authorities must bring their clients to their senses, make them lift the blockade of Donbas and end discrimination against ethnic minorities throughout Ukraine.
In Kosovo, the international military presence authorized by the Security Council is being transformed into a United States military base, and Kosovo armed forces are being created. The agreements between Belgrade and Pristina brokered by the European Union are not being implemented. Russia calls on the parties to engage in dialogue in accordance with the principles of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and will support a decision that would be acceptable for Serbia. In general, we urge that the Balkans not be once again transformed into an arena for confrontation or declared to be someone’s particular patrimony. The peoples of the Balkans must not be forced to face a false choice,
and we must prevent new dividing lines from emerging in the region.
We need to shape an architecture of equal and indivisible security elsewhere in the world, including the Asia-Pacific region. We welcome the positive developments on the Korean peninsula following the logic of the Russian-Chinese road map. It is important to encourage that process, which should be based on continuing the rapprochement between the  parties and on promoting the practical implementation of the important arrangements arrived at by Pyongyang and Seoul through the Security Council. We will continue to work to launch a multilateral process aimed at establishing a robust mechanism for peace and security in North-East Asia as soon as possible.
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is among the tasks before the international community in the key security area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Regrettably, serious obstacles to that track continue to pile up. The unilateral withdrawal by the United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, in violation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), and despite Iran’s full compliance with its obligations, came on top of the lack of progress in the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. We will do everything possible to preserve the deal approved by the Security Council.
We are seeing increasingly negative  trends  in  the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) whereby the West is attempting to transform the Technical Secretariat into an instrument for punishing undesirable Governments, which risks compromising the OPCW’s independent professional status, the universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the  exclusive  prerogatives of the Security Council. Those and other problems in the area of non-proliferation were discussed in detail in the Security Council on 26 September (see S/PV.8362), convened at a very timely moment by the United States presidency.
We firmly believe that any problems or concerns that arise in international relations should be addressed through a substantive dialogue. If there are any bones of contention, we should come together around the negotiating table, engage in talks, present facts, heed
 
the our partners’ counterarguments and seek a balance of interests.
In the past couple of years, the debate on abuses in cyberspace has become more intense. I would like to draw attention to the fact that it was Russia that initiated discussion of international information-security issues at the United Nations 20 years ago. Against the backdrop of recent developments, it is becoming ever more urgent that under the auspices of the United Nations we should develop global rules for the responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace, including the principles of the non-use of force, non-interference in internal affairs and respect for State sovereignty. We intend to introduce a draft resolution to that effect in the First Committee. We also believe that it is important to start work on a convention on cybercrime, and we envisage holding the relevant discussions in the Third Committee.
It is more essential than ever to seek mutually acceptable agreements and the mutual consideration of interests in the areas of global trade and economic relations, which today are being subjected to an unprecedented degree of politicization. The values of free trade are being held hostage to trade wars and other forms of unfair competition.
Russia has consistently  promoted  a  philosophy of shared economic development,  as  enshrined  in  the Greater Eurasian Partnership initiative launched by President Vladimir Putin, a large-scale project open to all Asian and European States regardless of their membership in other integration associations. If consistently implemented, it could help to develop a the space for extensive economic cooperation in Eurasia. In the long term, it could lay the foundations for a renewed continental security architecture fit for the realities of the twenty-first century.
Russia will continue to do its utmost to build a world based on law, truth and justice, and we are not alone in that aspiration. Together with us, our allies and partners in the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Community, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) group and an overwhelming majority of other countries are advocating for the democratization of all aspects of international affairs and in the interests of all States, without exception. The West should also heed that voice, which is becoming
more and more evident in the activities of the Group  of 20.
In today’s turbulent circumstances, the growing relevance of the United Nations — the only existing forum for overcoming differences and coordinating the activities of the international community — is an objective reality. Cooperation, with a view to arriving at broadly acceptable solutions, was a priority built into the foundations of the United Nations from the very start. Today we must not fail to live up to the high goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its dedication by the drafters to future generations.
We should recall the art of negotiation in order to be worthy of their legacy. Many of today’s problems can be solved only on a basis of equality and mutual respect. Dictates and coercion, hallmarks of the era of colonialism, should once and for all be filed away in the archives or, better yet, consigned to the dustbin of history.
Some great statesmen of the past have bequeathed to us many words of wisdom that have come to be aphorisms. Let me quote just one, from President Harry Truman: “The responsibility of the great States is to serve and not to dominate the world”.
I hope that a culture of mutually respectful dialogue will finally prevail. Russia will do everything it can to achieve that.
One year ago, I stood before the Assembly for the first time in this Hall (see A/72/ PV.3). I  addressed the  threats facing our world,  and  I presented a vision to achieve  a  brighter future for all of humankind. Today, I stand before the General Assembly to share the extraordinary progress that we have made. In less than two years, my Administration has accomplished more than almost any Administration in the history of our country.
America’s economy is booming like never before. Since my election, we have added $10 trillion in wealth. The stock market is  at  an all-time high in history, and jobless claims are at a 50-year low. African- American, Hispanic-American and Asian-American unemployment have all achieved their lowest levels ever recorded. We have added more than 4 million new jobs, including half a million manufacturing jobs. We passed the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. We started the construction of a major border wall and we have greatly strengthened border security. We have secured record funding for our military — $700 billion this year and $716 billion next year. Our military will soon be more powerful than it has ever been before.
In other words, the United States is a stronger, safer and richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago. We are standing up for America and for the American people. We are also standing up for the world. This is great news for our citizens and for peace-loving people everywhere. We believe that, when nations respect the rights of their neighbours and defend the interests of their people, they can better work together to secure the blessings of safety, prosperity and peace.
Each of us here today is the emissary of a distinct culture, a rich history and a  people  bound  together by ties of memory, tradition and the values that make our homelands like nowhere else on Earth. That  is why America will always choose independence and cooperation over global governance, control and domination. I honour the right of every nation in this Hall to pursue its own customs, beliefs and traditions. The United States will not tell nations how to live or work or worship. We only ask that you honour our sovereignty in return.
From Warsaw to Brussels and from Tokyo to Singapore, it has been my highest honour to represent the United States abroad. I have forged close relationships and friendships and strong partnerships
 
with the leaders of many nations in this Hall, and our approach has always yielded incredible change.
With support from many countries here today, we have engaged with North Korea to replace the spectre of conflict with a bold and new push for peace. In June, I travelled to Singapore to meet face to face with North Korea’s leader, Chairman Kim Jong Un. We had highly productive conversations and meetings. And we agreed that it was in both countries’ interests to pursue the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Since that meeting, we have already seen a number of encouraging measures that few could have imagined only a short time ago.
Missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction, nuclear testing has stopped and some military facilities are already being dismantled. Our hostages have been released and, as promised, the remains of our fallen heroes are being returned home to lay at rest in American soil. I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken, though much work remains to be done. The sanctions will stay in place until denuclearization occurs.
I also want to thank the many  Member  States who helped us reach this moment — which is in fact far greater than people might understand — for their critical support, which we will all need going forward. I would also like to extend special thanks to President Moon of South Korea, Prime Minister Abe of Japan and President Xi of China.
In the Middle East, our new approach is also yielding great strides and historic change. Following my trip to Saudi Arabia last year, the Gulf countries opened a new centre to target terrorist  financing. They are enforcing new sanctions, working with us to identify and track terrorist networks and taking more responsibility for fighting terrorism and extremism in their own region.
The United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have pledged billions of dollars to aid the people of Syria and Yemen. They are pursuing multiple avenues to end Yemen’s horrible, horrific civil war. Ultimately, it is up to the nations of the region to decide what kind of future they want for themselves and their children.
For that reason, the United States is working with the Gulf Cooperation Council, Jordan and Egypt to establish a regional strategic alliance so that MiddleEastern nations can advance prosperity, stability and security across their home region.
Thanks to the United States military and our partnership with many nations, I am pleased to report that the bloodthirsty killers known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have been driven out from the territory they once held in Iraq and Syria. We will continue to work with friends and allies to deny radical Islamic terrorists any funding, territory or support or any means of infiltrating our borders.
The ongoing tragedy in Syria is heartbreaking. Our shared goals must be the de-escalation of military conflict, along with a political solution that honours the will of the Syrian people. In this vein, we urge that the United Nations-led peace process be reinvigorated. Rest assured, the United States will respond if chemical weapons are deployed by the Al-Assad regime.
I commend the people of Jordan and other neighbouring countries for hosting refugees  from  this brutal civil war. As we see in Jordan, the most compassionate policy is to place refugees as close to their homes as possible to ease their eventual return as part of the rebuilding process. This approach also stretches finite resources to help far more people, increasing the impact of every dollar spent.
Every solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria must also include a strategy to address the brutal regime that has fuelled and financed it: the corrupt dictatorship in Iran. Iran’s leaders sow chaos, death and destruction. They do not  respect their neighbours or  borders or  the sovereign rights of nations. Instead, Iran’s leaders plunder the nation’s resources to enrich themselves and spread mayhem across the Middle East and far beyond. The Iranian people are rightly outraged that their leaders have embezzled billions of dollars from Iran’s treasury, seized valuable portions of the economy and looted the people’s religious endowments — all to line their own pockets and send their proxies to wage war. Not good.
Iran’s neighbours have paid a heavy toll for the regime’s agenda of aggression and expansion. That is why so many countries in the Middle East strongly supported my decision to withdraw the United States from the horrible 2015 Iran nuclear deal and reimpose nuclear sanctions. The Iran deal was a windfall for Iran’s leaders. In the years since the deal was reached, Iran’s military budget grew nearly 40 per cent. The dictatorship used the funds to build nuclear-capable
 
missiles, increase internal repression, finance terrorism and fund havoc and slaughter in Syria and Yemen.
The United States has launched a campaign of economic pressure to deny the regime the funds it needs to advance its bloody agenda. Last month, we began reimposing hard-hitting nuclear sanctions that had been lifted under the Iran deal. Additional sanctions will resume 5 November, and more will follow. And we are working with countries that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases substantially. We cannot allow the world’s leading sponsor of terrorism to possess the planet’s most dangerous weapons. We cannot allow a regime that chants “Death to America” and threatens Israel with annihilation to possess the means to deliver a nuclear warhead to any city on Earth. We just cannot do it. We ask all nations to isolate Iran’s regime as long as its aggression continues. And we ask all nations to support Iran’s people as they struggle to reclaim their religious and righteous destiny.
This year, we also took another significant step forward in the Middle East. In recognition of every sovereign State’s right to determine its own capital, I moved the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. The United States is committed to a future of peace and stability in the region, including peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. That aim is advanced, not harmed, by acknowledging the obvious facts. America’s policy of principled realism means we will not be held hostage to old dogmas, discredited ideologies and so- called experts who have been proven wrong over the years, time and time again. That is true not only in matters of peace, but in matters of prosperity.
We believe that trade must be fair and reciprocal. The United States will not be taken advantage of any longer. For decades, the United States opened its economy — the largest, by far, on Earth — with few conditions. We allowed foreign goods from all over the world to flow freely across our borders. Yet other countries did not grant us fair and reciprocal  access to  their markets  in return. Even worse, some countries abused their openness to dump their products, subsidize their goods, target our industries and manipulate their currencies to gain unfair advantage over our country. As a result, our trade deficit ballooned to nearly $800 billion a year. For that reason, we are systematically renegotiating broken and bad trade deals.
Last month, we announced a ground-breaking United States-Mexico trade agreement. And just yesterday, I
stood with President Moon to announce the successful completion of the brand new United States-Korea trade deal. And that is just the beginning. Many nations in this Hall will agree that the world trading system is in dire need of change. For example, countries were admitted to the World Trade Organization (WTO) that violate every single principle on which the organization is based. While the United States and many other nations play by the rules, those countries use Government-run industrial planning and State-owned enterprises to rig the system in their favour. They engage in relentless product dumping, forced technology transfer and the theft of intellectual property.
The United States lost more than 3 million manufacturing jobs, nearly a quarter of all steel jobs and 60,000 factories after China joined the  WTO. And we have racked up $13 trillion in trade deficits over the past two decades. But those days are over. We will no longer tolerate such abuse. We will not allow our workers to be victimized, our companies to be cheated and our wealth to be plundered and transferred. America will never apologize for protecting its citizens. The United States has just announced tariffs on another
$200 billion in Chinese-made goods — for a total, so far, of $250 billion. I have great respect and affection for my friend President Xi, but I have made it clear that our trade imbalance is just not acceptable. China’s market distortions and the way they deal cannot be tolerated. As my Administration has demonstrated, America will always act in our national interests.
I spoke before this body last year (see A/72/PV.3) and warned that the Human Rights Council had become a grave embarrassment to this institution, shielding egregious human rights abusers while bashing America and its many friends. Our Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, laid out a clear agenda for reform, but despite reported and repeated warnings,  no action at all was taken. The United States took the only responsible course. We withdrew from the Human Rights Council, and we will not return until real reform is enacted. For similar reasons, the United States will provide no support or recognition to the International Criminal Court (ICC). As far as America is concerned, the ICC has no jurisdiction, no legitimacy and no authority. The ICC claims near-universal jurisdiction over the citizens of every country, violating all principles of justice, fairness and due process. We will never surrender America’s sovereignty to an unelected, unaccountable global bureaucracy. America is governed
 
by Americans. We reject the ideology of globalism and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism. Around the world, responsible nations must defend against threats to sovereignty not just from global governance, but also from other new forms of coercion and domination.
In America, we believe strongly in energy security for ourselves and for our allies. We have become the largest energy producer anywhere on the face of the Earth. The United States stands ready to export our abundant, affordable supply of oil, clean coal and natural gas. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and OPEC nations, are, as usual, ripping off the rest of the world, and I do not like it. Nobody should like it. We defend many of those nations for nothing, and then they take advantage of us by giving us high oil prices. Not good. We want them to stop raising prices. We want them to start lowering prices. And they must contribute substantially to military protection from now on. We are not going to put up with such horrible prices much longer. Reliance on a single foreign supplier can leave a nation vulnerable to extortion and intimidation. That is why we congratulate European States, such as Poland, for leading the construction of a Baltic pipeline so that nations are not dependent on Russia to meet their energy needs. Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change its course.
Here, in the western hemisphere, we are committed to maintaining our independence from the encroachment of expansionist foreign powers. It has been the formal policy of our country since President Monroe to reject the interference of foreign nations in this hemisphere and in our own affairs.
The United States recently strengthened our laws to better screen foreign investments in our country for national security threats, and we welcome cooperation with countries in the region and around  the  world that wish to do the same. You need to do it for your own protection.
The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance of human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It is horrible thing that is going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It is very cruel. Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hard-working citizens and has produced a vicious
cycle of crime, violence and poverty. Only by upholding national borders and destroying criminal gangs  can we break that cycle and establish a  real foundation  for prosperity.
We recognize the right of every nation in this Hall to set its own immigration policy in accordance with its national interests, just as we  ask other countries   to respect our own right to  do  the  same —  which  we are doing. That is one reason the United States  will not participate in the new global compact for migration. Migration should not be governed by an international body that is unaccountable to our own citizens. Ultimately, the only long-term solution to the migration crisis is to help people build more hopeful futures in their home countries, to make their countries great again.
Currently, we are witnessing a human tragedy, to give an example, in Venezuela. More than 2 million people have fled the anguish inflicted by the socialist Maduro regime and its Cuban sponsors. Not long ago, Venezuela was one of the richest countries on Earth. Today socialism has bankrupted the oil-rich nation and driven its people into abject poverty. Almost everywhere socialism or communism has been tried, it has produced suffering, corruption and decay.
Socialism’s thirst for power leads to expansion, incursion and oppression. All nations of the world should resist socialism and the misery that it  brings  to everyone. In that spirit, we ask the nations that are gathered here to join us in calling for the restoration  of democracy in Venezuela. Today we are announcing additional sanctions against the repressive regime, targeting Maduro’s inner circle and close advisers.
We are grateful for all the work the United Nations does around the world to help people build better lives for  themselves and their families. The United States  is by far the world’s largest giver of foreign aid, but few give anything to us. That is why we are taking a hard look at United States foreign assistance. That will be headed up by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. We will examine what is working, what is not working  and whether the countries that receive our dollars and our protection also have our interests at heart. Moving forward, we are only going to give foreign aid to those that respect us and, frankly, are our friends. We expect other countries to pay their fair share of the cost of their defence.
 
The United States is committed to making the United Nations more effective and accountable. I have said many times that the United Nations has unlimited potential. As part of our reform effort, I have told our negotiators that the United States will not pay more than 25 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget. That will encourage other countries to step up, get involved and share the very large burden. We are working to shift more of  our funding from assessed  to voluntary contributions, so that we can target American resources to the programmes with the best record of success. Only when each of us does its part and contributes its share can we realize the highest aspirations of the United Nations.
We must pursue peace without fear, hope without despair and security without apology. Looking around this Hall, where so much history has transpired, we think of the many before us who have come here to address the challenges of their nations and times. Our thoughts turn to the same question that ran through all their speeches and resolutions, through every word and every hope. It is a question of what kind of world we will leave for our children and what kind of nations they will inherit. The dreams that fill this Hall today are as diverse as the people that have stood at this rostrum, and as varied as the countries represented here in this body. It really is something. It really is great history.
There  is  India,  a  free  society  with  more  than 1 billion people, successfully lifting countless millions out of poverty and into the middle class. There is Saudi Arabia, where King Salman and the Crown Prince are pursuing bold new reforms. There is Israel, proudly celebrating its seventieth anniversary as a thriving democracy in the holy land. In Poland, a great people are standing up for their independence, security and sovereignty. Many countries are pursuing their own unique visions, building their own hopeful futures and chasing their own wonderful dreams of destiny, legacy and a home. The whole world is richer and humanity is better because of this beautiful constellation of nations, each very special, each very unique and each shining brightly in its part of the world. In each one, we see the awesome promise of a people bound together by a shared past and working towards a common future.
As for Americans, we know what kind of future we want for ourselves. We know what kind of nation America must always be. In America we believe in the majesty of freedom and the dignity of the individual. We believe in self-government and the rule of law. And we prize
the culture that sustains our liberty — a culture built on strong families, deep faith and fierce independence. We celebrate our heroes, we treasure our traditions and, above all, we love our country.
Inside everyone in this great Hall today, and everyone listening around the globe, there is the heart of a patriot that feels the same powerful love for your nation and the same intense loyalty to your homeland. The passion that burns in the hearts of patriots and the souls of nations has inspired reform and revolution, sacrifice and selflessness, scientific breakthroughs and magnificent works of art. Our task is not to erase it, but to embrace it — to build with it, to draw on its ancient wisdom and to find within it the will to make our nations greater, our regions safer and the world better.
To unleash that incredible potential in our people, we must defend the foundations that make it all possible. Sovereign and independent nations are the only vehicles where freedom has ever survived, democracy has ever endured and peace has ever prospered. And so we must protect our sovereignty and our cherished independence above all. When we do, we will find new avenues for cooperation unfolding before us. We will find a new passion for peacemaking rising within us. We will find new purpose, new resolve and new spirit flourishing all around us and making this a more beautiful world in which to live.
Together let us choose a future of patriotism, prosperity and pride. Let us choose peace and freedom over domination and defeat. Let us  come here to this place to stand up for our people and their nations — forever strong, forever sovereign, forever just and forever thankful for the grace, goodness and glory of God. God bless you and God bless the nations of the world.
I have the honour to address the General Assembly for the first time as President of the Republic of South Africa.
It is nearly a quarter of a century since the founding father of our democracy, President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, stood at this rostrum to declare that
“The millions across our globe who stand expectant at the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them peace, to bring them
life, to bring them a life worth living.” (A/49/PV.14, p. 10)
As we mark the centenary of the birth of this great global leader, Nelson Mandela, we are bound to ask whether the United Nations has met the needs and expectations of the millions who stand at the gates of hope. We are bound to ask what contribution the United Nations has made to a more peaceful, more prosperous and more equal world. More important, we are called upon to ask — as we did yesterday during the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit (see A/73/PV.5), which was held here — what the United Nations and the assembled global leadership must do to secure lasting peace, reconciliation and stability across the globe.
Allow me to express the deep gratitude of the Government and the people of South Africa to the international community for convening the Peace Summit to honour the memory of Nelson Mandela and advance his legacy. We applaud the political declaration of the Summit (resolution 73/1), which recognizes the period from 2019 to 2028 as the Nelson Mandela Decade of Peace. It reflects a new and sincere commitment by the world’s leaders to comprehensively advance peace and security and resolve all conflicts and wars. To succeed in giving effect to that commitment, the United Nations must become what billions of people across the world want it to be, that is, a representative and truly democratic global parliament of the people of the world.
Throughout its seven decades, the United Nations has been a source of hope for the oppressed, exploited and poor around the world. During the dark days of colonialism and apartheid, we drew strength, inspiration and encouragement from the United Nations and its Charter in our quest for freedom and self-determination. With the support of the United Nations, 24 years ago, we as South Africans were able to  bring an  end  to the nightmare of apartheid. Nelson Mandela led us to freedom and gave us the great opportunity to transform our country. We have now embarked upon a journey of transformation and are making progress to deal with the ugly legacy of the past system of apartheid.
Madiba’s vision continues to guide us as we seek to improve the lives of our people in many respects, among others, by improving educational outcomes for our youth and transforming our economy, which was constituted to serve the interests of a few. We have started a comprehensive dialogue on the question of land reform in our country, which is guided by our
 
Constitution and the rule of law, as we seek ways to ensure that the land is shared among all who work it, as set out in our Freedom Charter. Even as our country is experiencing difficult economic challenges, we  have made progress. We are reforming our economy and creating an environment that is conducive to investment and have embarked upon an investment drive to attract $100 billion in the next five years. To the poor, vulnerable and marginalized, the United Nations today is a beacon of promise in a landscape of doubt. To billions across the world, the United Nations is the most powerful instrument we possess to achieve a more equal, humane and inclusive world.
There are men and women with dreams and aspirations that transcend the hardships of the present, who want to contribute to a new global civilization defined by care, justice and solidarity. They want an end to the greed, ignorance and conceit that is driving the destruction of our only home, the Earth. It is within our ability, as the leaders assembled here today, to forge a more representative, equal and fair United Nations that is empowered and equipped to lead the struggle to end poverty, unemployment and inequality in the world.
We are a youthful world: more than half the global population is under the age of 30. That is even more pronounced on our continent of Africa, where two thirds of our people were not yet born when Nelson Mandela was released from 27 years in prison. We are living in the age of youth. That places a responsibility on us as leaders not only to put the interests of young people at the centre of our efforts, but also to empower women and young people to be more prominent in directing the course of global affairs. It is young people who are fighting the wars that we started. It is women who are bearing the brunt and hardships of the wars that continue to destroy their lives and their families. As we speak, young lives are being lost and futures are being destroyed.
There is an urgency to the measures we must take to end conflict and war. Not only must we stop the death, destruction and human suffering that is visited daily on millions of people, but we  must act with purpose  to prevent the loss of another entire generation to its aftermath. We must accept our shared responsibility for, and our shared interests in, ending conflict and using the outcomes of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit to empower the United Nations to be a more effective instrument for mediation, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction.
Our resolve to end ongoing conflicts and our determination to root out terrorism must be matched by action and the appropriate deployment of resources. We must act with the same urgency to resolve some of the world’s most protracted and intractable disputes. The fact that the people of Palestine have endured occupation and suffering for nearly as long as the United Nations has existed makes their plight no less pressing and their suffering no more acceptable. We must likewise intensify our efforts to secure the right of the people of Western Sahara to self-determination and full national sovereignty.
One of the greatest challenges to the achievement of global prosperity and development is the continued exclusion of millions of women and young people from meaningful economic participation. It is therefore vital that we deploy all the means at our disposal to address youth unemployment and ensure universal access to educational opportunities appropriate to the changing world of work. We need a deliberate programme to ensure that the digital revolution, which carries such great potential for both disruption and empowerment, is effectively harnessed to promote social justice as well as human progress. The call to leave no one behind requires that we strengthen the institutions of global governance and make them more responsive to the needs of young people, particularly in the developing world.
Institutions such as the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization need to be reshaped and enhanced so that they may more effectively meet the challenges of the contemporary world and better serve the interests of the poor and marginalized around the globe. Reform of the United Nations, and of the Security Council in particular, must be a priority if we are to give full effect to the values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
We must resist any and all efforts to undermine the multilateral approach to international trade, which is essential to the promotion of stability and predictability in the global economy. The history of the global economy informs us that no country can prosper at the expense of all others and that no people can hope to live in comfort and security as long as millions of others languish in poverty.
It is therefore essential that we take collective responsibility for the development of all nations and for the improvement of the lives of all people. That
 
responsibility is manifest in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development, among other agreements. Together they represent our common commitment to tackle poverty, underdevelopment and environmental degradation. They represent our common commitment to tackle diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, diabetes and cancer. Our task as global leaders is to pursue the policies required to turn intent into implementation and mobilize the resources needed to turn implementation into impact.
We have made significant strides as Africans in addressing the challenges that have confronted our continent for many decades. We continue vigorously to implement our commitments set out in the African Union Agenda 2063, which is our collective plan as Africans to rid our continent of under-development,  poverty and conflict and to improve democratic governance, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. We have recently reached agreement on the establishment of an African Continental Free Trade Area, which will fundamentally transform African economies, giving rise to a new industrial age on the continent. We are working to silence the guns in Africa by 2020, to bring an end to conflicts that have cost the lives of millions of our people, displaced more and stunted economic growth and human development.
As the continent  with  the  youngest  population in the world, Africa has the potential to be the next great frontier for global growth and development. With effective investment in education, improved health care, good governance and greater economic integration, Africa has the potential to develop its productive capacity on a scale and at a rate that will lift tens of millions out of poverty. The youth of Africa are poised to transform their continent.
We the people of South Africa are committed to being part of that transformation. From the ashes of a system that was described by the General Assembly as a crime against humanity, we are building a new, democratic nation, united in its diversity. We are working to correct the injustices of our past and to build a society that is free, inclusive and sustainable. We are pursuing an economic path that draws on the resources and capabilities of all our people to eradicate poverty, unemployment and inequality. We are determined through our international relations to be a force for progress, good, peace and global equality, and
will continue to advance the interests of the African continent and the global South.
Allow me to conclude by once more drawing on the wisdom of Nelson Mandela, who said, “Sometimes it falls on a generation to be great.” This is not the generation that will stand expectant at the gates of hope; this is the generation that will change the world. It is the generation of young people who want to see change. This is their time and this is their age. Let their greatness blossom.
Every September, global attention is focused on the United Nations and on this stately Assembly Hall. People watch closely what is happening here, hoping that the United Nations will deliver peace, development, harmony  and prosperity to the world. People look to the United Nations to help them realize their dreams for a better life, to a United Nations that is committed to making itself relevant to all people, thereby making our world a better place for everyone to live in.
The contemporary international order, which began with the founding of the United Nations, is based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and is enhanced by the vision and practice of multilateralism. It has brought about general peace and rapid development over the past 70 years or more. A
 
people-centred philosophy has gained wide acceptance, and a broad consensus has formed on the need for interdependence and win-win cooperation.
Yet it is also true that the international  order today faces problems and needs steady reform and improvement. The world is changing. As we celebrate humankind’s proud achievements and progress, we must never lose sight of the challenges and difficulties we face in an ever-changing world. We must remain vigilant. What we see today is that international rules and multilateral mechanisms are under attack, and the international landscape is filled with uncertainties and destabilizing factors. Should we stay committed to multilateralism or let unilateralism have its way? Should we seek to uphold the architecture of the world order or allow it to be eroded and collapse? Those are critical questions bearing on the future of all countries and the destiny of humankind, questions that all countries must carefully reflect on and seek answers to.
China’s answer is clear cut.  All  along,  China  has upheld the international order and pursued multilateralism. Though once kept out of the United Nations for 22 years, China has never wavered in its commitment to multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China stayed true to  its  commitment  throughout  the negotiation process on its return to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and then its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) — negotiations that lasted 15 long years and were concluded at a certain price. China fulfilled its promise and integrated itself into the world economic system. After the international financial crisis broke out, China chose not to stand idly by; instead it worked together with other countries to get through those challenging times. For many years, China has contributed more than 30 per cent of global economic growth. It has played its part in helping with the global recovery. In the face of new developments and severe challenges, China will keep to its commitment and remain a champion of multilateralism.
Standing at this rostrum in 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping, in his statement reflecting the key understanding of humankind’s common interest and the future of  our planet, called for  the building  of a community with a shared future for humankind (seeA/70/PV.13). That initiative is in keeping with the trend of history, and it echoes the call of the times. It adds to our conviction and strength as we pursue our common endeavour to protect this global village. It
points us in the direction where we should work together to open up an even better future for humankind.
To uphold multilateralism in this new era, we believe that the following principles must be adhered to. First, we must pursue win-win cooperation. Our world is undergoing profound changes, never before seen in this century. Also never seen before are the problems and challenges we are facing. No country can meet them alone or stay immune to their impact. We must replace confrontation with cooperation and coercion with consultation. We must remain united as a big family. Instead of forming closed circles, we must promote common development through consultation instead of taking a “winner-takes-all” approach. That is a sure way to usher in a bright future.
Secondly, we must act in accordance with rules and order. State-to-State relations must be based on credibility, not the wilful revocation of commitments. International cooperation should be guided by rules, not impulse. Practising multilateralism is, first and foremost, about upholding the Charter of the United Nations, observing international law and basic norms governing international relations, and honouring international agreements reached through negotiations.
Thirdly, we must uphold the principles of fairness and justice. In international affairs, fairness and justice mean equality among all countries, big or small. They signify the responsibility  of  big  countries  to  help the small, and rich ones to assist the poor. Fairness  and justice also mean respect for other countries’ sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, as well as their choice of  development paths and right to a better life and increased development opportunities.
Fourthly, we must act to deliver real results. Multilateralism is not based on empty rhetoric. It must be pursued to solve problems. Efforts must be targeted, results-oriented and measured by visible progress. Whether a multilateral mechanism works depends on the will and engagement of countries. It is imperative that we work together to uphold the international system with the United Nations at its core, as well as the multilateral trading system centred on the World Trade Organization. Multilateralism requires a strong United Nations. China supports Secretary-General Guterres in advancing reform of the United Nations system in the three critical areas of peace and security, economic development and internal management. That reform should be led by Member States, and it should prioritize
 
the concerns of developing countries, make the United Nations more effective and enhance oversight and accountability. Stable and predictable funding is critical to the proper functioning of the United Nations. China will continue to fulfil its financial obligations and calls on other Member States to pay their membership contributions and peacekeeping assessments on time and in full.
The momentum of humankind’s drive forward towards development and progress is unstoppable. Peace, reconciliation and harmony represent the predominant trend, while war, conflict and terror are opposed by all. Equality, mutual trust and win-win cooperation are key words of our times, whereas power politics and the law of the jungle find no support. As a major responsible country, China is committed to the path of peaceful development, and it will work together with other countries and contribute its share to global peace and security.
Over the past year, the situation on the Korean peninsula has seen a major turnaround thanks to the efforts of all the parties concerned. China,  for  its part, has contributed to that progress. China supports the comprehensive improvement of relations between the north and the south of the peninsula, as well as efforts to facilitate dialogue between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United States. China encourages the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue moving towards denuclearization. We believe that it is also incumbent on the United States to respond in a timely and positive manner so  as to truly meet  the  Democratic  People’s  Republic of Korea halfway. China will continue to honour its international responsibilities and obligations and will strictly implement the Security Council resolutions related to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. China calls on the Security Council to take timely action in the light of developments and changes in the situation so as to create more favourable  conditions for a peaceful settlement of the issue on the peninsula through political and diplomatic means. To effectively settle the issue we need complete denuclearization and the establishment of a peace mechanism. Only when those components move in tandem can the issue be truly resolved and peace achieved.
Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, now is a crucial time for the continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA is a consensus-based multilateral agreement endorsed
by the Security Council. It serves the common interests of all the parties concerned and the international community at large. If it is not implemented, the international nuclear non-proliferation regime  will be undermined, the authority and role of the Security Council challenged, and peace and stability jeopardized both in that region and throughout the world,. That is  a scenario from which no one stands to gain. China urges the parties concerned to continue to observe and implement the JCPOA. On that basis, the possibility could be explored for a platform for dialogue that is inclusive and transparent so as to enable each party’s concerns to be adequately addressed through  talks and consultations.
The question of Palestine must not be marginalized. For more than seven decades, peace and justice have remained elusive in that part of the world. What the international community needs most is not a proposal or an initiative but resolve and action. In order to implement a two-State solution, a new round of peace-promoting efforts must be made with a view to exploring a new mediation mechanism. To that end, China will play its part, and Chinese humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people will continue.
The issue involving Myanmar’s Rakhine state cannot be resolved overnight, and steady progress must be made through a three-phase process involving a cessation of violence, the return of the displaced persons and economic development. Myanmar and Bangladesh are inseparable neighbours and could well be inseparable partners. Yesterday, at my meeting with colleagues from Myanmar and Bangladesh and in the presence of Secretary-General Guterres, an agreement was reached between Myanmar and Bangladesh on accelerating the return of the first wave of displaced persons. We believe that Myanmar and  Bangladesh are capable of resolving the issue properly through friendly negotiations.
China supports the leading role of the United Nations in coordinating responses to non-traditional security challenges. On the new frontiers of global governance, such as cyberspace and outer space, State sovereignty must be upheld, rules observed and responsibilities honoured. Terrorism, a threat to all societies, can never be justified. Security Council resolutions must be vigorously implemented to counter cyberterrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of radical narratives so as to eliminate the breeding grounds of terrorism.
 
Development is essential for our world today. We need to address both insufficient development and, more importantly, imbalance in development. There  is no one-size-fits-all model. Every country is entitled to explore a particular development path aimed at delivering happiness and security to its people and bringing about a future of confidence and hope for its children. Countries face various questions with regard to development. Such questions could be turned into drivers for reform, and solutions to problems could bring about development. Economic globalization should not be a process whereby some profit and others lose; even less should it result in widening the gap between North and South. It is important that we  adapt to the trend  of economic globalization and ensure that the process is open, inclusive, balanced and mutually beneficial so that it can deliver benefits to  all.  International trade is complementary and mutually beneficial in nature.  It should not be a zero-sum game in which one side gains at the expense of the others, and no one should be allowed to place their own interest above the interest of others. Protectionism will only be self-defeating, and unilateral moves will hurt everyone.
With regard to friction in trade, China stands for  a proper settlement of disagreements based on rules and consensus through dialogue and consultation on an equal footing. China will not be blackmailed or yield to pressure. We have not only taken steps to defend our own legitimate rights and interests but also to uphold the free trade system, international rules and the international order for the benefit of global recovery and the common interests of all countries.
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be at the top of the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. We need to incorporate its implementation into Member States’ development strategies and pursue innovation-driven, coordinated, green and open development that benefits all. We need to forge closer partnerships for development and pursue international development cooperation, with the United Nations at its centre and North-South cooperation as the main channel, supplemented by South-South cooperation. To meet the challenges of climate change, it is crucial to achieve sustainable development. China hopes to see the conclusion of the negotiations on the implementation guidelines of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, scheduled for the end of this year, with a view to boosting joint efforts for global ecological conservation.
In pursuing our common cause of humankind’s development and progress, China has worked in partnership with other countries of the international community. This year marks the fortieth anniversary of China’s reform and opening up. Over those 40 years, we have worked hard and forged ahead successfully along a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. That path has brought fundamental changes to China. In the past 40 years, more than 700 million individuals in the Chinese population have been lifted out of absolute poverty, which accounts for more than 70 per cent of the global totals for the same period. A basic medical insurance system has been set up to cover China’s 1.35 billion people, and a social pension network accessible to more than 900 million people has been fully implemented. China has built approximately 25,000 kilometres of high-speed railway. That accounts for two thirds of the global total and helps elevate global infrastructure construction.  According  to polls conducted by authoritative international polling agencies, China is at the top of global rankings in terms of public satisfaction with its development and public confidence in its future. The path  of  development that China is pursuing has provided the world with opportunities for shared development. Over the past 40 years, China’s foreign trade has averaged an annual growth rate of 14.5 per cent. That has sustained the impetus for global growth and provided the world with a huge Chinese market. We have every  confidence that we will maintain that momentum and continue to realize high-quality development. China will accelerate efforts to build an advanced economic system, which will create greater trade opportunities and an even better investment environment for other countries.
China will not reverse course or  shut  its  doors but will rather open its doors even wider to the world. China will not erect market barriers but will expand access to the Chinese market. Of all of the developing countries in the world, China has been the fastest in terms of opening up at a level unparalleled by others. When it comes to overall tariff reduction, China has accomplished more than it committed to when it joined the WTO. The breadth of China’s openness in services is close to the average level of  developed countries.  In November, China will host the first International Import Expo in Shanghai, which will be yet another major step in opening China’s market. Countries are welcome to participate actively in it.
 
The Belt and Road Initiative, proposed by President Xi Jinping, is a public good that China is providing for the world. It has grown into the largest platform for international cooperation. It aims to deliver benefits for all through consultations and cooperation. The Initiative is open, transparent and inclusive. It is  based on international rules and laws, and it aims to achieve green, environment-friendly and sustainable development. It is about pursuing common prosperity through greater complementarity among participating countries. By September, more than 130 countries and international organizations will have signed agreements on Belt and Road cooperation with China. Next year, China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, and we welcome all parties to attend that event.
China is the largest developing country in the world. Strengthening cooperation and solidarity with other developing countries has been and will continue to be a firm strategic priority in China’s diplomacy. That choice has been determined by what defines China as a country and by the system and values that China upholds. No matter how  much  China has increased  in strength, and regardless of how the international landscape might change, that strategic priority of China will not change.
The United Nations is the primary platform for advocating for and practising multilateralism. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will be remembered for its part in upholding multilateralism, world peace and development.  We  hope  that  all  of us in the international community will support the United Nations in its efforts to play a central role in international affairs, and we call on people of all countries to work together to build a community with a shared future for humankind.
A veteran of United Nations diplomacy recently told me that every session of the General Assembly has its own crisis to discuss, its own major topic. So what is the big issue in 2018? Syria? North Korea? The Middle East? Or the dramatic global refugee situation, from the Mediterranean to Venezuela?
If we take a step back, those disparate conflicts reveal a bigger picture and a distinct pattern. It becomes clear that we are  indeed  facing  a  crisis —  a  crisis of multilateralism. And that crisis makes conflicts around the world appear insoluble. When I say that they “appear” insoluble, that reflects the faith that we Germans have in multilateralism. Germany’s post-war success story is also multilateralism’s success story.
 
Europe, which was scarred by war and destruction, was able to integrate in freedom, security and prosperity thanks to our neighbours’ courage in seeking reconciliation. The United States also played  a crucial role in Europe’s reconstruction. The fact that Europe was then able to become the closest partner of the United Nations is a triumph of multilateralism. We believe in the United Nations because international cooperation changed our own fate for the better.
Europe has proved to the world that multilateralism and sovereignty are not mutually exclusive. On the contrary, in a world faced with immense global problems, we can safeguard sovereignty only by working together.
Three words, “we the  peoples”,  express  both our goal and how we will achieve it. That is why the founders of the United Nations chose those as the opening words of the Charter of the United Nations. They wanted to spell out that we need to work together to find solutions. They wanted to leave no doubt as to whom the United Nations and we as representatives of States serve — the people.
The Charter’s promises are addressed to the people, who are assured that their freedom and dignity will be defended at the United Nations in New York. But does a boy in Idlib, who lives in constant fear of the next air strike, feel that? How does a girl in Africa feel when her life expectancy at birth is 30 years lower than it would be if she were born in Germany? If we do not act on their behalf, “we the peoples” will be nothing more than hollow words for them. Kofi Annan once said, “We don’t need any more promises. We need to start keeping the promises we already made.” (SG/SM/9095)
When Germany  joins  the  Security  Council  as  a non-permanent member in a few weeks’ time, that will be what motivates us. I thank the members of the Assembly for the immense trust they have shown in us through their votes. That trust is an incentive for us to play our part in tackling the world’s crises, and to do so with courage and hope, but without overestimating ourselves. We want to work with all Member States as a reliable partner putting dialogue and cooperation at the heart of its action. In our view, “we the peoples” refers in particular to those who find it hard to be heard at the United Nations. That means we will always seek dialogue with civil society, in the Security Council and beyond.
Nevertheless, “we the peoples” also means that the Security Council itself must become more representative and inclusive. The world’s population has more than tripled since 1945, while the number of States Members of the United Nations has almost quadrupled. Yet the Security Council has hardly changed at all. That is why we should stop beating around the bush and finally start real negotiations on Security Council reform, as the vast majority of Member States have wanted for a long time.
The crisis of multilateralism is most painfully evident in Syria. The civil war has long since turned into a widespread regional conflict, with further potential for escalation in an already ravaged part of the world. That sort of war cannot be resolved by military means, because the players in the region are too deeply involved and the individual stakes are too high. However, with united diplomatic efforts, we have managed to prevent escalation in Idlib, which is a glimmer of hope. The agreement between Turkey and Russia must now be permanently implemented. But ultimately, and at long last, we need a political process.
To that end, talks must be held under the auspices of the United Nations. In resolution 2254 (2015), the Security Council itself showed the way. We must finally take the path to free and fair elections. At that point, we will also be willing to shoulder responsibility for reconstruction. However, there is one line that we will not cross: we will not become accomplices to a regime that has forfeited its political legitimacy. Instead, we are doing our utmost to alleviate people’s suffering.
It is shameful that financial support is running  out once again. As the second-largest humanitarian donor, Germany is willing to provide the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a further €116 million — that is, half of the amount currently needed — to help Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon. But others also need to step up. After all, the Charter talks about “we the peoples”.
Disruptive foreign-policy approaches have now also reached the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Many people are keen to make us believe that the notion of a negotiated two-State solution is obsolete. They want us to think that it is now merely a term used in diplomacy and can no longer be achieved. But whatever  way  they twist it, there will be lasting peace only if people can determine the course of their own lives, living in security and dignity on both sides of the 1967 lines.
 
For that very reason, it remains important to work for a negotiated two-State solution, 25 years after Oslo.
The conflict in Ukraine will also continue to compel our attention. Along with France, Russia and Ukraine, we are working hard to implement the Minsk agreements. The focus is on the measures agreed to a long time ago with a view to stabilizing the ceasefire. All efforts, including our discussions on a possible United Nations mission in eastern Ukraine, are aimed at achieving that end.
Let us not forget  that  acute  crisis  management is at best a step towards peace. Lasting peace can be achieved only if we put a stop to the arms race. That is not some sort of nostalgic rhetoric from the days of the Cold War, whose balance of terror seems utterly benign compared to the scenario of a multipolar arms race with far more unpredictable players.
In the case of North Korea, the Security Council’s united stance and sanctions helped to pave the way back to dialogue. That was important. However, North Korea must follow up its words with deeds, and that must lead to complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. Germany is prepared to contribute its know-how, including the expertise we gained during the difficult negotiations with Iran.
The nuclear agreement with Iran may not be perfect. But so far, it has prevented Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons and averted an escalation that was highly likely three years ago. That is not insignificant. We Europeans, together, therefore stand by the agreement. We are working on keeping economic exchange with Iran possible, and we call on Iran to continue to fully live up to its commitments. The fact that we stand by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action does not mean that we are turning a blind eye to Iran’s destructive role in the region or to its ballistic-missile programme. That said, if there were no agreement, that would not make the search for solutions in Yemen, Syria or elsewhere any easier. On the contrary, disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation must generally become more of a focus of the work of the United Nations once again. We share the view of Secretary-General Guterres on this matter.
Our shared rules must keep pace with technological developments. Otherwise, what currently sounds like science fiction may very soon become deadly reality, as exemplified by autonomous weapons systems, or killer robots that kill without any human control. I call
on Members to support, both here in New York and in Geneva, our initiative to ban fully autonomous weapons before it is too late.
It is not only  in that domain that prevention  is  the right answer. The United Nations of the twenty- first century must tackle the root causes of conflict, including climate change. Action based solely on nationalism, with each country seeking to put itself first, reaches its limits in that respect, not least because our climate knows no borders. The alarm bells have rarely sounded as loudly as they did in the summer of 2018 in almost all parts of the world.
Germany and the European Union stand by the Paris Agreement. Moreover, we want to ensure that the Security Council makes the devastating effects that climate change can have on the security and stability of entire countries and regions an even greater priority.
We also need a quantum leap when it comes to post-conflict peacebuilding. That is why Germany will contribute at least €25 million to the Peacebuilding Fund this year. Over the past three years, Germany has tripled its contributions to efforts aimed at promoting stabilization and preventing crises around the world. For example, in Iraq, where Islamic State terrorists have mostly been militarily defeated, instead of leaving the Iraqi authorities to fend for themselves, we are training security forces to support administrative structures and providing civil support for efforts to promote stabilization, reconciliation and inclusive reconstruction.
Only when military measures are embedded in a clear political strategy can peacekeepers truly bring peace. That is also the objective of the peacekeeping reform efforts of Secretary-General Guterres. It would be a mistake to limit our discussion to bartering over decimal points in scales for  assessed  contributions. Of course efficiency is important, including for us in Europe, who are the largest contributors of funding. However, discussing potential cost savings alone  does not do justice to the benefits that peacekeeping missions bring, for example, in countries such as Mali or Lebanon, which have held peaceful elections and enjoyed relative stability, thanks in part to the Blue Helmets and the political efforts of the United Nations.
We Germans will continue to contribute, not only militarily and financially but also, always, politically, through diplomatic efforts and by investing in stability and  reconstruction.  After all,  the  success  of  United
 
Nations missions hinges on the political backing of Member States. That is particularly true for Libya right now. To tackle the Herculean task of making progress on functioning State structures, the United Nations needs our political support.
Peace is more than guns falling silent. Only just societies, societies where men and women enjoy equal rights and where women participate in all societal decision-making, will remain peaceful in the long term. It is not only a matter of fairness and respect; it is simply a question of humanity and reason. Kofi Annan put it this way in his report entitled “In larger freedom: towards development, security and human rights for all”:
“we will not enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development, and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights” (A/59/2005, para. 17).
Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, that instrument’s proclamation of dignity and personal freedom remains merely a distant promise for many. In the Security Council, the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly, we will demand accountability when human rights are trampled on, be it through human trafficking in Africa or attacks on the Rohingya in Myanmar. Nowhere will impunity stand. Even in war, there are limits.
We must hold to account those who wilfully attack humanitarian aid workers, hospitals and schools. Anyone who violates the most basic rules of human civilization must be punished. That also applies to those who use chemical weapons in breach of a taboo that was respected for decades. That is why it is so important that the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has been mandated to seek and identify those responsible. The perpetrators must be fully aware that there can be no impunity for crimes against humanity — never, and not anywhere. In that regard, the International Criminal Court remains indispensable because it sends a clear message to the victims and the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that justice will prevail.
Earlier, I spoke about how we Germans in particular have faith when it comes to multilateralism. That faith is also based on the fact that the United Nations, time and again and despite all disagreements, delivers proof of what we can achieve by working together. I am thinking
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which remains our guiding set of principles for making this a better world for all people. I am also thinking about the successful conclusion of the negotiations on the global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration. The fact that more than 190 Member States — countries of origin, transit and destination — reached agreement on such complex and controversial issues is a victory for multilateralism. That success is an achievement of nations that are truly united.
The United Nations is built on our courage to reach compromises. The Organization grows with our desire to shape things. It thrives on our common pledge to act together first. Common ground is created when we put people at the heart of what we do. The desire for peace and security, and the dream of a prosperous and dignified life, are things that all people can relate to, whether they live in Baghdad, Berlin or Bamako. The United Nations belongs to the people. It is to them — the peoples of “We the peoples” — that we owe allegiance.
All of us here are heirs to the great hope to save future generations from the scourge of war, to build an international order based on law and respect for one’s word, and to lead humankind towards economic, social and moral progress in increasingly secure freedom. We have seen results. The enjoyment of human rights has spread, trade and prosperity have grown, and poverty has declined. That has been our achievement of the past several decades.
We must, however, look honestly at the moment in which we are living. We are experiencing today a deep crisis in the liberal Westphalian international order, which we have known. First, that is because, in part,  it has failed to regulate itself, and to date no solution commensurate with the task of meeting its economic, financial, environmental and climatic failures has been found. Secondly, it is because our collective capacity to
 
respond to crises too often continues to be hindered by divisions within the Security Council. Our Organization is too often reduced to deploring the violations of rights that it has pledged to guarantee. Seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly in Paris, a cultural, historical and religious relativism is now challenging the foundations of their universality.
Born of hope, the United Nations can become, like the League of Nations that  preceded  it,  the  symbol of powerlessness. We need not look far to see who is responsible for that crime. They are in this Assembly Hall. They are speaking today. We, the leaders, are responsible. On that basis, I see three main paths for us to follow.
The first path is to think that this is just a passing moment, a historical parenthesis before we return to life as normal. I do not believe that to be the case. I do not believe it because we are going through a crisis of effectiveness and principles in our contemporary world order, which will not be able to restore its previous landmarks and modes of functioning. This moment in time is not a parenthesis; it is a manifestation of our own failures of the past.
The second path would be that of the law of the strongest. Everyone is tempted to follow their own law. That path — the path of unilateralism — leads directly to isolation and conflict, to widespread clashes with everyone pitted against each other, to the detriment of all, even ultimately those who believe themselves to be the strongest. The responsibility for peace cannot be delegated; it cannot be refused; it cannot be pre-empted. It must be exercised collectively.
The law of the strongest does not protect any people from any threat, be it chemical or nuclear. What will truly resolve the situation in Iran and what has already begun to stabilize it? Was it the law of the strongest, the pressure of one individual? No. We know that Iran was on the path to military nuclear power, but what stopped it was the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in Vienna in 2015. Today, as I said a year ago (see A/72/PV.4), we must not exacerbate regional tensions, but rather put forth a broader agenda that addresses all the nuclear, ballistic and regional concerns caused by Iranian policies. We must do so through dialogue and multilateralism, without naivety or complacency, but also without posturing, which would be pointless.
 The problem of trade imbalances and their consequences for our societies will be solved by common rules adapted to today’s reality that make it possible to ensure fair competition on an equal footing, and under no circumstances will a bilateral approach to all our trade disputes or new protectionism do so.
What will resolve the crisis between Israel and Palestine is definitely not unilateral initiatives, or ignoring Palestinians’ legitimate right to  lasting peace, or underestimating Israelis’ legitimate right to their security. There is no credible alternative to two States living side by side in peace and security, with Jerusalem as their capital. Israel knows that France is unwavering in its friendship, and it is in the name of that friendship that I call for a quick end to the policy of faits accomplis that threaten the very possibility of reaching a peace agreement. Continuing along that path would be a mistake. On that issue, I am ready, and we must all stand ready, to move beyond dogmas and historical positions in order to take new initiatives, on the condition that it leads to positive changes on the ground. There too, the law of the strongest will only exacerbate frustration and violence. As the Assembly has seen, in the face of  contemporary imbalances, I  do not believe in the law of the strongest, even if it is masked in a form of legitimacy where it has actually lost all claims to legality.
I believe that there is a third possible path ahead of us, probably the most difficult and the most demanding, which requires us to forge a new model and to find a new global balance together. After the Second World War, a balance was built bloc by bloc over the course of decades. Then there was the emergence of a model based on hyperpower. For several years now, we have witnessed a new global instability characterized by the return of multiple centres of power.
The new balance that we must create must be based on new forms of regional and international cooperation and will, in my opinion, be structured around three principles. The first is respect for sovereignty, which is at the very heart of the Charter of the United Nations. The second is the strengthening of our regional cooperation. The third is the provision of more robust international guarantees or safeguards. It is through that method, and on the basis of those three principles, that we must manage contemporary crisis situations.
In Syria, we are pursuing the fight against Islamist terrorism. The military engagements of some countries
 
have allowed the regime to recover at the expense of crimes for which those responsible will one day have to account. The Syrian people have, tragically, paid the price, and there will be no winners in a Syria in ruins. What is needed now is to win peace under the auspices of the United Nations. We cannot decide for the Syrian people, but we must rather build the ways and means of the method that I have just defined and thereby build a solution supported not only by the Astana guarantors, but also by other States of the region and the international community through the Small Group on Syria, under the coordination of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in order to create the means both to resolve the humanitarian crisis and to build an inclusive, lasting political solution through constitutional reform and the holding of free elections. That is what it means to truly respect Syrian sovereignty. It is neither a substitute for the Syrian people in deciding who should be their leader nor an agreement to cover all crimes by accepting that this leader will remain until the end of time, considering that all principles and, ultimately, all law have been cast aside.
In Libya, too, it is that new method that should enable us to achieve a lasting solution. The current status quo allows militias and traffickers to gain ground, which destabilizes the entire region. We will not give the Libyans a way out of the crisis if we remain divided and if Libya becomes a stage, as it still is too often, for confrontations among  foreign  influences. In Paris, the Libyans recently pledged to hold early elections, which will make it possible to reunify State institutions. Those commitments must be fulfilled under the auspices of the United Nations and in close cooperation with the African Union. Yesterday, an important step was taken that I wish to  commend here. It is in the interests of Libyans, their neighbours, Europeans and the international community, who must be united around those objectives to move forward in that way.
We are all strong together in the face of terrorism when States are able to count on their own forces to ensure their security and when such security is based on regional and international solutions, in accordance with the principle I have justset out. That is the decision taken by the States of the Sahel, acting together in the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. That was also the essence of the process launched by the African Union to better assume its responsibilities by deploying
African peacekeeping operations. That is the essence of the initiatives undertaken in the Lake Chad region, together with Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon, with the support of the African Union. That is why we must support the African Union’s initiative and push for better coordination between the African Union and the United Nations. I hope that, by the end of the year, a resolution can be adopted to that effect.
We are strong in the face of terrorism when we take joint responsibility to fight all its forms of financing, and when, as we do in the Alliance for the Sahel, we act together for development, agriculture and education, and against the root causes of despair that have allowed terrorists to win hearts and minds. Some $7.5 billion has already been committed to 500 projects defined jointly with all the States concerned and the partners of the Alliance for the Sahel. We must consolidate those initial results.
As is evident from each of these crises, the answer has not been to leave States alone, to act for them or to proclaim from here the law or solution to be applied, but to know how to conscientiously articulate the principles of the sovereignty of peoples, regional cooperation and the real commitment of the international community. Those three principles form the basis for modern solutions. Only collective action can preserve the sovereignty and equality of the peoples that have given us a mandate. We also need collective action in the face of the demographic, climate and digital challenges before us, which none of us can face alone.
Confronted with the great challenges posed by migration, I do not believe in talk of unconditional openness, which only sparks concern and stokes intolerance. Nor do I believe in the misleading speeches of those who claim, for example, in Europe as elsewhere, that they will be safer behind the protection of a closed border. That is not true. The only effective way to manage the migratory flows affecting all our continents in an organized and controlled manner is to create the conditions for elective rather than forced international mobility, to work together — countries of origin, transit and destination — to address the  root  causes of migration, especially for its victims, to dismantle trafficking networks that are the worst scourge of this phenomenon, and to protect our borders in a respectful manner while ensuring compliance with international law and, in particular, the unconditional protection of those who are entitled to asylum. That is what we have decided to do together through the United Nations pact
 
that is to be adopted in Marrakech in December, which I support.
With regard to climate change, too, there are no free rides or easy solutions either. Even those who have challenged that reality suffer its consequences like everyone else. Extreme weather events are now a daily occurrence. And by weakening collective action, some only expose themselves further.
As for the great digital transformation, here too our duty is to stand together to build modern rules that will allow us to reconcile the development of artificial intelligence with our ethical rules in order to support the digital transformation of our societies.
I firmly believe in the sovereignty of peoples, which today is strong and demanded by all our peoples in the international arena. It also enjoys enhanced cooperation in many forms and a renewed legitimacy of international commitment. The great fight of our elders was achieving peace, and this remains one of our responsibilities. We will win that fight in the twenty- first century only by restoring a robust multilateralism that is truly capable not only of resolving conflicts pragmatically but, also and more broadly, of addressing their causes.
To tell the truth, I do not believe in one great globalized people. That is an illusion. It does not exist. But I do believe in universal values, and on that point we must not compromise. It is not the same thing. I believe in the non-negotiable defence of our values: human rights, the dignity of individuals and gender equality. I believe in our ability to strike a balance that respects peoples and cultures by refusing to negotiate those universal values. That is the reality, and I will in no way leave the principle of the sovereignty of peoples in the hands of nationalists or those who today, before the international community, advocate withdrawal and wish to exploit the sovereignty of peoples to challenge the universality and strength of our values, thanks to which we are all gathered here together in this Hall.
All of us here, even those who criticize it, have benefited from the structuring of the international order that has accompanied globalization. We have enjoyed a period of humanism and have all played a role in making it happen. Today, we must tackle the root causes of our imbalances. Together, we must face the weaknesses of our international order and, beyond the crises I have just mentioned, consider the deep inequalities that have taken root. In my view, that is the
heart of our problem today. What awakens nationalism? What gives rise to doubt in our Assembly? What gives rise crises everywhere? It is those deep inequalities that we have failed to address.
Ten years ago, when the international financial crisis hit, we took emergency action, but we did not solve the root cause. We did not curb the trend of hyperconcentration of wealth on our planet, and we did not truly provide a response to all those left behind by globalization. All those who were marginalized now hold a grudge because of the humiliations they suffered or have been plunged into despair, for which we are now collectively paying the price. We owe all those people a response.
We owe a response to the 265 million children who do not have access to school, more than half of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa, and to the young girls who have equal access to education in less than 40 per cent of countries.
We owe a response to the 700 million children who live in the regions most exposed to the consequences of climate change — the victims of floods, droughts, rising sea levels and the depletion of resources.
We owe a response to the 200 million women who do not have  access to contraception, to the more than 1 billion women who are not protected by law if they are victims of violence in their homes, and to all women whose global average pay is 23 per cent less than men and up to 40 per cent in rural areas.
We owe a response to the 783 million people living below the poverty line, to those suffering from hunger or chronic malnutrition and to those who do not have access to basic health care.
We owe a response to the aspirations of the most important generation of young people in history — our own young people — amounting to nearly 2 billion people who are now between the ages of 10 and 24, and 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries.
We owe a response to all those who look to us because their destiny depends on what we are or are not able to do here together in the Assembly.  And those who forget that we owe an answer to all those people are wrong because they are sowing the seeds for tomorrow’s crises and because they will leave their children and ours in a much worse situation than we are in today.
 
We have made great progress in reducing inequalities among our countries, and we  have created the framework for  that in the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development, but the fight is not behind us. It is far from over. Wealth per capita is 50 times higher in the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development than in low- income countries. Do we think that we can sustainably increase stability and balance in this state of affairs? No, we must take action. That is why, as I announced here last year (see A/72/PV.4), I have decided to increase France’s official development assistance by
€1 billion starting in 2019. Our humanitarian funding will increase by 40 per cent. But it is also why the fight against inequality will be the priority of the French presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7) summit in 2019. After Canada, whose leadership I applaud, France will assume the G-7’s next presidency. I would like to have a major reconsideration of its format in order to improve its association with various other Powers and devise new ways to coordinate.
I also wanted it to be at the United Nations that I made the first announcement that the inequality agenda will be at the centre of the next G-7, and also that I intend to report on the results of the Biarritz G-7 next September, because the time when a club of rich countries could define the balances of power in the  world  by  itself has long since passed and because it is impossible to separate the fate of each of its members from that of all the States members of the Assembly. We must tackle modern inequalities today because they are at the root of the evil that I denounced at the beginning of my statement. We must address inequalities of opportunity, which are a moral aberration and an unsustainable reality. We cannot accept a world in which people do not have the same opportunities because of the country where they were born, or cannot go to school in certain countries because they are women, or do not have access to basic services.
We kept the commitment made here last year with the President of Senegal. The Global Partnership for Education Financing Conference, held in February in Dakar, raised $2.5 billion to increase access to education around the world. That is a historic amount. France has increased its contribution tenfold. The mobilization of the G-7 already begun under the Canadian presidency should make it possible to go even  further. We  are at a key moment on  this issue that will decide whether or not we are capable of dealing with the challenge we
face. Between now and 2030 there will be 620 million more children needing schooling worldwide, including 444 million Africans. Are we going to provide for that? Are we going to give them all that they need for a solid foundation that will enable them to be agents for their own lives, to live as brothers in tomorrow’s world? If not, what kind of world are we creating? That is why I have committed France to this fight and why I insist so much on teacher training, vocational training and gender equality in education. That is why I urge everyone here to join in this great global surge for education. Education and health will not only be the pillars of our societies in the twenty-first century, they will be the fundamental building blocks of our economies.
We must also fight diligently against gender inequality. In France I have made this the signature issue of my five-year term, and I am launching an appeal here to make it a major global issue. Women and girls are the first of us to be affected by poverty, conflict and the consequences of global warming. They are the primary victims of gender-based and sexual violence, which too often hinders their freedom of movement and their ability to work and have control over their bodies. It is our responsibility in the twenty- first century to put an end to such violence, from street harassment to femicide. It is time for our world to stop victimizing women and finally make a place for them, one that they deserve, one where they can be leaders. We must ensure that they have access to education, health care, employment and economic and political decision-making everywhere, and we must fight all forms of violence against them. France therefore proposes to those Governments that want to move forward with us the creation of a coalition for enacting new legislation on equality between women and men. Fifty per cent of our development assistance will be devoted to projects aimed at reducing gender inequality.
We must also mobilize against health inequality at the international level. In Lyon in 2019 we will host the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Replenishment Conference. We will take up the initiative on the fight against counterfeit medicines and will intensify our response to major pandemics. I call on everyone here to mobilize.
Lastly, we must fight urgently, body and soul, against environmental inequality. It is unacceptable that 45 per cent of greenhouse-gas emissions are produced by 10 per cent of the planet’s richest inhabitants. As is the case with solar energy, we have an inefficient situation
 
when the countries with the greatest potential and needs have the least access to appropriate technologies. It is unsustainable that 100 million more people will be condemned to extreme poverty by 2030 if we fail  to meet our commitments to fighting global warming. Here too we must be united in combat. Some countries represented here are suffering more than others, and we owe them our solidarity. But we will all be held accountable for the disasters that are multiplying before our very eyes, before our peoples and our own children. The proclaimed breakdown of the Paris Climate Change Agreement has been thwarted because we have been able to remain united, despite the decision of the United States to withdraw from it. That strength must continue to support us and help us to ward off all the fatalistic predictions.
We are told that solutions exist but that the funding is lacking. So let us go find it, let us innovate. This is what we did last year in Paris, on 12 December, with many of those gathered here, at the One Planet Summit, with concrete commitments and first results. That is what we did at the beginning of the year in Delhi, with the International Solar Alliance. That is what we will do again tomorrow in New York, at the second One Planet Summit. We are told that it is already too late, that we cannot meet the goals. So let us speed up, let us together adopt the rules for implementing the Paris Agreement in December at the 24th session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Let us implement the protocol against hydrofluorocarbon gases, which could enable us to reduce the average global temperature by one degree by 2050. Let us set ourselves the goal of concluding an ambitious draft global environmental pact by 2020, and ensuring that the Beijing Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and the 2020 International Union for Conservation of Nature World Conservation Congress in France will be decisive steps.
Let us make a  clear commitment, and let  us all be equally clear, concrete and consistent. This is an emergency. So let us honour the commitments we  have made. Let us no longer sign trade agreements with Powers that do not respect the Paris Agreement. Let us ensure that our business commitments integrate our environmental and social constraints. Let us work harder to involve sovereign wealth funds and financiers in this low-carbon-policy strategy. France will continue to be a global leader in this fight alongside everyone who  wants to join. We  will work  in the G-7  to ensure
that the commitments made at the 2015 Climate Change Conference are increased, and if one of our members does not want to move forward, we will move forward anyway by seeking new coalitions and new formats, because the G-7’s mission is to remain a united group of countries committed to democracy. But today it must also contribute to the creation of new coalitions that will make it possible to improve and restructure the collective global system. So let us build new forms of cooperation to make progress and  take decisions  on those fundamental issues. Only together can we effectively fight the inequalities that have fractured all of our societies and that have fuelled mistrust and the temptation to withdraw — inequalities that we have allowed to grow and to which we have been collectively unable to respond effectively.
But none of us can effectively fight the inequalities I have decried if we act alone. If we do, there are essentially only two solutions. The first is to continually lower the bar and revert to the standards that we know, as we have been doing for decades. We have a trade war, so let us reduce workers’ rights, keep cutting taxes and fuel our inequalities that way in an effort to respond to our trade problems. What does that lead to? It reinforces the inequalities in our societies and the disruption that we are living through. The alternative is to say that it is the rules that are not working, so we should retreat inwards towards isolationism and protectionism. But the only thing that leads to is heightened tensions, which do nothing to address serious inequalities.
What I am proposing instead is that we put in place a collective mechanism to enable us to work together on what we are doing in each of our countries to reduce inequalities, to evaluate our actions but also to coordinate them better and to disseminate best practices. I therefore propose that international institutions — the United Nations, but the OECD as well, of course — support us in setting up such a mechanism, for which the G-7 must be the driving force.
To defeat inequality, we must change our methods. First, we should revise both our trade and social rules. Rather than pursuing protectionism, we should all work together to thoroughly review the World Trade Organization (WTO) rules. We must restore the WTO’s ability to resolve conflicts and establish rules for the unfair trade practices, non-compliance with intellectual property rights and forced technology transfers that make a level playing field impossible. Starting this year, the Group of Twenty summit in Argentina must provide
 
us with a credible road map for rebuilding the WTO. That is also what we will have to do on the social front next year, during the centenary of the International Labour Organization.
Secondly, we must also change the modalities of our action, bringing into the scope of our collective action the major  players who are not  in this Hall or  at the General Assembly, the big  non-State  actors who are helping to change the world but who do not participate enough in reducing the inequalities that these transformations bring, and by that I mean the major  digital players, both in terms of taxation and  of responsibility for combating the manipulation of information. We need to  operate  differently  from  our standard collective action where all our major challenges are concerned and include dialogue with these new private stakeholders and Internet giants.
Thirdly, we must enable Africa to take its rightful place so that it can play a central part in rebuilding the international system. It is not only on that continent that we will collectively win or lose our great battle against inequality — it is with that continent, because today it is in Africa that we find the most fervent defenders of multilateralism and regional integration. Our African partners have fully understood that we can only meet our common challenges together. And this new alliance with Africa will also be a focus of the French presidency of the G-7.
I  firmly  believe  that  despite  these  fractures and challenges in the modern  world  order,  we  can put together a new vocabulary for action while also addressing the root causes of inequality today. And it is the responsibility of France and all its European partners, of the European Union, to be in the vanguard in this fight, to build a new, modern humanism that refuses to yield to attempts to withdraw or to simple-mindedness and at the same time, as mediating Powers, to build these new rules for the international order.
At a  time when our collective system is cracking, I have to say that we have never needed it so much. That is why we will support the agencies working on projects for peace and humanity — UNESCO, the conscience of the United Nations; the Human Rights Council; the International Criminal Court; the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, to which we will increase our contribution — because, I want to remind the Assembly, we are simply talking  about enabling
hundreds of thousands of children to go to school, nothing less, nothing more.
We will defend expanding both member categories of the Security Council so that its composition reflects today’s balances of power and so that it is strengthened as a forum for consultation rather than obstruction. We will ensure that by the end of the year, two thirds of the members of the General Assembly can support limiting the right of veto in the case of mass atrocities. We will defend international humanitarian law by supporting staff who take extraordinary risks to help civilians on the ground by negotiating humanitarian access to all theatres, one by one.
On the seventieth anniversary of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we will remind the world that human rights are not a cultural thing. They are not simply values or revocable options, but a legal corpus enshrined in international treaties to which the members of the Assembly have freely consented. We will point out that their universality not only does not run counter to a people’s sovereignty, it is rather the only way to ensure the preservation and exercise of those rights.
France will be there to ensure that the world does not forget that clashing nationalisms only plunge us into the abyss, that when democracies lack the courage to defend their principles, they are weak, and that accumulated resentments, backed only by a fragile international system, can result in a global unleashing of violence twice in the space of one human life. I am speaking from our own experience. In a few weeks’ time, on 11 November, the Paris Peace Forum will present an opportunity for us to see a surge of thoughtfulness and courage as we attempt to rediscover what keeps us together here. For us, united by the tragedies of the twentieth century, it should be a time for renewal and to rediscover the oath we have taken to save future generations from the scourge of war. I want us and our counterparts to take on new responsibilities during the Forum in order to chart the way for concrete actions in the service of peace.
I know that many of us may be tired of multilateralism. In a world that is flooded with information and in which in a sense we are in a free-for-all, in which society is a reality show where it is fashionable and newsworthy to say the worst possible things, I know that denouncing the consequences of causes we have championed can be a successful political tactic and
 
that defending cooperation and multilateralism may no longer be fashionable. Then let us not be fashionable, because we have a duty to those who have made it possible for us to sit in this Hall. Because we must never forget that the genocides that are the reason we are here today were fuelled by the speeches that we are growing accustomed to, by the political spectacles that we applaud. Because we are now seeing international law and every kind of cooperation disintegrate, as if it was nothing, out of fear and complicity and because it looks good.
But I will not do that. I will not do it, because I come from a country that helped to create the declarations that have brought us here, because I come from a country that stands tall, and while it has made many mistakes and done many bad things, it has been able to maintain a kind of universalism at every point in its own history and in international history. This is today. This is now. So we must not get used to it. We must not accept all these kinds of unilateralism. Every day pages are being ripped in a betrayal of our history. And I am not going to get used to it.
This is what I have to say, very clearly. This nascent century is watching us, and our children are waiting. We must resolve our crises. We must work together to combat all our inequalities, but let us do so on a human level and in full accord with our principles, our histories and our universalism. In any case, that is my commitment to everyone here, and I am counting on us all.
On behalf of the United Kingdom, let me begin by paying tribute to an outstanding leader of the United Nations, who, sadly, passed away this summer. Kofi Annan was one of the great Secretaries-General, a tireless campaigner for peace and progress and a champion of human rights and human dignity, whose influence will continue to be felt around the world for years to come. Over the course of his lifetime he witnessed the extraordinary progress that we as a community of nations have made since the Organization was founded: progress in which we have more than halved the number of people living in extreme poverty in this century alone; progress in which the number of people killed in conflicts has fallen by three quarters in just over three decades; and progress in which millions of our citizens lead healthier and longer lives and where, thanks to advances in human knowledge, medicine, science and technology, we are presented with huge opportunities in the years ahead. Yet today many are concerned about whether or not that progress will continue and fearful about what the future holds.
For the end of the Cold War did not, as many once believed, lead to the inevitable supremacy of open economies and liberal democracies cooperating on the global stage for the common good. Today, instead, we face a loss of confidence in those very systems that have delivered so much. The belief in free markets has been challenged by the financial crisis of 2008, the concerns of those feeling left behind by globalization, the anxieties about the pace and scale of technological change and what that will mean for jobs and the unprecedented mass movements of people across borders, with all the pressures that can bring. And after the military interventionism at the beginning of the century, people question the rationale, and indeed legitimacy, of the use of force and involving ourselves in crises and conflicts that are not ours, while at the same time being repelled by the slaughter in Syria and our failure to end it.
Such doubts are entirely understandable; so too is the demand for leadership. Those of us who believe in inclusive societies and open economies have a duty to respond, learn the lessons of the past, meet people’s concerns with practical actions, not beguiling illusions, and renew our confidence in the ideas and values that have done so much to benefit so many for so long. For be in no doubt, if we lack the confidence to step up, others will.
In the last century, whether in the rise of fascism or the spread of communism, we have seen those on the extreme right and extreme left exploit people’s fears, stoke intolerance and racism, close down economies and societies and destroy the peace of nations. And today, once more, we see worrying trends in the rise of such movements in Europe and beyond. We have seen what happens when countries slide into authoritarianism, slowly crushing the basic freedoms and rights of their citizens. We have seen what happens when corrupt oligarchies rob their nations of the wealth, resources and human capital that are so vital to unlocking a brighter future for their citizens.
We have seen what happens when the natural patriotism that is a cornerstone of a healthy society is warped into aggressive nationalism, exploiting fear and
 
uncertainty to promote identity politics at home and belligerent confrontation abroad, while breaking rules and undermining institutions. We see what happens when States like Russia flagrantly breach international norms — from the seizing of sovereign territory to the reckless use of chemical weapons on the streets of Britain by agents of the Russian GRU. We have to show there is a better way to meet the concerns of our people. That way lies in global cooperation between strong and accountable States based on open economies and inclusive societies. It is a way that ensures that strong nation States provide the bonds that bring citizens together and that power remains accountable to those it is there to serve; that celebrates free markets and has the confidence to reform them when they need to work better; and that demonstrates that delivering for one’s citizens at home does not have to be at the expense of global cooperation and the values, rules and ideals that underpin that.
Indeed, cooperation and competition are not mutually exclusive. Only global cooperation based on a set of agreed rules can ensure competition is fair and does not succumb to protectionism, with its certain path to lost jobs and international confrontation. It is only global cooperation that can harness legitimate self- interest towards common goals, producing agreements on global challenges, such as climate change and proliferation, and increasing inclusive economic growth. We see that cooperation here today at the United Nations, as we also saw it at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting earlier this year. And here today, as Chair-in-Office of the Commonwealth, I deliver a clear statement on behalf of the Heads of Government of its 53 equal and independent member States. We reaffirm our shared commitment to working together within a rules-based international system to address shared global challenges and foster a fairer, more secure, more sustainable and more prosperous future. That commitment takes account of the special requirements of the least developed countries and of small and otherwise vulnerable economies and benefits all our citizens and the wider world.
But it is not enough for us merely to make the case for cooperation. We need action, at home and in the community of nations, to show how our ideas and values can deliver practical benefits for all our people in all parts of the world. We must recognize the legitimacy of people’s concerns and act to build a global economy that works for everyone. We must invest in the patient
work of building open societies in which everyone has a stake in the future. And we must act to uphold the international rules-based system and stand up for our values by protecting those who may suffer when it is violated. Let me take each in turn.
First, we must respond to those who feel that the global economy is not working for them; the pace of globalization that has left too many people behind; the fear that our children and grandchildren may lack the education and skills to secure the jobs of tomorrow; and the risk that technological change could become   a source of inequality and division rather than the greatest opportunity in history. In the United Kingdom we are driving investment in industries of the  future to create new jobs, from low-carbon technologies to artificial intelligence. We are investing in education and skills so that workers are ready to make the most of the opportunities that lie ahead. And we are making sure people play by the rules so that business and innovation is celebrated for creating jobs, not demonized because of grievances over tax not paid or rights not respected.
While we strive to make our own economies work for all our people, we should do the same at a global level. In an increasingly global economy, it is not enough to ensure people play by the rules at home. We need global cooperation to set and enforce fair rules on trade, tax and the sharing of data. And those rules need to keep pace with the changing nature of trade and technology. We need to give the World Trade Organization a broad, ambitious and urgent mandate to reform. It must address the areas where it is not functioning effectively, deal with issues that are not currently covered and maintain trust in a system that is critical to preventing a return to the failed protectionism of the past.
Fair and respected rules are essential for business to flourish and drive growth. But recent history shows that that cannot be sustained without deeper partnerships among Governments, business, international financial institutions and civil society to ensure that growth delivers for everyone. That is why I recently visited Africa, along with British businesses, to promote trade and investment and encourage a new partnership based on shared prosperity and shared security. It is why at this General Assembly session I co-hosted an event with Prime Minister Trudeau, President Kagame and President Akufo-Addo, calling for more support for investment and job creation for young people on the continent. It is why the United Kingdom will maintain its commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross
 
national income on official development assistance and put our development budget at the heart of our international agenda. We will do more to create jobs, improve skills and increase investment in emerging economies — in both our interests and theirs, for the best way of resisting protectionism is to ensure that this century is defined by open markets that really deliver for all our people.
Secondly, we must build countries, not only economies, that work for everyone: inclusive societies where every citizen has a stake in the future. Those are the firm foundations on which strong and accountable nations are built. History has consistently taught us that giving people a stake in society is the best way to ensure stability, security and economic growth. There is no one right way to do this. Every country must choose its own path, but the basic tenets are common across the world. They include a Government that is transparent and accountable, an independent judiciary to enforce the rule of law, free and fair elections and a free and open media. They also include freedom of expression, a right to redress, property rights that are reliably enforced, equality, freedom of thought, opinion, religion and conscience — all found in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed 70 years ago.
Those of us who believe in those tenets must set  an example in defending and strengthening them at home and abroad. That is why we must call out hate speech, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia  and  all  forms of prejudice and discrimination against minorities wherever we find  it.  Like  many  leaders,  I  suspect, I do not always enjoy reading what the media in my country writes about me. But I will defend their right to say it, for the independence of our media is one of my country’s greatest achievements and it is the bedrock of our democracy.
So, too, will I defend objectivity and impartiality in the face of those who treat truth as just another opinion to be manipulated. This challenge has only become more complex with the rise in social media and online information. That is why we agreed at the Group of Seven (G-7) Summit in June to step up  our efforts to respond to disinformation and why, together with our partners and with technology companies, we are leading efforts to reclaim the Internet from terrorists and others who would do us harm.
Just as we must stand up for the values that we adhere to, so we must support countries and leaders who
choose to take the often difficult steps towards a more inclusive society. The United Kingdom will use all the levers at its disposal to do so. Through our aid budget and commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals, we will not only protect the most vulnerable, but also bolster States under threat and help others sustain their progress. Through global campaigns, we will help countries to end scourges such as modern slavery and sexual violence in conflict, and we will mobilize wider support through our alliances and membership of multilateral organizations — not only the United Nations, but also international financial institutions, the G-7, the Group of 20 and NATO.
Just as there is no single recipe for an inclusive society, so there is no single model for balancing the democratic demands of our public with the imperative to cooperate internationally. The vote by the British people to leave the European Union (EU) was not a rejection of multilateralism or international cooperation; it was a clear demand for decisions and accountability to lie closer to home. I believe the role of leadership   in these circumstances is clear: it is delivering on the democratic wishes of our people and international cooperation, working with allies and partners in pursuit of our shared values.
Thirdly, we must have the will and confidence to act when the fundamental rules that we live by are broken. This is not about repeating the mistakes of the past by trying to impose democracy on other countries through regime change, but we should not allow those mistakes to prevent us from protecting people in the face of the worst violations of human rights and human dignity. We should not allow those mistakes to paralyse the international community when its long-established norms are violated. We should not let our inability to prevent some of the worst conflicts today stop us from making every effort to ensure they do not happen again in future. If we stand back, we allow the world to become divided into spheres of influence in which the powerful dominate the weak and in which legitimate grievances go unaddressed. This is not just a moral imperative — it is also a matter of self-interest, for when barbarous acts and aggression go unchecked, dictators and terrorists are emboldened.
We must therefore have the confidence to act. When the Syrian regime used chemical weapons on its people again in April, it was Britain — together with France and America — that took military action to degrade the Syrian regime’s chemical-weapons capability and
 
deter their use. Earlier this year, when Russia used a toxic nerve agent in a sickening attack on the streets  of Salisbury, the United Kingdom, with our NATO, EU and other allies, took action, expelling over 150 Russian intelligence officers in the largest collective expulsion ever.
In Burma, following the damning report of the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, we should sow the same  confidence  to hold accountable those responsible for the appalling atrocities repeatedly inflicted by the Burmese military on the Rohingya, Shan and Kachin peoples since 2011. Similarly, we should gather evidence of Da’esh’s crimes worldwide, show ensuring justice for their victims and deterring those who might conduct such crimes in the future. But accountability alone is not enough. We must do more collectively to prevent such atrocities in the first place and address the causes of instability that can give rise to them.
The United Nations has a critical  role  to  play, and it has a wide range of levers to do so, from sanctions — which show the leaders of Iran and North Korea that they cannot act without consequence — to peacekeeping missions, such as that in South Sudan, which is helping to prevent suffering and the collapse of law and order. To be able to effectively use those levers, the Security Council must find the political  will  to act in our collective interest. United Nations agencies must deliver the reforms that the Secretary-General has started to become more agile, more transparent and better coordinated on the ground. To support those reforms, we must also ensure proper funding is targeted specifically at those parts of the United Nations that deliver results.
Seventy years ago, the General Assembly agreed the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights.  Today we must renew the ideals and values on which that Declaration was founded. In doing so, we must learn the lessons of the past and show through our actions how cooperation between strong and accountable States with open economies and inclusive societies can best deliver security and prosperity for all our people. As Kofi Annan said at the start of his second term as Secretary-General,
“I have sought to turn an unflinching eye to the failures of our recent past, in order to assess more clearly what it will take for us to succeed in the future.” (A/55/PV.105, p.3)
In that spirit, let us show unflinching resolve to renew the promise of freedom, opportunity and fairness, a promise that has delivered for more people, in more places, than at any other period in our history. Let us ensure that promise can be fulfilled for our children and grandchildren and for every generation to come.On my own behalf and on behalf of my country, India, I should like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy- third session. As a woman, I feel doubly proud that this honour has been bestowed on you. I also recall, with equal pride, that the first woman to occupy this eminent position was an Indian — Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit — in 1953, at the General Assembly at its eight session. I also thank former President Miroslav Lajčák for successfully presiding over the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
 
We  received the   tragic   news   this   morning  of a tsunami and an earthquake, which occurred simultaneously. From this rostrum, on behalf of India, I wish to convey our deep condolences to the Government and the people of Indonesia. I would also like to assure them that India will cooperate in helping them during this trying time.
The United Nations is the world’s principal multilateral organization, where nations  seek  balm for the wounds of history and a platform for solutions and where less developed nations sit with their more fortunate brethren to formulate plans that can correct skewed economic imbalances. In 2015, we established 2030 as a critically important horizon for 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A common refrain since 2015 has been that we will reach that horizon only if India finds its way to that destination; otherwise, we will fail.
I assure the General Assembly through you, Madam President, that India will not let us fail. We are totally committed to achieving those objectives for our own people. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, India has initiated an unprecedented economic and social transformation that will help our country achieve its SDG benchmarks well before the deadline. I will provide an overview to illustrate the world’s largest-scale exercise in poverty elimination and social transformation.
Through the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana, the world’s largest financial inclusion scheme, more than 320 million Indians who had previously never seen the inside of a bank now have bank accounts.  The programme has enabled the poor to receive direct benefit transfers from the Government’s welfare programmes into their personal accounts, thereby stopping waste and corruption within the system. Similarly, Ayushman Bharat Yojana, the world’s largest health insurance programme, was launched by Prime Minister Modi a few days ago, on 23 September. That revolutionary scheme will benefit 500 million Indians, who will receive insurance coverage of 500,000 rupees per family annually. We have a prayer in India — Sarve Santu Niramaya — which means “May all be free from illness”. The Ayushman Bharat Yojana, or National Health Protection Scheme, is the answer to that prayer.
Similarly, we have launched the largest-scale housing programme in the world aimed at ensuring that everyone  has a  roof  over  their head.  Under  the
programme, we have set for ourselves a target of  nearly 21  million homes by  2022. So  far, more than  5 million homes for the poor have already been built. Two extremely effective programmes have also been initiated to increase the skill levels of those waiting to be employed through the National Skill Development Corporation and the Micro Units Development and Refinance Agency (MUDRA) programme, which seeks to turn the poor into entrepreneurs. I stress that more than 140 million Indians have taken out MUDRA loans. The most significant aspect of the MUDRA scheme is the fact that 76 per cent of its beneficiaries are women. At the heart of Prime Minister Modi’s transformative vision is a radical idea, which is that uplifting any nation is best achieved through the comprehensive empowerment of women. All the programmes that I have just mentioned have the welfare of women at their core. Last year, I spoke about the Ujjwala programme (see A/72/PV.19), through which, I am happy to report,
50 million free liquid-gas connections have been provided so far.
Another such initiative is the maternity benefit programme, in which women in India are provided with 26 weeks of paid leave to care for their newborns. As a woman, Madam President, you will understand better than most how vitally important that programme is for every mother. Some developed nations with huge economies do not provide more than six weeks’ paid leave, thereby leading to a continuing struggle for more time off. In India, we have implemented what women across the world need, namely, 26 weeks of paid maternity leave.
In 2022, free India will be 75 years old. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to build a New India by then. What kind of India will that be? That India will be a clean, healthy, prosperous, secure, educated, developed, energized and strong India. That is our horizon for India in 2022, and we will reach it, as we are sparing no effort to meet that goal.
The greatest challenges of our era are the existential threats of climate change and terrorism. Underdeveloped and developing nations are the most affected victims of climate change. They have neither the capacity nor the resources to meet that crisis. The countries that have exploited nature for their short-term needs cannot abdicate their responsibilities in that matter. If we wish to save the world from the adverse effects of climate change, the developed nations must lift up the deprived with financial and technical resources. The principle
 
of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities was reiterated in the 2015 Paris Agreement. Prime Minister Modi, together with the Prime Minister of France, launched the International Solar Alliance. Sixty-eight nations have become members of the Alliance so far. In March, India and France chaired the founding conference of the Alliance, in which 120 countries participated. I am pleased to inform the Assembly that Prime Minister Modi has been acknowledged as a champion in that area. He is also working towards realizing the principle of one sun, one grid, since he believes that, as there is only one sun, there should also be a single universal grid.  If that goal is achieved, we will be witness to a major revolution in the energy sector, which will represent a major milestone in combating all phenomena related to climate change.
I mentioned terrorism as the second existential threat to humankind. We imagined that the advent of the twenty-first century would see an age of common good characterized by cooperation but, here in New York, the horrific tragedy of 11 September and, in Mumbai, the catastrophe of 26 November became nightmares that shattered our dreams. The demon of terrorism now stalks the world at a faster pace in some places, and at a slower one in others, but it is life-threatening everywhere. In our case, terrorism is bred not in some faraway land but across our border to the west. Our neighbour’s expertise is not restricted to serving as a spawning ground for terrorism; our neighbour is also an expert in trying to mask malevolence with verbal duplicity. The most startling evidence of that duplicity was the fact that Osama Bin Laden, the architect and ideologue  of  11  September,  was  given  safe  haven in Pakistan.
America  had  declared  Osama  Bin   Laden   to be its most dangerous enemy and had launched an exhaustive, worldwide search to bring him to justice. What America could perhaps not comprehend was that Osama would find sanctuary in a country that claimed to be America’s friend and ally, namely, Pakistan. Eventually, America’s intelligence services discovered the truth of that hypocrisy, and its special forces delivered justice. But Pakistan continued to behave as if nothing had happened. Pakistan’s commitment to terrorism as an instrument of official policy has not abated one bit, nor has its practice of hypocrisy. The killers of 11 September met their fate but the mastermind of 26 November, Hafiz Saeed, continues to roam the
streets of Pakistan with impunity. What is heartening is that the world is no longer ready to believe Islamabad. The Financial Action Task Force, for instance, has put Pakistan on notice with regard to the funding of terror.
We have been accused of sabotaging the process for talks with Pakistan. That is a complete lie. We believe that talks are the only rational means by which to settle even the most complex disputes. Accordingly, talks with Pakistan have been initiated many times. When they failed, it was only because of Pakistan’s behaviour. There have been many Governments of numerous parties in India. Every Government has tried the peace option. By inviting the Heads of State of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation to his swearing-in ceremony, Prime Minister Modi began his attempt for dialogue on his very first day in office. On 9 December 2016, I personally went to Islamabad and proposed a comprehensive bilateral dialogue. But soon afterwards, on 2 January, Pakistan-sponsored terrorists attacked our air force base in Pathankot. It is clear that we could not pursue talks in the middle of terrorist bloodshed. Even now, after the new Government in Pakistan came to power, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, wrote to Prime Minister Modi suggesting a meeting between our Foreign Ministers in New York. We even accepted the proposal but, within hours of our acceptance, news came that terrorists had killed three of our security personnel. Does that indicate a desire for dialogue? Could such a dialogue ever take place?
Time and again, Pakistan has accused India of human rights violations. Who is a greater transgressor of human rights than a terrorist? Those who take innocent lives in pursuit of war by other means are defenders of inhuman behaviour, not of human rights. Pakistan glorifies killers. It refuses to see the blood of innocent victims. It has become something of a habit for Pakistan to throw the dust of deceit and deception up against India in order to provide some thin cover for its own guilt.
The United Nations has seen that before. Last year, using her right of reply, the representative of Pakistan displayed some photographs as proof of alleged human rights violations by India (see A/72/PV.22). The photographs turned out to be from another country. Similar false accusations have become part of its standard rhetoric.
Each year, for the past five years, India has been arguing from this rostrum that lists are not enough if we
 
want to check terrorists and their protectors. We need to bring them to accountability through international law. In 1996, India submitted a document with a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism at the United Nations. That draft remains a draft today only because we cannot agree on a common language. On the one hand, we want to fight terrorism; on the other, we cannot define it.
That has allowed terrorists with a price on their head to be celebrated in Pakistan as “freedom fighters”. Their cruelty and barbarism are being advertised as heroism. The country of Pakistan prints postage stamps glorifying such terrorists. How long can we sit quietly and listen to such claims? If we do not act now, we will have to deal with that demon later on, when it sets fire to the entire world. Once again, I appeal to this body to come to an agreement on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and to adopt it as one of the necessary measures in a long-running war.
I would now like to make some remarks regarding the United Nations. I began by highlighting its unique and positive role, but I must add that, step by slow  step, the importance, influence, respect for and value of this institution are beginning to ebb. It is time to wonder whether we are wandering towards the fate of the League of Nations, which came to an end because it did not adopt the changes that were needed. It was unwilling to accept the need for reforms; we must not make that mistake. The United Nations must accept that it needs fundamental reform. Those reforms cannot be simply cosmetic; we need to change the institution’s head and heart in order to make both compatible with the contemporary reality.
Reform must begin today; tomorrow could be too late. Are all of the challenges that confronted the United Nations at its founding still relevant today? I feel that, in the Security Council, now is the time to start making much-needed changes.
A subject that is often debated is multilateralism. The challenges we face are causing tensions in many countries. I should like to state that India believes that the world is one global family. The United Nations should therefore work as a family. How does a family work? It is shaped by love, not trade; it is nurtured by compassion, not jealousy; it functions by compromising, not by fighting. That is why the United Nations must be based on the principles of the family. It cannot be
run using “I”, “me” and “mine”; this forum needs “we”, “us” and “ours”. Only then will it be sustainable.
India does not believe that only certain countries should be allowed to fulfil their goal or that we should take decisions on behalf of other countries that are not beneficial to them. We should take every country’s goals into account.
This year, India will celebrate the 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth. Mahatma’s favourite devotional hymn was “Vaishnav Jan To Tene Kahiye” or “Call those people Vaishnavas who feel the pain of others”. Its essence is that he who understands the pain of another and absorbs it as his own is a good human being. He who sees that pain and helps without becoming arrogant is a good human being.
We have to make the Assembly a platform for understanding, assistance and true justice.  We  have to understand the pain of other nations and work with developed nations to ease and eliminate their pain. Arrogance has no place in our scheme of things; arrogance is counter-productive and self-defeating.  Let us work for the benefit of the less fortunate and towards a world that is free from terrorism, tension and violence. That is the universe we envisage.
It is with that wish in mind that I end with a Sanskrit shloka or song: May all experience well-being; may all experience peace; may all move towards perfection; may all enjoy prosperity; may all achieve serenity.
When I spoke here three years ago (see A/70/PV.22), Israel stood alone among the nations. Of the nearly 200 countries that sit in this Hall, only Israel openly opposed the nuclear deal with Iran. We opposed it because it threatens our future, even our very survival. We opposed it because the deal paved Iran’s path to a nuclear arsenal. By lifting the sanctions, it has fuelled Iran’s campaign of carnage and conquest throughout the Middle East. We opposed it because the deal was based on a fundamental lie, that Iran is not seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
Israel exposed that lie earlier this year. In February 2018, Israel conducted a daring raid on Iran’s secret atomic archive. We obtained more than 100,000 documents and videos that had been stashed in vaults in an innocent-looking building in the heart of Tehran. In May, I presented a short summary of what we obtained to the international media. I provided hard evidence of Iran’s plans to build nuclear weapons and its plans to deceive the international community. Israel shared that information and even more damning evidence that we found with members of the five plus one group and with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Months have passed, and the IAEA has still not taken any action. It has not posed a single question to Iran. It has not demanded to inspect a single new site discovered in that secret archive. Given that inaction,  I have decided, therefore, to reveal today something else that we have shared with the IAEA and with a few intelligence agencies. What I am about to say has not been shared publicly before. Today I am disclosing for the first time that Iran has another secret facility in Tehran, a secret atomic warehouse for storing massive amounts of equipment and materiel from Iran’s secret nuclear-weapon programme.
In May, we exposed the site of Iran’s secret atomic archive. It is in the Shorabad district of Tehran. Today I am revealing the site of a second facility, Iran’s secret atomic warehouse, which is located in the Torquzabad district of Tehran, just three miles away from the archive. Let me show exactly what the secret atomic warehouse looks like. From this image, it looks just like the atomic archive, another innocent-looking compound. For listeners at home using Google Earth, this no-longer-secret atomic warehouse is on Mehr Alley. The coordinates are on the image. Anyone can try to get there. And for those who try to get there, it  is a hundred meters from the Kalishoi, a rug-cleaning operation. By the way, I hear they do a fantastic job of cleaning rugs there. But by now they may be radioactive rags. That is the second secret site.
Now countries with satellite capabilities may notice some increased activity on Mehr Alley in the days and weeks ahead. The people they will see scurrying back and forth are Iranian officials desperately trying to finish the job of cleaning up that site. Since we raided the atomic archive, they have been busy cleaning out the atomic warehouse. Just last month, they removed 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel. What did they do with it? They had to get those 15 kilogrammes of radioactive materiel out of the site, so they took it out and spread it around Tehran in an effort to hide the evidence. The residents of Tehran, now endangered, may want to know that they can get a Geiger counter on Amazon for only $29.99. At today’s exchange rate, that is just 4 million Iranian rials. But we will get to that later. I will talk about the Iranian economy in a minute.
They took that radioactive material and spread it around Tehran. The Iranian officials cleaning out the site still have a lot of work to do, because they had at least 15 gigantic ship containers full of nuclear-related equipment  and  materiel  stored  there.  Since  each of
 
those containers can hold 20 tons of materiel, the site must have contained as much as 300 tons of nuclear- related equipment and materiel, all in that very place.
We now have to ask ourselves a question. Why did Iran keep a secret atomic archive and a secret atomic warehouse? After all, when South Africa and Libya gave up their nuclear programmes, the first thing they did was to destroy both the archives and the materiel and equipment. The answer to the question is simple. The reason Iran did not destroy its atomic archive and its atomic warehouse is because it has not abandoned its goal to develop nuclear weapons. In fact, it planned to use both of those sites in a few years when the time was right to break out the atom bomb. Delegations may rest assured that that will not happen. It will not happen because what Iran hides Israel will find.
I have a message for  the  Head  of  the  IAEA,  Mr. Yukiya Amano. I believe he is a good man. I believe he wants to do the right thing. I therefore ask him to do the right thing now. The IAEA should inspect that atomic warehouse immediately, before the Iranians finish clearing it out. Do delegations remember the time when we were promised that inspections could take place anytime, anywhere? Well, how about inspections of Mehr Alley right now? And while Mr. Amano is at it, he should inspect the other sites that we told him about. Once and for all, he should tell the world the truth about Iran.
I also have a message today for the tyrants of Tehran. Israel knows what they are doing, and Israel knows where they are doing it. Israel will never let a regime that calls for our destruction develop nuclear weapons — not now, not in 10 years, not ever. And Israel will do whatever it must do to defend itself against Iran’s aggression. We will continue to act against it in Syria. We will act against it in Lebanon. We will act against it in Iraq. We will act against it whenever and wherever we must. We must act to defend our State and to defend our people.
Three years ago, a few weeks after the nuclear deal was completed, I asked this question from this very podium: does anyone seriously believe that flooding Iran’s radical theocracy with weapons and cash will curb its appetite for aggression? But many of the deal’s supporters believed just that. They believed that Iran’s regime would become more moderate, more peaceful. They believed that Iran would use the billions of dollars it received in sanctions relief to improve the lives of
its people — solving the water problem, the trucking problem, the electricity problem and improving hospitals and schools. That is what they believed. Perhaps some people here today also believed that.
Well, it did not happen. Instead, Iran used the money to fuel its vast war machine. Just this past year, Iran has attacked Kurds in Iraq, slaughtered Sunnis in Syria, armed Hizbullah in Lebanon, financed Hamas in Gaza, fired missiles into Saudi Arabia and threatened the freedom of navigation in the Strait  of  Hormuz and the Strait of Bab El-Mandeb. That is some peace, some moderation.
If people think that Iran’s aggression has been confined to the Middle East, they need to  think again. Last month, two Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks here in the United States, and several weeks ago, Iranian agents were arrested for plotting terror attacks in the heart of Europe. Yet while the United States is confronting Iran with new sanctions, Europe and others are appeasing Iran by trying to help it bypass those new sanctions.
Now, I have just used a tough word,  a  very  strong word: appeasement. I use it reluctantly. But unfortunately that is exactly what we are seeing again in Europe. We need to think about that. The same week that Iran was caught red-handed trying to murder European citizens, European leaders were rolling out the red carpet for President Rouhani, promising to give Iran even more money. As the son of a historian, I have to ask — and I ask it not merely as a historian’s son, but as a Jew, a citizen of the world and someone who has lived through the twentieth century — have these European leaders learned nothing from history? Will they ever wake up?
We in Israel do not need a wake-up call, because Iran threatens us every day. Despite the  best  of  hopes — and there were many hopes around the nuclear deal — that deal did not push war further away. It brought it ever closer to our borders. In Syria, Iran  is trying to establish permanent military bases against us and has already launched missiles and drones into our territory. In Gaza, Iran is arming terror groups to launch rocket attacks on our cities and terror attacks on our civilians. In Lebanon, Iran is directing Hizbullah in the building of secret sites for converting inaccurate projectiles into precision-guided missiles that can hit targets deep inside Israel with an accuracy of within 10 metres.
 
The Assembly needs to listen to this. Hizbullah is deliberately using the innocent people of Beirut as human shields. It has placed three of these missile-conversion sites alongside Beirut’s international airport. I can show a picture that is worth a thousand missiles. In it, we can see Beirut’s international airport, the first missile site, which is in the Ouzai neighbourhood, on the water’s edge, a few blocks away from the runway. There is also a second site, which is underneath a soccer stadium, two blocks away, and a third site, which is adjacent to the airport itself, right next to it.
I therefore have a message for Hizbullah today. Israel also knows what it is doing. Israel knows where it is doing it. And Israel will not let it get away with it. Just as supporters of the nuclear deal were wrong about what would happen when sanctions were removed, they were dead wrong about what would happen when sanctions were restored. They argued that United States sanctions alone would have little economic impact on Iran. That is what they said. It is hard to believe.
Let us take a look at what  has  happened  to  Iran’s economy now that President Trump has forced companies to choose between doing business with Iran and doing business with the United States, whose gross domestic product is 50 times the size of Iran’s gross domestic product. A year ago, Iran’s economy was booming. Now it is collapsing. Iran’s currency is plummeting. Inflation and unemployment are soaring. British airlines, German banks, French oil companies, Japanese oil importers and many others are scrambling to get out. If that is little economic impact, we can imagine what will happen with the next batch of United States sanctions, which will be imposed in November.
The deal’s supporters were also wrong when they argued — and it is hard to believe that they argued this, despite the fact that I have had many arguments with them — that restoring sanctions would rally the Iranian people around the regime. While they are definitely rallying, their rallying is definitely not around the regime. They are rallying against the regime. They are not chanting “Death to America”. They are chanting “Death to the dictator”. They are not chanting “Export the Islamic Revolution”. They are chanting “Leave Syria”, “Leave Lebanon”, “Leave Gaza”, and “Take care of us in Iran”.
I listen to those protests. I talk to Iranian people. I show videos and get so many responses — from Iranians. At first, I thought they were Iranian exiles — in the
safety of London or Paris or Los Angeles. No, these are Iranians from Iran, embracing Israel, criticizing their regime — that is an understatement — with their names. Shortly after the protests broke out, I asked my intelligence people, “What is going on?”
Those protests are an indicator of something extraordinary that has been taking  place there. Through those protests, the Iranian people are showing unbelievable courage. The protests are now embracing the whole of Iran — from the urban centres to distant villages, from the striking merchants in the bazaars to the young women  uncovering their hair.  The people of Iran are bravely standing up to a regime that has brutally repressed them for four decades and that has squandered — and still squanders — their money in bloody wars across the Middle East.
This is what I say to Europe’s leaders and to others. Instead of coddling Iran’s dictators, join the United States and Israel and most of  the Arab world  in supporting new sanctions against a regime that endangers all of us across the world.
Israel is deeply grateful to President Trump for his bold decision to withdraw from the disastrous nuclear deal with Iran. A great many of our Arab neighbours are also grateful. And everyone who cares about the peace and security of the world should also be grateful.
But I have an important confession to make. It  may be surprising, but I have to admit that the Iran deal has had one positive consequence, an unintended but positive consequence. By empowering Iran, it has brought Israel and many Arab States closer than they have ever been before, in an intimacy and friendship that I have not seen in my lifetime and that would have been unimaginable a few years ago.
When friendships are formed around a threat or a challenge, opportunities are quickly seen, not just for security but for how to bring a better life to our peoples, which is what Israel can and wants to contribute to. Israel deeply values those new friendships, and I hope the day will soon arrive when Israel will be able to expand peace, a formal peace, beyond Egypt and Jordan to other Arab neighbours, including the Palestinians. I look forward to working with President Trump and his peace team to achieve that goal.
I also want to take the opportunity now, here at the United Nations, a place I know something about because many years ago I served here as Ambassador
 
for many years, to express Israel’s appreciation to President Trump and Ambassador Haley for the unwavering support they have provided to Israel at  the United Nations. They have unequivocally backed Israel’s right to defend itself.  They rightly pulled out of a history-denying UNESCO and a morally bankrupt Human Rights Council. I think that more resolutions about Israel than about the rest of the world combined have been introduced in those bodies, and tenfold the number of resolutions on Iran, Syria or any other State. It is not even fair to say “tenfold”, because there are no multiples of zero.
President Trump and Ambassador Haley also stopped funding an unreformed United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, an organization that perpetuates the Palestinian refugee problem instead of solving it. Day after day, the Trump Administration has stood up to what has long been a specialty here at the United Nations, slandering Israel. Even though the shameful resolution 3379
(XXX) comparing Zionism to racism was repealed 25 years ago, I am sorry to say that its foul stench still clings to these halls.
Israel airlifted Ethiopian Jews to freedom and a new life in Israel, in the Jewish State. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is absurdly accused of racism. Israel’s Arab citizens vote in our elections, serve in our Parliament, preside over our courts and have exactly the same individual rights as all other Israeli citizens. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is shamefully accused of apartheid. Today there are at least five times as many Palestinians as there were in 1948, the year of Israel’s founding. Yet here at the United Nations Israel is outrageously accused of ethnic cleansing. Do those here know what that is? It is the same old anti-Semitism with a brand-new face. That is all it is.
Once it was the Jewish people who were slandered and held to a different standard; today it is the Jewish State that is slandered and held to a different standard. Here is an example. Take the outlandish attacks that have been levelled against Israel after our Knesset, our Parliament, recently adopted a law declaring Israel the nation-State of the Jewish people. Nevertheless, Israel is a free country. People can oppose that law, and people have done so. People can call for different wording in this or that clause, or add or delete a clause. People can do that.
But when Israel is called racist for making  Hebrew its official language and the Star of  David  its national flag, when Israel is labelled an apartheid State for declaring itself the nation-State of the Jewish people — that is downright preposterous. And does the Assembly know why? Because represented in the Hall today are more than 100 countries that have only one official language, even though many other languages are commonly spoken within those countries. There are more than 50 countries here that have crosses or crescents on their flags, even though they have many non-Muslims and non-Christians living in  their  midst. And there are dozens of countries that define themselves as nation-States of a particular people, even though there are many ethnic and national minorities within their borders. None of those countries have been denigrated or libelled for celebrating their unique national identity. Only Israel is denigrated. Only Israel is libelled. What is unique about the Jewish people is not that we have a nation-State. What is unique is that many still oppose our having a nation-State.
Moments ago, President Abbas outrageously said that Israel’s nation-State law proves that Israel is a racist, apartheid State. President Abbas should know better. He wrote a dissertation denying the Holocaust. His Palestinian National Authority imposes death sentences on Palestinians for selling land to Jews. Let me repeat that. If a Jew buys an apartment or a piece of land anywhere in the Palestinian territories, the Palestinian who sold  him that land is executed. That  is what the law says. President Abbas proudly pays Palestinian terrorists who murder Jews. In fact, the more they slay, the more he pays. That is in their law too. Then how can he condemn Israel’s morality and call Israel racist?
That is not the way to peace. That is not the way  to achieve the peace that we all want and need and to which Israel remains committed. This body should not be applauding the Head of a regime that pays terrorists. The United Nations should condemn such a despicable policy. And the United Nations, which brokered an Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire in 2014, should demand that Hamas release our fallen soldiers Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin. The latter was kidnapped when Hamas violated that very ceasefire. Hamas should also release the two Israeli citizens whom it holds captive, Avera Mengistu and Hisham Al-Sayed.
Every time I stand here I  feel  as  I  do  today.  I am privileged to stand here as the Prime Minister
 
of the State of Israel, a Jewish and democratic State. Some believe that Israel cannot be both Jewish and democratic. That is false. Israel is both, and Israel will always remain both. Ever since Abraham and Sarah made their journey to the promised land, nearly 4,000 years ago, the land of  Israel has been our homeland. It is the place where Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob, Leah and Rachel carried out their eternal covenant with God. It is where Joshua made us a sovereign nation, where David ruled and Isaiah preached, where the Maccabees fought and where Masada fell. It is the place from which we were exiled and to which we returned, rebuilding our ancient and eternal capital, Jerusalem. The nation-State of Israel is the only place where the Jewish people proudly exercise our collective right of self-determination. That right was recognized nearly a century ago by the League of Nations, and more than 70 years ago by the United Nations when it supported the establishment of a Jewish State. That is what resolution 181 (II) said, “a Jewish State”.
At the same time, Israel is a vibrant democracy, where all its citizens, Jews and non-Jews alike, enjoy equal individual rights, and those rights are guaranteed by law. In Israel, whether a person is a Jew or an  Arab, a Christian or a Muslim, a Druze or a Bedouin or anything else, that person’s individual rights are exactly the same and will always  remain the same.  In the Middle East that is not obvious. Now that is an understatement. In the Middle East, where women are often treated as property, minorities are persecuted and gays are hanged, Israel stands out as a shining example of freedom and progress.
I could not be more proud to represent my country, Israel. I am proud that we have made Israel a global technological Power of breathtaking creativity in information technology and precision agriculture. Is the Assembly aware that we target the fertilizer and the water down to the individual plant — not to a field,  not to part of a field, but down to the plant? I am proud of those geniuses that have brought those unbelievable developments in water management, cybersecurity, autonomous vehicles, digital health, medical devices and so many other fields that are improving the lives of billions of people around the world. I am proud of Israel’s brilliant scholars, innovative entrepreneurs, talented artists, devoted teachers and compassionate doctors, and of our search-and-rescue teams who save lives from Haiti to Mexico, from Nepal to the Philippines. I am also proud of Israel’s courageous soldiers, the men
and women who bravely defend our homeland while upholding the highest values. Most of all, I am proud of the people of Israel, who draw extraordinary strength from the deep wellsprings of our heritage, who possess an unbreakable spirit and who are as determined as ever to build a secure and magnificent future for the one and only Jewish State.E nga mana nul o nga whenua o te ao/Tena koutou katoa/Nei ra te reo mihl maioha o Aotearoa/Tena tatau i nga kaupapa korero/Ka arahina e tatau/Me te ngakau pono/Me te kotahitanga o te tangata.
My opening remarks were in Te Reo Maori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand. As is tradition, I acknowledged those who are here, why we are here and the importance of our work. It seems a fitting place to start.
As a leader attending my first General Assembly, I am struck by the power and potential that resides here. In New Zealand we have always been acutely aware of that. We are a  remote nation at  the bottom  of the South Pacific. It takes three hours to reach our nearest neighbours by plane, and anywhere that takes less than 12 hours is considered close. I have no doubt, though, that our geographic isolation has contributed to our values.
We are a self-deprecating people.  We  are  not ones for status. We will celebrate the  local  people who volunteer at their sports clubs as  much  as  we will celebrate successful entrepreneurs. Our empathy and strong sense of justice are matched only by our pragmatism. We are, after all, a country made up of two main islands, one simply named North and the other South. For all of that, our isolation has not made us insular. In fact, our engagement with the world has helped shape who we are.
I am a child of the 1980s, a period in New Zealand’s history where we did not just observe international events, we challenged them. Whether it was apartheid in South Africa or nuclear testing in the Pacific, I grew up learning about my country and who we were by the way that we reacted to international events. Whether it was taking to the streets or changing our laws, we have seen ourselves as members of a community, one that we have a duty to use our voice within.
I am an incredibly proud New Zealander, but much of that pride has come from being a strong and active member of our international community, not in spite of it. At the heart of that international community has been this place. Emerging from a catastrophic war, we have collectively established — through convention, charters and rules — a set of international norms and human rights. All of these are an acknowledgement that we are not isolated, that Governments do have obligations to their people and to one another and that our actions have a global effect.
In 1945, New Zealand’s Prime Minister Peter Fraser said that the Charter of the United Nations offered perhaps a last opportunity to work in unison to realize the hope in the hearts of all of us, for a peace that would be real, lasting and worthy of human dignity. None of those founding principles should be consigned to the history books. In  fact,  given  the  challenges we face today and how truly global they are in their nature and impact, the need for collective action and multilateralism has never been clearer. And yet,  for  all of that, the debate and dialogue we  hear globally is not centred on the relevance and importance of our international institutions. Instead, we find ourselves having to defend their very existence. That surely leaves us all with the questions of how we got here and how we get out.
If anything unites us politically in this place right now it is this: globalization has had a massive impact on our nations and the people we serve. While that impact has been positive for many, for others it has not. The transitions our economies have made have often been jarring and the consequences harsh. Alongside unprecedented global economic growth, we are still seeing a growing sense of isolation, dislocation and insecurity and the erosion of hope. As politicians and Governments, we all have choices in how we respond to those challenges. We can use the environment to blame nameless and faceless others, feed the sense of insecurity and retreat into greater levels of isolationism,
 
or we can acknowledge the problems we have and seek to fix them.
In New Zealand, going it alone is not an option. Aside from our history, we are also a trading nation, and proudly so, but even without those founding principles, there are not just questions of nationhood to consider. There are generational demands on us too. It should hardly come as a surprise that we have seen  a global trend of young people showing dissatisfaction with our political systems and calling on us to do things differently. Why would they not, when they themselves have had to adapt so rapidly to a changing world?
Within a few short decades, we now have a generation that will grow up more connected than ever before. Digital transformation will determine whether the jobs they are training for will even exist in two decades. In education or the job market, they will not just compete with their neighbours but their neighbouring countries. This generation is a borderless one, at least in a virtual sense, and its members increasingly see themselves as global citizens. As their reality changes, they expect that ours will too, that we will see and understand our collective impact and that we will change the way we use our power.
If we are looking for an example of where the next generation is calling on us to make that change, we need look no further than climate change. Two weeks ago, Pacific Island leaders gathered together at the Pacific Islands Forum. It was at that meeting, in the small island nation of Nauru, that climate change was declared the single biggest threat to security in the Pacific. Please, just think about that for a moment. Of all the challenges we debate and discuss, rising sea levels present the single biggest threat to our region.
For those who live in the South Pacific, the impacts of climate change are not academic, or even arguable. They are watching the sea levels rise, the extreme weather events increase and the impact that has on their water supply and food crops. We can talk all we like about the science and what it means and what temperature rises we need to limit in order to survive, but there is a grinding reality in hearing people from  a Pacific island talk about where the sea was when they were children and the potential loss of their entire village now that they are adults.
Our action in the wake of that global challenge remains optional, but the impact  of  inaction  does not. Nations like Tuvalu, the Marshall Islands or
Kiribati — small countries that have contributed the least to global climate change — are suffering, and will suffer, the full force of a warming planet. If my Pacific neighbours do not have the option of opting out of the effects of climate change, why should we be able to opt out of taking action to stop it? Any disintegration of multilateralism and any undermining of climate-related targets and agreements are not interesting footnotes in geopolitical history. They are catastrophic.
In New Zealand we are determined to play our part. We will not issue any further offshore oil and gas exploration permits. We have set a goal of 100 per cent renewable energy generation by 2035, established a green infrastructure fund to encourage innovation and rolled out an initiative to plant 1 billion trees over the next 10 years. Those plans are unashamedly ambitious. The threat that climate change poses demands it. But we represent less than 0.2 per cent of global emissions. That is why, as a global community, not since the inception of the United Nations has there been a greater example than climate change of the importance of collective action and multilateralism. It should be a rallying cry for all of us.
Yet there is a hesitance that we can ill afford and a calculation of personal cost and self-interest. But that is not the only challenge where domestic self-interest is the first response and where an international or collective approach has been diluted at best, or rejected at worst. But it would be both unfair and naive  to argue that retreating to our own borders and interests has meant turning our backs on a perfect system. The international institutions that we have committed to have not been perfect. But they can be fixed.
That is why  the challenge I  want to issue today   is this: together, we must rebuild and recommit to multilateralism. We must redouble our efforts  to  work as a global community. We must rediscover our shared belief in the value, rather than the harm, of connectedness. We must demonstrate that collective international action not only works but is in all of our best interests. We must show the next generation that we are listening and have heard them.
But if we are truly going to take on a reform agenda, we must acknowledge the failings that have led us to this crossroads. International trade, for instance, has helped bring millions of people out of poverty around the world. But some have felt their standard of living slide. We in New Zealand have ourselves seen
 
the hesitancy around trade agreements within our own population. The correct response is not to repeat the mistakes of the past and be seduced by the false promises of protectionism. Rather, we must all work to ensure that the benefits of trade are distributed fairly across our societies.
We cannot rely on international institutions to do that, in the same way that we cannot blame them if they have not delivered those benefits. It is incumbent on us to build productive, sustainable and inclusive economies and demonstrate to our peoples that, when done right, international economic integration can make us all better off. If we want to ensure that everyone is better off, surely we should start with the most vulnerable.
We in New Zealand have set ourselves an ambitious goal. We want to be the best place in the world to be a child. It is hardly the stuff of hard and fast measures — after all, how are play and a feeling of security and happiness measured? But we can measure material deprivation and poverty, and so we will. Moreover, we are making it a law that we report on those numbers every single year alongside our budgets. What better way is there to hold ourselves to account, and what better group to do that for than children?
But if we are focused on nurturing that next generation, we equally have to  worry about  what  it  is that we are handing down to them, including our environment. In the Maori language there is a word that captures the importance of that role, kaitiakitanga, which means guardianship. That is the idea that we have been entrusted with our environment and have a duty to care for it. For us, that has meant taking action to address degradation, such as setting standards to make our rivers swimmable, reducing waste and phasing out single-use plastic bags, right through to eradicating predators and protecting our biodiversity. The race to grow our economies and increase wealth makes us all the poorer if it comes at the cost of our environment. We in New Zealand are determined to prove that it does not have to be that way. But those are all actions and initiatives that we can take domestically that ease the blame and pressure on our international institutions. That does not mean they do not need fixing.
At the heart of the multilateral system, the United Nations must lead the way. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s reform efforts to make the United Nations more responsive, effective and modernized so that it is capable of dealing with today’s challenges.
We encourage him to be ambitious, and  we  stand with him in that ambition. But ultimately it is up  to  us, the Member States, to drive change here at the United Nations. That includes reforming the Security Council. If we want the Council to fulfil its purpose  of maintaining international peace and security, its practices must be updated so that it is not hamstrung by the use of the veto.
New thinking will also be needed if we are to achieve the vision encapsulated in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In New Zealand we have sought to  embed the  principles behind the  SDGs  in a new living-standards framework that is guiding policymaking and the management of our resources. We remain absolutely committed to supporting the rollout of the SDGs alongside international partners through a significant increase in our official development assistance budget.
But revitalizing our international rules-based system is not just about the mechanics of how we work together. It also means renewing our commitment to our values. The Charter of the United Nations recalls that the Organization was formed to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which after two world wars had brought untold sorrow to humankind. If we forget that history and the principles that drove the creation of the United Nations, we will be doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past.
In an increasingly uncertain world it is more important than ever that we remember the core values on which the United Nations was built — that all people are equal, that all are entitled to have their dignity and human rights respected and that we must strive to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom. We must consistently hold ourselves to account on each one.
In addition to renewing that commitment, though, we must acknowledge where accountability must continue, and that is especially the case when it comes to equality. So many gains have been made, and each is worthy of celebration. In New Zealand we have just marked the 125th year since women were granted the right to vote. We were the first country in the world to do so. As a girl I never grew up believing that my gender would stand in the way of my achieving whatever I wanted in life. I am, after all, not the first but the third female Prime Minister of New Zealand.
 
But for all of that, we still have a gender pay gap and an overrepresentation of women in low-paid work and as victims of domestic violence. And we are not alone. It seems surprising that in this modern age we should have to recommit to gender equality, but we  do. I for one will never celebrate the gains we have made for women domestically while internationally other women and girls experience a lack of the most basic opportunities and dignity. #MeToo must become #WeToo. We are all in this together.
I accept that the list of demands, whether domestic or international, on all of us is long. We are operating in challenging times. We face what we in New Zealand would call wicked problems, ones that are intertwined and interrelated. Perhaps then it is time to step back from the chaos and ask what we want. It is in that space that we will find simplicity, the simplicity of peace, prosperity and fairness.
If I could distil it into one concept that we are pursuing in New Zealand it is simple and it is this: kindness. In the face of isolationism, protectionism and racism, the simple concept of looking outwardly and beyond ourselves and of kindness and collectivism might be just as good a starting point as any. Let us therefore start here, with the institutions that have served us well in times of need and will do so again.
In the meantime, I can assure everyone here that New Zealand remains committed to continuing to do its part in building and sustaining international peace and security; promoting and defending an open, inclusive and rules-based international order based on universal values; and being pragmatic, empathetic, strong and kind. The next generation, after all, deserves no less.
The statements delivered during this session’s general debate confirm that international relations are now being conducted in a complex and controversial period of history.
Today, we are all witnessing two opposing trends collide. On the one hand, we  see the strengthening    of polycentric principles of world order, the steady development of new centres of economic growth and peoples’ aspirations to preserve their sovereignty and choose development models that are consistent with their national, cultural and religious identities. On the other hand, we see the desire of a number of Western States to retain their self-proclaimed status as world leaders and slow the irreversible and objective process of establishing multipolarity. To that  end,  they  do not hesitate to use every possible method, including political blackmail, economic pressure and brute force.
Such illegal actions  devalue the  international law that underpins the post-war world order. We hear statements trumpeted that not only call into question the legal validity of international treaties, but also prioritize self-serving unilateral approaches over decisions made within the United Nations. We are seeing an assault  by belligerent revisionism on the modern system of international law. There have been attacks on the basic principles of the Middle East peace process, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, commitments under the framework of  the World Trade Organization, the multilateral Paris Agreement on Climate Change and many more.
At the same time, our Western colleagues continue to seek to replace the supremacy of law in world affairs with some kind of so-called rules-based order. Those
 
rules themselves are invented depending on whatever is politically expedient and are a reflection of double standards. Baseless accusations of interference in the internal affairs of various countries are being made alongside overt attempts to undermine and topple democratically elected Governments. Efforts are being made to draw some countries into military alliances that are designed to further specific agendas against the will of the peoples of those countries, while other States are threatened with punishment for their free choice of partners and allies. It is telling that aggressive attacks on international institutions are being accompanied by attempts to privatize their secretariat structures and grant them the rights of intergovernmental bodies in the hope of manipulating them later.
The shrinking space for constructive international cooperation, escalating confrontations, a growing overall lack of predictability, and a substantially higher risk of spontaneous conflicts all affect the work of this global Organization. The international  community has to pay a high price for the parochial, self-serving ambitions of a small group of countries. The collective mechanisms for responding to common security challenges have stalled. Diplomacy and a culture of negotiation and compromise are increasingly replaced by dictates and unilateral extraterritorial restrictions effected without the consent of the Security Council. Such measures, which have already been applied to dozens of countries, are ineffective as well as illegal, as demonstrated by the more  than  half-century  of the United States blockade of Cuba, which has been condemned by the entire international community.
Once again, however, the lessons are not being drawn from history. The number of those who  want  to hand down verdicts without bothering with charges or trials is not getting any smaller. Today assumptions in the spirit of the notorious “highly likely” approach seem to provide sufficient grounds for some of our Western colleagues to make accusations against anyone they want to. We have already been through that, and we well remember how often spurious pretexts have been used to justify interventions and unleash wars, as was the case in Yugoslavia in 1999, Iraq in 2003 and Libya in 2011. The same methods are being used in Syria today. On 14 April, missile strikes were launched against Syria on a completely invented pretext, just hours before international inspectors were expected to arrive at the site of an incident that had been staged. This is a warning against any further provocations
by terrorists and their patrons involving the use of chemical weapons, which would be unacceptable.
The conflict in Syria has already lasted seven years. The failed attempt to effect regime change, which was orchestrated from outside and relied on extremists, nearly resulted in the country’s disintegration and the emergence of a terrorist caliphate in its place. Russia’s energetic action, in response to the request of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and supported by diplomatic efforts in the context of the Astana process, helped prevent that devastating  scenario. The Syrian National Dialogue Congress, initiated by Russia, Iran and Turkey in Sochi in January, established the conditions for a political settlement in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), and the basis for the intra-Syrian constitutional committee now being established in Geneva. Its agenda includes the restoration of ruined infrastructure in order to facilitate the return of millions of refugees to their homes. Assistance in addressing those issues in the interest of all Syrians, without double standards, must become a priority for international efforts and the activities of United Nations agencies.
Despite the complexity of the situation in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya, we  must  not  lose  sight  of the long-standing Palestinian question. A just and equitable solution to that issue is crucial to improving the situation throughout the Middle East. I want to warn against any unilateral  approaches  in  this area or attempts to monopolize this peace process. Today, as never before, the international community should consolidate its efforts with the aim of restarting talks on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Russia will continue to do its utmost to facilitate the process, including within the Middle East Quartet and in cooperation with the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Mutually acceptable agreements must ensure the peaceful and safe coexistence of the two States of Israel and Palestine.
Here at the United Nations, which was created on the basis of lessons learned from the Second World War, we must all think about a future in which the repetition of past mistakes should have no place. This year marks the eightieth anniversary of the notorious Munich agreement crowning the criminal policy of appeasement of the Third Reich, a sad example of the catastrophic consequences that can result from national
 
egotism, disregard for international law and attempts to solve problems at others’ expense.
Regrettably, in a number of countries today not only has the vaccine against the Nazi plague been weakened, but a rising campaign to rewrite history and whitewash war criminals and their associates is  emerging.  In our view, the campaigns being waged in a number of countries to demolish monuments to the liberators of Europe are an outrage. We call on the Assembly to support the draft of this year’s versin of the annual resolution on the inadmissibility of glorification of the Nazis.
The growth of radical nationalism and neo-fascism in Ukraine, where criminals who fought under Waffen- SS banners have been declared heroes, is one of the main factors in the protracted intra-Ukrainian conflict. The only way to settle that conflict is to ensure the comprehensive and consistent implementation in good faith of the Minsk package of measures, approved unanimously by the Security Council in its resolution 2202 (2015). We support the activities of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and are ready to provide its monitors with United Nations protection.
However, instead of implementing the Minsk agreements and engaging in dialogue with Donetsk and Luhansk, Kyiv continues to harbour the illusion that it may be able to put occupying forces in Donbas with the support of the West and is increasingly threatening to resort to military options. The sponsors of the current Kyiv authorities must bring their clients to their senses, make them lift the blockade of Donbas and end discrimination against ethnic minorities throughout Ukraine.
In Kosovo, the international military presence authorized by the Security Council is being transformed into a United States military base, and Kosovo armed forces are being created. The agreements between Belgrade and Pristina brokered by the European Union are not being implemented. Russia calls on the parties to engage in dialogue in accordance with the principles of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and will support a decision that would be acceptable for Serbia. In general, we urge that the Balkans not be once again transformed into an arena for confrontation or declared to be someone’s particular patrimony. The peoples of the Balkans must not be forced to face a false choice,
and we must prevent new dividing lines from emerging in the region.
We need to shape an architecture of equal and indivisible security elsewhere in the world, including the Asia-Pacific region. We welcome the positive developments on the Korean peninsula following the logic of the Russian-Chinese road map. It is important to encourage that process, which should be based on continuing the rapprochement between the  parties and on promoting the practical implementation of the important arrangements arrived at by Pyongyang and Seoul through the Security Council. We will continue to work to launch a multilateral process aimed at establishing a robust mechanism for peace and security in North-East Asia as soon as possible.
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is among the tasks before the international community in the key security area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Regrettably, serious obstacles to that track continue to pile up. The unilateral withdrawal by the United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, in violation of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), and despite Iran’s full compliance with its obligations, came on top of the lack of progress in the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. We will do everything possible to preserve the deal approved by the Security Council.
We are seeing increasingly negative  trends  in  the activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) whereby the West is attempting to transform the Technical Secretariat into an instrument for punishing undesirable Governments, which risks compromising the OPCW’s independent professional status, the universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the  exclusive  prerogatives of the Security Council. Those and other problems in the area of non-proliferation were discussed in detail in the Security Council on 26 September (see S/PV.8362), convened at a very timely moment by the United States presidency.
We firmly believe that any problems or concerns that arise in international relations should be addressed through a substantive dialogue. If there are any bones of contention, we should come together around the negotiating table, engage in talks, present facts, heed
 
the our partners’ counterarguments and seek a balance of interests.
In the past couple of years, the debate on abuses in cyberspace has become more intense. I would like to draw attention to the fact that it was Russia that initiated discussion of international information-security issues at the United Nations 20 years ago. Against the backdrop of recent developments, it is becoming ever more urgent that under the auspices of the United Nations we should develop global rules for the responsible behaviour of States in cyberspace, including the principles of the non-use of force, non-interference in internal affairs and respect for State sovereignty. We intend to introduce a draft resolution to that effect in the First Committee. We also believe that it is important to start work on a convention on cybercrime, and we envisage holding the relevant discussions in the Third Committee.
It is more essential than ever to seek mutually acceptable agreements and the mutual consideration of interests in the areas of global trade and economic relations, which today are being subjected to an unprecedented degree of politicization. The values of free trade are being held hostage to trade wars and other forms of unfair competition.
Russia has consistently  promoted  a  philosophy of shared economic development,  as  enshrined  in  the Greater Eurasian Partnership initiative launched by President Vladimir Putin, a large-scale project open to all Asian and European States regardless of their membership in other integration associations. If consistently implemented, it could help to develop a the space for extensive economic cooperation in Eurasia. In the long term, it could lay the foundations for a renewed continental security architecture fit for the realities of the twenty-first century.
Russia will continue to do its utmost to build a world based on law, truth and justice, and we are not alone in that aspiration. Together with us, our allies and partners in the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Community, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) group and an overwhelming majority of other countries are advocating for the democratization of all aspects of international affairs and in the interests of all States, without exception. The West should also heed that voice, which is becoming
more and more evident in the activities of the Group  of 20.
In today’s turbulent circumstances, the growing relevance of the United Nations — the only existing forum for overcoming differences and coordinating the activities of the international community — is an objective reality. Cooperation, with a view to arriving at broadly acceptable solutions, was a priority built into the foundations of the United Nations from the very start. Today we must not fail to live up to the high goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its dedication by the drafters to future generations.
We should recall the art of negotiation in order to be worthy of their legacy. Many of today’s problems can be solved only on a basis of equality and mutual respect. Dictates and coercion, hallmarks of the era of colonialism, should once and for all be filed away in the archives or, better yet, consigned to the dustbin of history.
Some great statesmen of the past have bequeathed to us many words of wisdom that have come to be aphorisms. Let me quote just one, from President Harry Truman: “The responsibility of the great States is to serve and not to dominate the world”.
I hope that a culture of mutually respectful dialogue will finally prevail. Russia will do everything it can to achieve that.
One year ago, I stood before the Assembly for the first time in this Hall (see A/72/ PV.3). I  addressed the  threats facing our world,  and  I presented a vision to achieve  a  brighter future for all of humankind. Today, I stand before the General Assembly to share the extraordinary progress that we have made. In less than two years, my Administration has accomplished more than almost any Administration in the history of our country.
America’s economy is booming like never before. Since my election, we have added $10 trillion in wealth. The stock market is  at  an all-time high in history, and jobless claims are at a 50-year low. African- American, Hispanic-American and Asian-American unemployment have all achieved their lowest levels ever recorded. We have added more than 4 million new jobs, including half a million manufacturing jobs. We passed the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. We started the construction of a major border wall and we have greatly strengthened border security. We have secured record funding for our military — $700 billion this year and $716 billion next year. Our military will soon be more powerful than it has ever been before.
In other words, the United States is a stronger, safer and richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago. We are standing up for America and for the American people. We are also standing up for the world. This is great news for our citizens and for peace-loving people everywhere. We believe that, when nations respect the rights of their neighbours and defend the interests of their people, they can better work together to secure the blessings of safety, prosperity and peace.
Each of us here today is the emissary of a distinct culture, a rich history and a  people  bound  together by ties of memory, tradition and the values that make our homelands like nowhere else on Earth. That  is why America will always choose independence and cooperation over global governance, control and domination. I honour the right of every nation in this Hall to pursue its own customs, beliefs and traditions. The United States will not tell nations how to live or work or worship. We only ask that you honour our sovereignty in return.
From Warsaw to Brussels and from Tokyo to Singapore, it has been my highest honour to represent the United States abroad. I have forged close relationships and friendships and strong partnerships
 
with the leaders of many nations in this Hall, and our approach has always yielded incredible change.
With support from many countries here today, we have engaged with North Korea to replace the spectre of conflict with a bold and new push for peace. In June, I travelled to Singapore to meet face to face with North Korea’s leader, Chairman Kim Jong Un. We had highly productive conversations and meetings. And we agreed that it was in both countries’ interests to pursue the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Since that meeting, we have already seen a number of encouraging measures that few could have imagined only a short time ago.
Missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction, nuclear testing has stopped and some military facilities are already being dismantled. Our hostages have been released and, as promised, the remains of our fallen heroes are being returned home to lay at rest in American soil. I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken, though much work remains to be done. The sanctions will stay in place until denuclearization occurs.
I also want to thank the many  Member  States who helped us reach this moment — which is in fact far greater than people might understand — for their critical support, which we will all need going forward. I would also like to extend special thanks to President Moon of South Korea, Prime Minister Abe of Japan and President Xi of China.
In the Middle East, our new approach is also yielding great strides and historic change. Following my trip to Saudi Arabia last year, the Gulf countries opened a new centre to target terrorist  financing. They are enforcing new sanctions, working with us to identify and track terrorist networks and taking more responsibility for fighting terrorism and extremism in their own region.
The United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar have pledged billions of dollars to aid the people of Syria and Yemen. They are pursuing multiple avenues to end Yemen’s horrible, horrific civil war. Ultimately, it is up to the nations of the region to decide what kind of future they want for themselves and their children.
For that reason, the United States is working with the Gulf Cooperation Council, Jordan and Egypt to establish a regional strategic alliance so that MiddleEastern nations can advance prosperity, stability and security across their home region.
Thanks to the United States military and our partnership with many nations, I am pleased to report that the bloodthirsty killers known as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham have been driven out from the territory they once held in Iraq and Syria. We will continue to work with friends and allies to deny radical Islamic terrorists any funding, territory or support or any means of infiltrating our borders.
The ongoing tragedy in Syria is heartbreaking. Our shared goals must be the de-escalation of military conflict, along with a political solution that honours the will of the Syrian people. In this vein, we urge that the United Nations-led peace process be reinvigorated. Rest assured, the United States will respond if chemical weapons are deployed by the Al-Assad regime.
I commend the people of Jordan and other neighbouring countries for hosting refugees  from  this brutal civil war. As we see in Jordan, the most compassionate policy is to place refugees as close to their homes as possible to ease their eventual return as part of the rebuilding process. This approach also stretches finite resources to help far more people, increasing the impact of every dollar spent.
Every solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria must also include a strategy to address the brutal regime that has fuelled and financed it: the corrupt dictatorship in Iran. Iran’s leaders sow chaos, death and destruction. They do not  respect their neighbours or  borders or  the sovereign rights of nations. Instead, Iran’s leaders plunder the nation’s resources to enrich themselves and spread mayhem across the Middle East and far beyond. The Iranian people are rightly outraged that their leaders have embezzled billions of dollars from Iran’s treasury, seized valuable portions of the economy and looted the people’s religious endowments — all to line their own pockets and send their proxies to wage war. Not good.
Iran’s neighbours have paid a heavy toll for the regime’s agenda of aggression and expansion. That is why so many countries in the Middle East strongly supported my decision to withdraw the United States from the horrible 2015 Iran nuclear deal and reimpose nuclear sanctions. The Iran deal was a windfall for Iran’s leaders. In the years since the deal was reached, Iran’s military budget grew nearly 40 per cent. The dictatorship used the funds to build nuclear-capable
 
missiles, increase internal repression, finance terrorism and fund havoc and slaughter in Syria and Yemen.
The United States has launched a campaign of economic pressure to deny the regime the funds it needs to advance its bloody agenda. Last month, we began reimposing hard-hitting nuclear sanctions that had been lifted under the Iran deal. Additional sanctions will resume 5 November, and more will follow. And we are working with countries that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases substantially. We cannot allow the world’s leading sponsor of terrorism to possess the planet’s most dangerous weapons. We cannot allow a regime that chants “Death to America” and threatens Israel with annihilation to possess the means to deliver a nuclear warhead to any city on Earth. We just cannot do it. We ask all nations to isolate Iran’s regime as long as its aggression continues. And we ask all nations to support Iran’s people as they struggle to reclaim their religious and righteous destiny.
This year, we also took another significant step forward in the Middle East. In recognition of every sovereign State’s right to determine its own capital, I moved the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. The United States is committed to a future of peace and stability in the region, including peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. That aim is advanced, not harmed, by acknowledging the obvious facts. America’s policy of principled realism means we will not be held hostage to old dogmas, discredited ideologies and so- called experts who have been proven wrong over the years, time and time again. That is true not only in matters of peace, but in matters of prosperity.
We believe that trade must be fair and reciprocal. The United States will not be taken advantage of any longer. For decades, the United States opened its economy — the largest, by far, on Earth — with few conditions. We allowed foreign goods from all over the world to flow freely across our borders. Yet other countries did not grant us fair and reciprocal  access to  their markets  in return. Even worse, some countries abused their openness to dump their products, subsidize their goods, target our industries and manipulate their currencies to gain unfair advantage over our country. As a result, our trade deficit ballooned to nearly $800 billion a year. For that reason, we are systematically renegotiating broken and bad trade deals.
Last month, we announced a ground-breaking United States-Mexico trade agreement. And just yesterday, I
stood with President Moon to announce the successful completion of the brand new United States-Korea trade deal. And that is just the beginning. Many nations in this Hall will agree that the world trading system is in dire need of change. For example, countries were admitted to the World Trade Organization (WTO) that violate every single principle on which the organization is based. While the United States and many other nations play by the rules, those countries use Government-run industrial planning and State-owned enterprises to rig the system in their favour. They engage in relentless product dumping, forced technology transfer and the theft of intellectual property.
The United States lost more than 3 million manufacturing jobs, nearly a quarter of all steel jobs and 60,000 factories after China joined the  WTO. And we have racked up $13 trillion in trade deficits over the past two decades. But those days are over. We will no longer tolerate such abuse. We will not allow our workers to be victimized, our companies to be cheated and our wealth to be plundered and transferred. America will never apologize for protecting its citizens. The United States has just announced tariffs on another
$200 billion in Chinese-made goods — for a total, so far, of $250 billion. I have great respect and affection for my friend President Xi, but I have made it clear that our trade imbalance is just not acceptable. China’s market distortions and the way they deal cannot be tolerated. As my Administration has demonstrated, America will always act in our national interests.
I spoke before this body last year (see A/72/PV.3) and warned that the Human Rights Council had become a grave embarrassment to this institution, shielding egregious human rights abusers while bashing America and its many friends. Our Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, laid out a clear agenda for reform, but despite reported and repeated warnings,  no action at all was taken. The United States took the only responsible course. We withdrew from the Human Rights Council, and we will not return until real reform is enacted. For similar reasons, the United States will provide no support or recognition to the International Criminal Court (ICC). As far as America is concerned, the ICC has no jurisdiction, no legitimacy and no authority. The ICC claims near-universal jurisdiction over the citizens of every country, violating all principles of justice, fairness and due process. We will never surrender America’s sovereignty to an unelected, unaccountable global bureaucracy. America is governed
 
by Americans. We reject the ideology of globalism and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism. Around the world, responsible nations must defend against threats to sovereignty not just from global governance, but also from other new forms of coercion and domination.
In America, we believe strongly in energy security for ourselves and for our allies. We have become the largest energy producer anywhere on the face of the Earth. The United States stands ready to export our abundant, affordable supply of oil, clean coal and natural gas. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and OPEC nations, are, as usual, ripping off the rest of the world, and I do not like it. Nobody should like it. We defend many of those nations for nothing, and then they take advantage of us by giving us high oil prices. Not good. We want them to stop raising prices. We want them to start lowering prices. And they must contribute substantially to military protection from now on. We are not going to put up with such horrible prices much longer. Reliance on a single foreign supplier can leave a nation vulnerable to extortion and intimidation. That is why we congratulate European States, such as Poland, for leading the construction of a Baltic pipeline so that nations are not dependent on Russia to meet their energy needs. Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change its course.
Here, in the western hemisphere, we are committed to maintaining our independence from the encroachment of expansionist foreign powers. It has been the formal policy of our country since President Monroe to reject the interference of foreign nations in this hemisphere and in our own affairs.
The United States recently strengthened our laws to better screen foreign investments in our country for national security threats, and we welcome cooperation with countries in the region and around  the  world that wish to do the same. You need to do it for your own protection.
The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance of human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It is horrible thing that is going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It is very cruel. Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hard-working citizens and has produced a vicious
cycle of crime, violence and poverty. Only by upholding national borders and destroying criminal gangs  can we break that cycle and establish a  real foundation  for prosperity.
We recognize the right of every nation in this Hall to set its own immigration policy in accordance with its national interests, just as we  ask other countries   to respect our own right to  do  the  same —  which  we are doing. That is one reason the United States  will not participate in the new global compact for migration. Migration should not be governed by an international body that is unaccountable to our own citizens. Ultimately, the only long-term solution to the migration crisis is to help people build more hopeful futures in their home countries, to make their countries great again.
Currently, we are witnessing a human tragedy, to give an example, in Venezuela. More than 2 million people have fled the anguish inflicted by the socialist Maduro regime and its Cuban sponsors. Not long ago, Venezuela was one of the richest countries on Earth. Today socialism has bankrupted the oil-rich nation and driven its people into abject poverty. Almost everywhere socialism or communism has been tried, it has produced suffering, corruption and decay.
Socialism’s thirst for power leads to expansion, incursion and oppression. All nations of the world should resist socialism and the misery that it  brings  to everyone. In that spirit, we ask the nations that are gathered here to join us in calling for the restoration  of democracy in Venezuela. Today we are announcing additional sanctions against the repressive regime, targeting Maduro’s inner circle and close advisers.
We are grateful for all the work the United Nations does around the world to help people build better lives for  themselves and their families. The United States  is by far the world’s largest giver of foreign aid, but few give anything to us. That is why we are taking a hard look at United States foreign assistance. That will be headed up by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. We will examine what is working, what is not working  and whether the countries that receive our dollars and our protection also have our interests at heart. Moving forward, we are only going to give foreign aid to those that respect us and, frankly, are our friends. We expect other countries to pay their fair share of the cost of their defence.
 
The United States is committed to making the United Nations more effective and accountable. I have said many times that the United Nations has unlimited potential. As part of our reform effort, I have told our negotiators that the United States will not pay more than 25 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget. That will encourage other countries to step up, get involved and share the very large burden. We are working to shift more of  our funding from assessed  to voluntary contributions, so that we can target American resources to the programmes with the best record of success. Only when each of us does its part and contributes its share can we realize the highest aspirations of the United Nations.
We must pursue peace without fear, hope without despair and security without apology. Looking around this Hall, where so much history has transpired, we think of the many before us who have come here to address the challenges of their nations and times. Our thoughts turn to the same question that ran through all their speeches and resolutions, through every word and every hope. It is a question of what kind of world we will leave for our children and what kind of nations they will inherit. The dreams that fill this Hall today are as diverse as the people that have stood at this rostrum, and as varied as the countries represented here in this body. It really is something. It really is great history.
There  is  India,  a  free  society  with  more  than 1 billion people, successfully lifting countless millions out of poverty and into the middle class. There is Saudi Arabia, where King Salman and the Crown Prince are pursuing bold new reforms. There is Israel, proudly celebrating its seventieth anniversary as a thriving democracy in the holy land. In Poland, a great people are standing up for their independence, security and sovereignty. Many countries are pursuing their own unique visions, building their own hopeful futures and chasing their own wonderful dreams of destiny, legacy and a home. The whole world is richer and humanity is better because of this beautiful constellation of nations, each very special, each very unique and each shining brightly in its part of the world. In each one, we see the awesome promise of a people bound together by a shared past and working towards a common future.
As for Americans, we know what kind of future we want for ourselves. We know what kind of nation America must always be. In America we believe in the majesty of freedom and the dignity of the individual. We believe in self-government and the rule of law. And we prize
the culture that sustains our liberty — a culture built on strong families, deep faith and fierce independence. We celebrate our heroes, we treasure our traditions and, above all, we love our country.
Inside everyone in this great Hall today, and everyone listening around the globe, there is the heart of a patriot that feels the same powerful love for your nation and the same intense loyalty to your homeland. The passion that burns in the hearts of patriots and the souls of nations has inspired reform and revolution, sacrifice and selflessness, scientific breakthroughs and magnificent works of art. Our task is not to erase it, but to embrace it — to build with it, to draw on its ancient wisdom and to find within it the will to make our nations greater, our regions safer and the world better.
To unleash that incredible potential in our people, we must defend the foundations that make it all possible. Sovereign and independent nations are the only vehicles where freedom has ever survived, democracy has ever endured and peace has ever prospered. And so we must protect our sovereignty and our cherished independence above all. When we do, we will find new avenues for cooperation unfolding before us. We will find a new passion for peacemaking rising within us. We will find new purpose, new resolve and new spirit flourishing all around us and making this a more beautiful world in which to live.
Together let us choose a future of patriotism, prosperity and pride. Let us choose peace and freedom over domination and defeat. Let us  come here to this place to stand up for our people and their nations — forever strong, forever sovereign, forever just and forever thankful for the grace, goodness and glory of God. God bless you and God bless the nations of the world.
I have the honour to address the General Assembly for the first time as President of the Republic of South Africa.
It is nearly a quarter of a century since the founding father of our democracy, President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, stood at this rostrum to declare that
“The millions across our globe who stand expectant at the gates of hope look to this Organization to bring them peace, to bring them
life, to bring them a life worth living.” (A/49/PV.14, p. 10)
As we mark the centenary of the birth of this great global leader, Nelson Mandela, we are bound to ask whether the United Nations has met the needs and expectations of the millions who stand at the gates of hope. We are bound to ask what contribution the United Nations has made to a more peaceful, more prosperous and more equal world. More important, we are called upon to ask — as we did yesterday during the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit (see A/73/PV.5), which was held here — what the United Nations and the assembled global leadership must do to secure lasting peace, reconciliation and stability across the globe.
Allow me to express the deep gratitude of the Government and the people of South Africa to the international community for convening the Peace Summit to honour the memory of Nelson Mandela and advance his legacy. We applaud the political declaration of the Summit (resolution 73/1), which recognizes the period from 2019 to 2028 as the Nelson Mandela Decade of Peace. It reflects a new and sincere commitment by the world’s leaders to comprehensively advance peace and security and resolve all conflicts and wars. To succeed in giving effect to that commitment, the United Nations must become what billions of people across the world want it to be, that is, a representative and truly democratic global parliament of the people of the world.
Throughout its seven decades, the United Nations has been a source of hope for the oppressed, exploited and poor around the world. During the dark days of colonialism and apartheid, we drew strength, inspiration and encouragement from the United Nations and its Charter in our quest for freedom and self-determination. With the support of the United Nations, 24 years ago, we as South Africans were able to  bring an  end  to the nightmare of apartheid. Nelson Mandela led us to freedom and gave us the great opportunity to transform our country. We have now embarked upon a journey of transformation and are making progress to deal with the ugly legacy of the past system of apartheid.
Madiba’s vision continues to guide us as we seek to improve the lives of our people in many respects, among others, by improving educational outcomes for our youth and transforming our economy, which was constituted to serve the interests of a few. We have started a comprehensive dialogue on the question of land reform in our country, which is guided by our
 
Constitution and the rule of law, as we seek ways to ensure that the land is shared among all who work it, as set out in our Freedom Charter. Even as our country is experiencing difficult economic challenges, we  have made progress. We are reforming our economy and creating an environment that is conducive to investment and have embarked upon an investment drive to attract $100 billion in the next five years. To the poor, vulnerable and marginalized, the United Nations today is a beacon of promise in a landscape of doubt. To billions across the world, the United Nations is the most powerful instrument we possess to achieve a more equal, humane and inclusive world.
There are men and women with dreams and aspirations that transcend the hardships of the present, who want to contribute to a new global civilization defined by care, justice and solidarity. They want an end to the greed, ignorance and conceit that is driving the destruction of our only home, the Earth. It is within our ability, as the leaders assembled here today, to forge a more representative, equal and fair United Nations that is empowered and equipped to lead the struggle to end poverty, unemployment and inequality in the world.
We are a youthful world: more than half the global population is under the age of 30. That is even more pronounced on our continent of Africa, where two thirds of our people were not yet born when Nelson Mandela was released from 27 years in prison. We are living in the age of youth. That places a responsibility on us as leaders not only to put the interests of young people at the centre of our efforts, but also to empower women and young people to be more prominent in directing the course of global affairs. It is young people who are fighting the wars that we started. It is women who are bearing the brunt and hardships of the wars that continue to destroy their lives and their families. As we speak, young lives are being lost and futures are being destroyed.
There is an urgency to the measures we must take to end conflict and war. Not only must we stop the death, destruction and human suffering that is visited daily on millions of people, but we  must act with purpose  to prevent the loss of another entire generation to its aftermath. We must accept our shared responsibility for, and our shared interests in, ending conflict and using the outcomes of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit to empower the United Nations to be a more effective instrument for mediation, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction.
Our resolve to end ongoing conflicts and our determination to root out terrorism must be matched by action and the appropriate deployment of resources. We must act with the same urgency to resolve some of the world’s most protracted and intractable disputes. The fact that the people of Palestine have endured occupation and suffering for nearly as long as the United Nations has existed makes their plight no less pressing and their suffering no more acceptable. We must likewise intensify our efforts to secure the right of the people of Western Sahara to self-determination and full national sovereignty.
One of the greatest challenges to the achievement of global prosperity and development is the continued exclusion of millions of women and young people from meaningful economic participation. It is therefore vital that we deploy all the means at our disposal to address youth unemployment and ensure universal access to educational opportunities appropriate to the changing world of work. We need a deliberate programme to ensure that the digital revolution, which carries such great potential for both disruption and empowerment, is effectively harnessed to promote social justice as well as human progress. The call to leave no one behind requires that we strengthen the institutions of global governance and make them more responsive to the needs of young people, particularly in the developing world.
Institutions such as the United Nations, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization need to be reshaped and enhanced so that they may more effectively meet the challenges of the contemporary world and better serve the interests of the poor and marginalized around the globe. Reform of the United Nations, and of the Security Council in particular, must be a priority if we are to give full effect to the values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
We must resist any and all efforts to undermine the multilateral approach to international trade, which is essential to the promotion of stability and predictability in the global economy. The history of the global economy informs us that no country can prosper at the expense of all others and that no people can hope to live in comfort and security as long as millions of others languish in poverty.
It is therefore essential that we take collective responsibility for the development of all nations and for the improvement of the lives of all people. That
 
responsibility is manifest in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development, among other agreements. Together they represent our common commitment to tackle poverty, underdevelopment and environmental degradation. They represent our common commitment to tackle diseases such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, diabetes and cancer. Our task as global leaders is to pursue the policies required to turn intent into implementation and mobilize the resources needed to turn implementation into impact.
We have made significant strides as Africans in addressing the challenges that have confronted our continent for many decades. We continue vigorously to implement our commitments set out in the African Union Agenda 2063, which is our collective plan as Africans to rid our continent of under-development,  poverty and conflict and to improve democratic governance, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. We have recently reached agreement on the establishment of an African Continental Free Trade Area, which will fundamentally transform African economies, giving rise to a new industrial age on the continent. We are working to silence the guns in Africa by 2020, to bring an end to conflicts that have cost the lives of millions of our people, displaced more and stunted economic growth and human development.
As the continent  with  the  youngest  population in the world, Africa has the potential to be the next great frontier for global growth and development. With effective investment in education, improved health care, good governance and greater economic integration, Africa has the potential to develop its productive capacity on a scale and at a rate that will lift tens of millions out of poverty. The youth of Africa are poised to transform their continent.
We the people of South Africa are committed to being part of that transformation. From the ashes of a system that was described by the General Assembly as a crime against humanity, we are building a new, democratic nation, united in its diversity. We are working to correct the injustices of our past and to build a society that is free, inclusive and sustainable. We are pursuing an economic path that draws on the resources and capabilities of all our people to eradicate poverty, unemployment and inequality. We are determined through our international relations to be a force for progress, good, peace and global equality, and
will continue to advance the interests of the African continent and the global South.
Allow me to conclude by once more drawing on the wisdom of Nelson Mandela, who said, “Sometimes it falls on a generation to be great.” This is not the generation that will stand expectant at the gates of hope; this is the generation that will change the world. It is the generation of young people who want to see change. This is their time and this is their age. Let their greatness blossom.
