By reminding us of the extent to which our destinies are linked – for better and for worse – the pandemic crisis has reminded us of the value of what has united us at this organization for over 75 years. The will to cooperate, the primacy of law over force, unconditional respect for the human person: the principles of our Charter have not lost any of their meaning. In fact, quite the opposite. Today’s crises and challenges have made them even more essential.
Our security, our health and our planet are now common goods, which together we must strive to preserve. This imperative is not abstract, it is not an ideal.
It is, in very concrete terms, the perspective of each of our choices.
And just as definitively, it is our punishment each time we are divided, each time we give up, each time we are powerless.
Because in a world of exchanges and interdependencies, a world with environmental emergencies, a world facing worrying attitudes of brutalization and the constant temptation of unilateralism, everything that we do together – and conversely, everything that we fail to do – involves us all. We must be aware of this and learn lessons from it. Together.
Although the foundations of the multilateral system have remained solid in the face of attacks in recent years, too many uncontrolled risks are building up. On behalf of France, my first message to you today is thus one of responsibility.
Our first shared responsibility is to maintain international peace and security.
And it is in danger when power games are heightened, when bloc mentalities reappear, when our regulatory frameworks collapse, when attempts at fait accompli policies increase.
That is why France is calling for a P5 Summit to set out a joint action programme.
To enable the Security Council to fully exercise its mandate.
And to start dialogue on the key issues of arms control and our collective security.
And that is why we are taking action and will continue to do so for peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific with our willing partners in the region and other Europeans alongside us. As an Indo-Pacific

nation, France has major interests in the region, as does Europe which has just set out a strategy in this area.
International peace and security is thus at risk each time a crisis breaks out or reaches a new level.
In Afghanistan, our duty is to provide the people with necessary humanitarian assistance and it is in our common interest to have clear political and security requirements with regard to the regime in Kabul: all links with terrorist organizations must be severed.
Twenty years after the events of September 11, we know what a rebuilt haven for terrorists would mean for us.
In the Levant and the Sahel, we must, for the same reason, continue to fight the terrorist threat, work to restore dialogue where it has broken down and give the people new prospects for the future by working towards stability and development.
Recently, the President of the French Republic, Emmanuel Macron, travelled to Baghdad to support the Iraqis’ determined efforts to come together and restore their sovereignty.
In the Sahel, we are adapting our military structure to retain our long-term action capabilities, to meet the expectations of our regional partners and to remain fully available to our international partners, those from the Coalition for the Sahel and those serving within MINUSMA. These efforts, which are producing real results, as can be seen by the recent killing of Abu Walid Al-Sahrawi, are not sustainable without political stability and respect for the democratic process. I particularly have in mind the timetable for elections in Mali, which must be strictly observed.
In Libya, there is now a credible path to restore unity and sovereignty in the country, provided that all parties fulfil their obligations, the foreign mercenaries withdraw, the ceasefire remains in place and elections are held as planned on 24 December.
France hopes that the Security Council, Libya’s neighbours and those which have influence over the country can collaborate to achieve our shared objective of completing the ongoing transition.
This is the aim of the international conference to support the political process and restore sovereignty in Libya, which we will host in Paris on 12 November.
Whether in the divided Middle East, along the contact line in Ukraine, in Nagorno-Karabakh or the South Caucasus, where the risk of conflict still cannot be ruled out, we must prevent tensions, uphold international law and collectively support the implementation of concrete political solutions.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear programme, we must be absolutely unequivocal. Iran cannot be allowed to think time is on its side, because the more dangerous its nuclear programme becomes, the greater the risk of a major crisis.
The positions taken by the United States yesterday cannot justify Iran’s continued violation of its JCPOA commitments.

France will take all necessary action to encourage dialogue. But the only possible path remains an agreement to establish that Iran is once again fulfilling its obligations. It is therefore essential that negotiations resume very quickly.
Violations of international humanitarian law also constitute a serious threat to international peace and security.
Particularly when humanitarian and medical personnel are targeted, even as they are providing emergency relief to populations. We must therefore equip ourselves with the means to better prevent these crimes and punish those who are guilty of committing them – in Syria, Yemen, Niger, the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and everywhere else.
Our responsibility – ladies and gentlemen – is also to build pragmatic and inclusive responses to the major global challenges that determine our shared future.
Starting with the COVID-19 challenge which is not yet behind us.
We need to be very clear: the health of some depends on the health of all. We must therefore pursue efforts that, through the ACT-A initiative, have already provided 255 million vaccine doses to 141 countries. We cannot allow the vaccine divide between the North and the South to widen any further.
Because the very meaning and credibility of multilateralism is at stake.
And because we know that if immunity is not global, there will be no immunity.
There is an urgent need to accelerate deliveries to ensure that each vaccine delivered is administered properly and to strengthen our production capacities on all continents.
France will continue to work in close cooperation with its partners, especially those in Africa.
Our commitment to provide 60 million doses will be achieved by the end of the year.
And we are proud to contribute to the financing of a project to transfer technology to South Africa, which should help Africa develop autonomous production capacities of mRNA vaccines.
International solidarity must also prevail when it comes to the other challenge of the pandemic crisis: the challenge of economic recovery.
A response to the emergency was provided with the debt deferment initiative that we took at the G20 and the establishment of a common framework that can now be used for its implementation. But we must go further by building a new pact with Africa that President Macron called for at the Summit on the Financing of African Economies in May 2021.
The G20 must commit to ensuring that the allocation of special drawing rights we decided upon in the IMF is swiftly supplemented by the reallocation of a portion of them to countries which need them most.

France is ready to transfer 20% of its SDR allocation to African economies to strengthen the resilience of societies and support the transition to a sustainable development model and meet our objectives for the climate and the environment.
The environmental emergency must be at the heart of each of our future choices.
Without succumbing to fatalism, because the IPCC experts have told us that if we swiftly lower our emissions, we can still limit warming to 2° or even 1.5°C. We must act urgently, but it is not too late!
However when we act it must be with no half measures, because - as the Secretary-General has firmly stated – we are now on a catastrophic pathway due to insufficient commitments that are leading us to global heating of 2.7°C for which we will all, without exception, pay a heavy price.
COP26 which will begin on 1 November will therefore be a moment of truth.
Each of us must shoulder our responsibility and provide a contribution that is commensurate with what is at stake. Namely human lives, international stability, and the future of the generations to come. We must rally around the objective of climate neutrality by 2050 before it is too late. Here again, France will show its solidarity by providing €6 billion a year and devoting more than a third of its financing to climate adaptation.
This fight for the climate must go hand in hand with the fight for biodiversity. In Marseille at the IUCN World Conservation Congress, held in early September, we made strong commitments, that we must now implement, particularly the symbolic project of the Great Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel.
We must also put climate finance to work for biodiversity, as the connections between the two topics are now well recognized.
During this time of global economy recovery, we must lastly ensure that our trade practices are fully compatible with our international solidarity efforts and our climate and environmental objectives.
By providing new levers in accordance with WTO law, such as the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism that we wish to establish in Europe to fight carbon leakage, in the same way that we wish to fight imported deforestation and violations of social rights across our value chains.
And by working, at the same time, on a tangible “greening” of the multilateral trade framework at the WTO ministerial meeting this year, starting with an ambitious agreement for regulating fisheries subsidies. The future of our oceans depend on it.
We also have a responsibility with regard to the very principles of multilateralism, of which we are the guardians.
The responsibility, first of all, to preserve our ability to act in the name of these principles and promote a truly multilateral order.
In this regard, Secretary-General, I would like to commend your action and your efforts to inject new impetus into the United Nations system. We will work by your side throughout your second term.

While supporting our collective institutions, including in their reform efforts, we must also continue to develop project multilateralism.
That of the Alliance for Multilateralism, which we launched two years ago with my German colleague and which was able to play its full role from the start of the pandemic.
And the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas, which is doing an outstanding job in Iraq, Syria, Mali and Afghanistan, in cooperation with UNESCO.
We have the responsibility to defend these principles where they are wavering.
In Afghanistan, where the achievements of the last 20 years cannot be erased. Particularly when it comes to the access to education and the rights of women and girls.
And everywhere where the universal scope of human rights is being challenged.
Because universal human rights are the first political and legal translation of the unity of humankind, without which this organization, our organization, would have no foundation. This is a commitment – I would like to recall – that the United Nations Member States freely consented to sign and respect.
These principles that unite us, we have the responsibility to keep them alive today, by upholding them up to and including the digital realm.
We have seen increasingly irresponsible behaviours flourish, without managing, unfortunately, to provide an international normative response to regulate them and to ensure that the rights and freedoms of all are respected.
The introduction of a minimum universal 15% tax for multinational companies will help achieve this. We therefore call on all States to support this vital measure.
France and its European partners even intend to adopt actual legislation on digital markets. We encourage our international partners to follow us down this path, and we invite them to work with us to establish a new digital public order in the wake of the Paris Call and the Christchurch Call to Action, which, since 2019, has enabled us to take decisive action to remove terrorist content from the Internet.
Collective responsibility in international peacekeeping and security; shared responsibility in tackling today’s major challenges; responsibility of each of us with regard to what unites us: for France this is what the historic turning point we are experiencing calls for. We must all rise to the challenge.
While our country is preparing to take over the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2022, you can – ladies and gentlemen – count on our determination to fully assume our share of this three-pronged responsibility.
Engaging us in all the security, solidarity and equality combats.
To rebuild, with you, our shared world.
Thank you.Mr President, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
An inspection of the fossil record over the last 178 million years – since mammals first appeared – reveals that the average mammalian species exists for about a million years before it evolves into something else or vanishes into extinction.
Of our allotted lifespan of a million, humanity has been around for about 200,000.
In other words, we are still collectively a youngster.
If you imagine that million years as the lifespan of an individual human being – about eighty years – then we are now sweet 16.
We have come to that fateful age when we know roughly how to drive and we know how to unlock the drinks cabinet and to engage in all sorts of activity that is not only potentially embarrassing but also terminal.
In the words of the Oxford philosopher Toby Ord “we are just old enough to get ourselves into serious trouble”.
We still cling with part of our minds to the infantile belief that the world was made for our gratification and pleasure and we combine this narcissism with an assumption of our own immortality.
We believe that someone else will clear up the mess we make, because that is what someone else has always done.
We trash our habitats again and again with the inductive reasoning that we have got away with it so far, and therefore we will get away with it again.
My friends the adolescence of humanity is coming to an end.
We are approaching that critical turning point – in less than two months – when we must show that we are capable of learning, and maturing, and finally taking responsibility for the destruction we are inflicting, not just upon our planet but ourselves.
It is time for humanity to grow up.
It is time for us to listen to the warnings of the scientists – and look at Covid, if you want an example of gloomy scientists being proved right –
and to understand who we are and what we are doing.
The world – this precious blue sphere with its eggshell crust and wisp of an atmosphere – is not some indestructible toy,
some bouncy plastic romper room against which we can hurl ourselves to our heart’s content.
Daily, weekly, we are doing such irreversible damage that long before a million years are up,
we will have made this beautiful planet effectively uninhabitable – not just for us but for many other species.
And that is why the Glasgow COP26 summit is the turning point for humanity.
We must limit the rise in temperatures – whose appalling effects were visible even this summer – to 1.5 degrees.
We must come together in a collective coming of age.
We must show we have the maturity and wisdom to act.
And we can.
Even in this feckless youth we have harnessed clean energy from wind and wave and sun.
We have released energy from within the atom itself
and from hydrogen, and we have found ways to store that energy in increasingly capacious batteries and even in molten salt.
We have the tools for a green industrial revolution
but time is desperately short.
Two days ago in New York we had a session in which we heard from the leaders of the nations most threatened by climate change:
the Marshall Islands, the Maldives, Bangladesh and many others.
And they spoke of the hurricanes and the flooding and the fires caused by the extreme meteorological conditions the world is already seeing.
And the tragedy is that because of our past inaction
there are further rises in temperature that are already baked in – baked is the word.
And if we keep on the current track then the temperatures will go up by 2.7 degrees or more by the end of the century.
And never mind what that will do to the ice floes:
we will see desertification, drought, crop failure, and mass movements of humanity on a scale not seen before,
not because of some unforeseen natural event or disaster
but because of us,
because of what we are doing now.
And our grandchildren will know that we are the culprits
and that we were warned
and they will know that it was this generation that came centre stage
to speak and act on behalf of posterity
and that we missed our cue
and they will ask what kind of people we were to be so selfish and so short sighted.
In just 40 days time we need the world to come to Glasgow
to make the commitments necessary.
And we are not talking about stopping the rise in temperatures -
it is alas too late for that -
but to restrain that growth, as I say, to 1.5 degrees.
And that means we need to pledge collectively to achieve carbon neutrality – net zero – by the middle of the century.
And that will be an amazing moment if we can do it
because it will mean that for the first time in centuries humanity is no longer
adding to the budget of carbon in the atmosphere,
no longer thickening that invisible quilt that is warming the planet,
and it is fantastic that we now have countries
representing 70 per cent of the world’s GDP committed to this objective.
But if we are to stave off these hikes in temperature we must go further
and faster – we need all countries to step up and commit to very substantial reductions by 2030 -
and I passionately believe that we can do it by making commitments in four areas – coal, cars, cash and trees.
I am not one of those environmentalists who takes a moral pleasure in excoriating humanity for its excess.
I don’t see the green movement as a pretext for a wholesale assault on capitalism.
Far from it.
The whole experience of the Covid pandemic
is that the way to fix the problem is through science and innovation,
the breakthroughs and the investment that are made possible by capitalism and by free markets,
and it is through our Promethean faith in new green technology that we are cutting emissions in the UK.
When I was a kid we produced almost 80 per cent of our electricity from coal;
that is now down to two per cent or less
and will be gone altogether by 2024.
We have put in great forests of beautiful wind turbines on the drowned prairies of Doggerland beneath the North Sea.
In fact we produce so much offshore wind that I am thinking of changing my name to Boreas Johnson in honour of the North Wind.
And I know that we are ambitious in asking the developing world to end the use of coal power by 2040
and for the developed world to do so by 2030,
but the experience of the UK shows that it can be done
and I thank President Xi for what he has done to end China’s international financing of coal and I hope China will now go further and phase out the domestic use of coal as well,
because the experience of the UK shows it can be done.
And when I was elected mayor of London only 13 years ago,
I was desperate to encourage more electric vehicles
and we put in charging points around the city.
And I am afraid that in those days they were not greatly patronised.
But the market in EVs in the UK is now growing at an extraordinary pace -
maybe two thirds every year -
and Nissan is sufficiently confident to invest £1 billion in a new EV factory and a gigafactory for the batteries.
And that is because we have set a hard deadline for the sale of new hydrocarbon ICEs of 2030
and again we call on the world to come together to drive this market so that by 2040
there are only zero emission vehicles on sale anywhere in the world.
And you can make these cuts in pollution while driving jobs and growth:
we have cut our greenhouse gas emissions by 44 per cent in the last 30 years
while expanding our GDP by 78 per cent.
And we will now go further by implementing one of the biggest nationally determined contributions
- the NDC is the pledge we ask every country to make in cutting carbon –
going down by 68 per cent by 2030, compared to where we were in 1990.
We are making a huge bet on hydrogen, we are expanding nuclear,
we are helping people to reduce their own household CO2.
We are working towards Jet Zero – the first large carbon free passenger plane.
And we also recognise that this is not just about using technical fixes for CO2:
we need to restore the natural balance,
we need to halt and reverse the loss of trees and biodiversity by 2030,
and that is why we in the UK are committed to beautifying the landscape,
strengthening our protection against flooding,
by planting millions more trees.
We must also work towards the crucial Kunming summit in China
and I call on all nations to follow the example of Imran Khan
who has pledged to plant 10 billion trees in Pakistan alone.
And we in the developed world must recognise our obligation to help.
We started this industrial revolution in Britain:
we were the first to send the great puffs of acrid smoke to the heavens
on a scale to derange the natural order.
And though we were setting in train a new era of technology that was itself to lead to a massive global reduction in poverty,
emancipating billions around the world,
we were also unwittingly beginning to quilt the great tea cosy of CO2
and so we understand when the developing world looks to us to help them
and we take our responsibilities.
And that’s why two years ago I committed that the UK would provide £11.6 billion to help the rest of the world to tackle climate change
and in spite of all the pressures on finances caused by Covid, we have kept that promise to the letter.
And I am so pleased and encouraged by some of the pledges we have heard here at UNGA,
including from Denmark, and now a very substantial commitment from the US that brings us within touching distance of the $100 billion pledge.
But we must go further, and we must be clear that government alone will not be able to do enough
We must work together so that the international financial institutions – the IMF, the World Bank -
are working with governments around the world
to leverage in the private sector,
because it is the trillions of dollars of private sector cash that will enable developing nations – and the whole world – to make the changes necessary.
It was the UK government that set the strike price for the private sector to come in and transform our country into the Saudi Arabia of wind,
and only yesterday the UK’s first sovereign green bond raised £10 billion on the markets,
from hard-headed investors who want to make money.
And these investments will not only help the countries of the world to tackle climate change:
they will produce millions and millions of high wage, high skill jobs,
and today’s workforce and the next generation will have the extra satisfaction of knowing that they are not only doing something useful
- such as providing clean energy -
but helping to save the planet at the same time.
And every day green start-ups are producing new ideas,
from feeding seaweed to cows to restrain their traditional signs of digestive approval,
to using AI and robotics to enhance food production.
And it is these technological breakthroughs that will cut the cost for consumers,
so that we have nothing to fear and everything to gain from this green industrial revolution.
And when Kermit the frog sang It’s Not Easy Bein’ Green
I want you to know he was wrong -
and he was also unnecessarily rude to Miss Piggy.
We have the technology:
we have the choice before us.
Sophocles is often quoted as saying that there are many terrifying things in the world, but none is more terrifying than man,
and it is certainly true that we are uniquely capable of our own destruction, and the destruction of everything around us.
But what Sophocles actually said was that man is deinos
and that means not just scary but awesome -
and he was right.
We are awesome in our power to change things
and awesome in our power to save ourselves,
and in the next 40 days we must choose what kind of awesome we are going to be.
I hope that COP 26 will be a 16th birthday for humanity in which we choose to grow up,
to recognise the scale of the challenge we face,
to do what posterity demands we must,
and I invite you in November to celebrate what I hope will be a coming of age and to blow out the candles of a world on fire.
See you in Glasgow.Israel is a lighthouse in a stormy sea.
A beacon of democracy,
diverse by design,
innovative by nature
and eager to contribute to the world –
despite being in the toughest neighborhood on earth.
We are an ancient nation.
Returned - to our ancient homeland,
Revived - our ancient language,
Restored - our ancient sovereignty.
Israel is a miracle of Jewish revival.
Am Yisrael Chai - the nation of Israel is alive,  and the 
State of Israel is its beating heart.
For way too long, Israel was defined by wars with our 
neighbors. 
But this is not what Israel is about.
 
This is not what the people of Israel are about.
Israelis don’t wake up in the morning thinking about the 
conflict.
Israelis want to lead a good life,
take care of our families,
and build a better world for our children.
Which means that from time to time, we might need to 
leave our jobs,  say goodbye to our families,
and rush to the battlefield to defend our country —
just like my friends and I have had to do ourselves.
They should not be judged for it.
Israelis remember the dark horrors of our past,
but remain determined to look ahead,
to build a brighter future.

Distinguished delegates,
There are two plagues that are challenging the very fabric 
of society at this moment,
One is the coronavirus,
Which has killed over 5 million people around the globe,
the other, has also shaken the world as we know it—
It’s the disease of political polarization.
Both coronavirus and polarization can erode public trust in 
our institutions,
Both - can paralyze nations
If left unchecked, their effects on society — can be 
devastating. 
In Israel, we faced both, and rather than accept them as a 
force of nature,
we stood up,
took action,
And we can already see the horizon.

In a polarized world,
Where algorithms fuel our anger,
people on the right and on the left operate in two separate 
realities,
each in their own social media bubble,
they hear only the voices that confirm what they already
believe in.
People end up hating each other.
Societies – get torn apart.
Countries broken from within – go nowhere.
In Israel, after four elections in two years, with a fifth 
looming, the people yearned for an antidote:
Calm. Stability. An honest attempt for political 
normalcy.
Inertia is always the easiest choice.
But there are moments in time where leaders have to take 
the wheel a moment before the cliff,
Face the heat,
And drive the country to safety.
About a hundred days ago my partners and I formed a 
new government in Israel.
The most diverse government in our history.
What started as a political accident, can now turn into a 
purpose.
And that purpose is unity.
Today we sit together, around one table.
We speak to each other with respect,
we act with decency,
and we carry a message:
Things can be different.
It’s okay to disagree,
it’s okay—in fact vital—that different people think 
differently,
it’s even okay to argue.
For healthy debate is a basic tenet of the Jewish tradition 
and one of the secrets to the success of the start-up 
nation.
What we have proven, is that even in the age of social 
media,
We can debate, without hate.

The second great disease we're all facing is the
coronavirus, sweeping the world.
To overcome –  we going to need to make new
discoveries,
gain new insights,
and achieve new breakthroughs.
It all begins with the pursuit of knowledge.
The State of Israel is on the front lines of the search for 
this vital knowledge.
We developed a model, which fuses the wisdom of 
science with the power of policymaking.
The Israeli model has three guiding principles:
One — the country must stay open
We all paid a huge price: an economic price, a physical 
price and an emotional price—for bringing life to a 
standstill in 2020.
To bring economies back to growth,  children back to 
school,  and parents back to work,
Lockdowns, restrictions, quarantines – cannot work in the 
long run.
Our model, rather than locking people down in passive 
sleep-mode,
recruits them to the effort.
For example we asked Israeli families to carry out hometesting of their children so we can keep schools open—
and indeed schools stayed open.
The Second Rule—vaccinate early.
Right from the start, Israelis were quick to get vaccinated.
 
We are in a race against a deadly virus and we must try to 
be ahead of it.
In July we were the first to learn that the vaccines were 
waning—which is what brought a surge in Delta cases.
It was then when my government decided to administer a 
third dose of vaccine—the booster—to the Israeli public.
It was a tough decision, given that at the time the FDA 
hadn't yet approved it.
We faced a choice to either drag Israel into yet another set 
of lockdowns,
further harm our economy and society;
or to double-down on vaccines.
We chose the latter.
We pioneered the booster shot.

Two months in I can report that it works:
With a third dose, you're 7 times more protected than with 
two doses, and 40 times more protected than without any 
vaccine.
As a result, Israel is on course to escape the fourth wave 
without a lockdown,
without further harm to our economy.
Israel's economy is growing, and unemployment is down.
I'm glad that our actions have inspired other countries to 
follow with the booster.
The third rule – Adapt and move quickly.
We formed a national task force that meets everyday, to 
bypass slow governmental bureaucracy,
make quick decisions and act on them right away.
Trial and error is key.
Every day is a new day, with new data and new 
decisions.
When something works, 
we keep it.
When it doesn't, we ditch it.
Running a country during a pandemic is not only about 
health.
It's about carefully balancing all aspects of life that are 
affected by corona, especially Jobs and education.
 
The only person that has a good vantage point of all of this 
– is the national leader of any given country. 
Above all, we're doing everything in our power to provide 
people with the tools needed to protect their lives. 
The ancient Jewish text, the Talmud, says that:
"Whoever saves one life, is as if he saved an entire world",
And that's what we aspire to do.

Distinguished delegates,
While Israel strives to do good, we cannot lose sight for 
one moment of what’s happening in our neighborhood.
Israel is, quite literally, surrounded by Hezbollah, Shia 
militias, Islamic Jihad, and Hamas.
On our borders.
These terror groups seek to dominate the Middle East and 
spread radical Islam across the world.
What do they all have in common?
They all want to destroy my country,
And they're all backed by Iran. 
They get their funding from Iran,  they get their training
from Iran, and they get their weapons from Iran.
Iran’s great goal is crystal clear to anybody who cares to 
open their eyes: 
Iran seeks to dominate the region — and seeks to do so 
under a nuclear umbrella.
For the past three decades Iran has spread its carnage 
and destruction around the Middle East, country after 
country:
Lebanon. Iraq. Syria. Yemen. & Gaza.
What do all these places have in common?
They are all falling apart.
Their citizens — hungry and suffering.
Their economies —collapsing.
Like the Midas touch, Iran's regime has the "Mullah-touch" 
—
Every place Iran touches —fails.
If you think Iranian terror is confined to the Israel– you're 
wrong.
 Just this year, Iran made operational a new deadly 
terror unit – swarms of killer UAVs armed with lethal 
weapons that can attack any place any time.
They plan to blanket the skies of the Middle East with this 
lethal force.
Iran has already used these deadly UAVs—called Shahed 
136-- to attack Saudi Arabia, US targets in Iraq and civilian 
ships at sea, killing A Brit and a Romanian.
Iran plans to arm its proxies in Yemen, Iraq, Syria and 
Lebanon with hundreds and then thousands of these 
deadly drones.
Experience tells us that what starts in the Middle East, 
doesn't stop there. 

Distinguished delegates,
In 1988, Iran set up a "death commission" that ordered the 
mass murder of 5,000 political activists.
They were hanged from cranes.
This "death commission" was made up of four people;
Ebrahim Raisi - Iran's new president, was one of them.
(Pause)
Raisi's also oversaw the murder of Iranian children.
His nickname is "the butcher of Tehran", because that's 
exactly what he did - butchered his own people.
One of the witnesses of this massacre, stated in her 
testimony, that when Raisi would finish a round of murder, 
he'd throw a party, pocketing the money of those he just 
executed… and then would sit down to eat cream cakes.
He celebrated the murder of his own people, by devouring 
cream cakes.
And now Raisi is Iran's new president.
This is who we're dealing with.

Over the past few years, Iran has made a major leap 
forward,
in its nuclear R&D,
in its production-capacity,
and in its enrichment.
Iran's nuclear weapon program is at a critical point.
[pause]
All red lines have been crossed.
Inspections — ignored.
All wishful-thinking — proven false.
Iran is violating the IAEAs safeguard agreements — and 
it's getting away with it.
They harass inspectors and sabotage their investigations 
—  and they’re getting away with it.
They enrich Uranium to the level of 60% which is one step 
short of weapons-grade material — and they’re getting 
away with it.
Evidence which clearly proves Iran's intentions for nuclear 
weapons in secret sites in Toorkooz-abad, Teheran & 
Marivan — is ignored.
Iran’s nuclear program has hit a watershed moment;
and so has our tolerance.
Words do not stop centrifuges from spinning.
 
[pause]
There are those in the world who seem to view Iran's 
pursuit of nuclear weapons as an inevitable reality,
or they've just become tired of hearing about it.
Israel doesn't have that privilege.
We will not tire.
We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.
I want to tell you something:
Iran is much weaker, much more vulnerable than it 
seems.
It's economy is sinking,
Its regime is rotten and divorced from the younger 
generation,
Its corrupt government fails to even bring water to large 
parts of the country.
The weaker they are, the more extreme they go.
If we put our heads to it,
if we're serious about stopping it,
if we use all our resourcefulness,
we can prevail.
And that's what we're going to do.

But not everything is dark in the Middle East.
Alongside worrying trends, there are also rays of light.
 First and foremost the growing ties Israel is forging with 
Arab and Muslim countries.   Ties that began 42 years 
ago with Israel’s historic peace agreement with Egypt,
continued 27 years ago with Israel's peace agreement with 
Jordan,
and even more recently with the "Abraham Accords" —
that normalized our relations with the United Arab 
Emirates, Bahrain and Morocco.
More is to come.

At a ripe young age of 73, more and more nations are 
understanding Israel's value and unique place in the 
world.
Some friends have stood with us since our founding.
The United States of America is a long time, trusted friend 
of Israel, as we saw, yet again—just a few days ago in 
congress.
Alongside our old friends, we are gaining new friends — in 
the Middle East and beyond.
Last week this manifested itself with the defeat of the 
racist, anti-Semitic, Durban conference.
This conference was originally meant to be against
racism,  but over the years turned into a conference of
racism — against Israel and the Jewish people.
And the world's had enough of this.
I thank the 38 countries (38!) who chose truth over lies, 
and skipped the conference.
And to those countries who chose to participate in this 
farce, I say:  Attacking Israel doesn’t make you morally 
superior, fighting the only democracy in the Middle East 
doesn’t make you "Woke", adopting cliché's about Israel 
without bothering to learn the basic facts, well.. that's just 
plain lazy.
Every member state in this building has a choice.
It’s not a political choice, but a moral one.
It’s a choice between darkness and light.
Darkness that persecutes political prisoners, murders the 
innocent, abuses women & minorities, and seeks to end 
the modern world as we know it.
Or light — that pursues freedom, prosperity and 
opportunity.

Over the past 73 years, the State of Israel — the people of 
Israel — have achieved so much in the face of so much.
And yet, I can say with full confidence:  Our best days 
are ahead of us.
Israel is a nation of great hope,
a nation that has brought the heritage of the Torah to life 
in modern-day Israel,
a nation of an unbreakable spirit.
.מעט מן האור דוחה הרבה מן החושך
A bit of light dispels much darkness.
The lighthouse among the stormy seas –
Stands tall,
Stands strong,
And her light shines brighter than ever.
Thank youGreetings to you all.
Mr President,
Mr Secretary-General,
Friends,
I greet you in te reo Māori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand.
As I deliver this address to the General Assembly from here in New Zealand, it strikes me that even when global events threaten to disconnect and divide us, a shared instinct to connect with one another, still prevails.
I have often described New Zealand as being remote, but connected. The COVID-19 pandemic has made both parts of this statement truer than ever. In some ways, we now feel that remoteness more keenly. The vast ocean surrounding our islands have taken on an even greater significance in a time when our border controls are our first line of defence against a highly contagious, global virus.
Despite this physical distancing, the pandemic has demonstrated more starkly than ever just how closely connected we all are. We live in a world where domestic decisions made half a world away, are as significant to us as those made by our nearest neighbours.
In many ways, COVID-19 is an illustration of global transboundary problems at a local level. Here is an invisible threat, which no one is safe from, and the very thing keeping us safe – is each other. We have placed our trust in the actions of neighbours and strangers – to wear masks, to distance, to get vaccinated and support others to do so, and we live collectively with the consequences.
It has been a privilege for me as a leader, to witness the practical application of New Zealanders’ values to these challenges.
Values like manaakitanga and whanaungatanga, which in the Māori language mean kindness, and a shared sense of humanity and connectedness. Values like kotahitanga, or a shared aspiration and unity towards a common goal.
These values have seen New Zealanders take care of one another, and work together to limit the transmission of COVID-19 in our communities.
Now these values are not unique to New Zealand. They are universal. They underpin the Charter of the United Nations. One need only read the preamble to see them reflected back at us.
No community, nation, or region acting alone can address COVID-19. It is a complex, global problem that requires a global solution. Equitable access to safe and effective vaccines for everyone is essential to our response and recovery.
New Zealand is working with others, especially Australia, to support full vaccine coverage for Pacific island countries. And the COVAX Facility is doing essential work distributing vaccines worldwide. But more must be done to support this effort. New Zealand is proud to have been amongst the first countries to donate doses to the COVAX Advance Market Commitment in addition to our financial support.
New Zealand continues to work in WTO and APEC to support a waiver of intellectual property protections for vaccines and other measures to increase availability.
Without equitable access for all, we risk further variants developing which could undermine or undo our progress.
At the same time that the direct impacts of COVID-19 have brought immeasurable pain to many across the world, it has also exacerbated and further complicated other existing global challenges. We know what these challenges are. We articulated them as areas of action in the UN Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Declaration.
The pandemic has been the ultimate disrupter. It has changed our realities, and given us cause to pause and reflect. In the disruption is an opportunity for us to reset. To adjust some of our fundamental settings to put us in a better position to respond to our shared challenges.
We have heard so much about ‘building back better’. We must do better. Like the drafters of the Charter, we owe future generations our commitment to hand down a better world forged through cooperation.
Fortunately for us, we already have a blueprint for such a world in the Sustainable Development Goals, and the 2030 Agenda. The 2030 Agenda recognises that as our shared challenges are interconnected, so too must be our responses. As we face a series of interlinked global crises that demand action, now is the time for us to recommit to the SDGs.
COVID-19 cannot be an excuse for not achieving the SDGs. In fact, it’s a further reason why we must.
There is perhaps no better example of a global crisis that demands action than climate change.
Climate change is one of the most pervasive crises of our time. From rising sea levels to shifting weather patterns, the impacts are global in scope, unprecedented in scale, and happening right now.
Climate change touches all of our lives, but countries in the Pacific are some of the most affected, despite having contributed least to the problem. Pacific leaders view climate change as the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the region.
Any global response that fails to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels is unacceptable. This is our goal, and our collective efforts must achieve it. The latest science from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is stark.
The climate crisis cannot be beaten through incrementalism. The science demands that we do so much more.
New Zealand has made the 1.5 degree limit the heart of our domestic climate change legislation. We have committed to a 2050 target and we are revising our Nationally Determined Contribution.
As we mitigate, we must also adapt. This year New Zealand conducted its first national climate change risk assessment to tell us where to focus our effort, and within two years we will have a national adaptation plan. But we have already begun our journey. New Zealand has a programme to plant for instance, one billion trees by 2028. This will store carbon, but it will also support forest resilience, prevent erosion, improve biodiversity, and support our rural and indigenous communities.
Lifting the ambition of our nationally determined contributions is vital, but there are also collective actions we need to take.
This includes bringing an end to fossil fuel and other environmentally harmful subsidies. It includes pooling our resources and knowledge through the Global Research Alliance so that we can grow more food without growing emissions. It includes negotiating an agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability. New Zealand is actively pursuing all of these outcomes.
We must collectively address the unjust and potentially destabilising consequences of climate change.
For Small Island Developing States, one of the gravest consequences is sea-level rise. The ocean is central to the culture and livelihoods of the peoples of the Pacific. Pacific countries have also planned their economies and long-term development in reliance on the maritime zones and resources guaranteed to them under the Law of the Sea Convention.
It is only right that as an international community, we work to ensure the maintenance of those zones and rights in the face of climate change-related sea-level rise.
As a contribution to this objective, I was pleased to join my fellow Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in issuing the ‘Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-related Sea-Level Rise’, in August this year.
Climate change is closely interlinked with another crisis of a planetary scale – that of global biodiversity loss.
As much as we are all interconnected as nations, so too are we connected with nature and the services it provides. We depend on it for the air we breathe, and the economies we have built. Biodiversity loss threatens our well-being, our prosperity, and our health. It will both accelerate climate change, and make its impacts worse.
This is a challenge that requires us to work across barriers and silos. For New Zealand’s part, we have adopted the Aotearoa New Zealand Biodiversity Strategy 2020 – Te Mana o te Taiao – which will guide our actions domestically for the protection, restoration and sustainable use of biodiversity.
We simply cannot achieve the 2030 Agenda unless we unite with collective ambition to reverse biodiversity loss by 2030. We have an opportunity to do this by adopting and implementing an ambitious and transformational post-2020 global biodiversity framework at the upcoming Conference of Parties. New Zealand is committed to this, and I urge you to join us.
As with biodiversity on land, ocean biodiversity is equally important. New Zealand looks forward to concluding the negotiations on an UN treaty for the conservation and sustainable use of high seas biodiversity.
But as we turn our mind to the challenges we face globally, we must turn to the most important thing of all – he tangata, he tangata, he tangata – it is people, people, people.
More than 120 million people have been pushed into extreme poverty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Inequality within and between countries has deepened.
These consequences were never inevitable, and there are steps we can take to reverse these trends and improve the lives of those impacted.
Too many people go hungry every day. New Zealand invests heavily in sustainable food production, and what we produce feeds many times our own population. But we have seen that at the global level, food systems are neither sustainable nor resilient. They suffer from, and contribute to, the overlapping impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss. Transformational change is needed to ensure that everyone has access to the nutrition they need.
This week’s Food Systems Summit is an important step, and it must be the beginning of an ongoing effort. We will do our part in supporting these efforts, including on initiatives that acknowledge the leadership of indigenous peoples in food systems and increase global ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture.
For our part – this is an area where we are working hard, with a unique agreement between our food sector, government and Māori to reduce agricultural emissions through a pricing mechanism. We are determined to show the world what is possible.
At the same time we must include making trade more open and inclusive. COVID-19 disrupted global supply chains, while at the same time it illustrated the importance of open trade to protecting the health of people and lifting them out of poverty and hunger. We must commit to ensuring the flow of essential goods and services, and reject any temptation to turn inwards and focus on protectionism.
We know that poverty and inequality drive conflict and instability, and we are also seeing this, in heightened civil unrest and conflict. Humanitarian crises have worsened. We are seeing this in Afghanistan and there are many more.
As an international community we must rise to the challenge of meeting the growing humanitarian need. But we also have to intensify our efforts to prevent conflict and build peace. New Zealand looks forward to playing a part in this effort as we join the Peacebuilding Commission in 2022.
As leaders, we have a responsibility to foster and sustain peace in our societies. We know what the necessary conditions are. Yes, this includes the absence of poverty, hunger, and material deprivation. But it is also something more. Peaceful societies are inclusive societies, where diversity is embraced and everyone has both the means and the opportunities to contribute to the fullness of their potential. Where women and girls are lifted up and encouraged to exercise their voice and their agency.
Whatever our political or constitutional systems, no nation will ever be truly peaceful in the absence of these basic conditions, founded on the fundamental and equal rights of every person.
And where peace fails, we must all do our part to strengthen and improve respect for the laws of armed conflict, and to enhance the protection of civilians. Preventing both the use of illegal weapons, and the illegal use of legal weapons, is essential, as is ensuring there is no impunity for any such use. This work is a shared responsibility, and one which we pursue alongside our tireless efforts to rid the world of nuclear weapons and the spectre of a conflict that no one can recover from.
All of these challenges we share might cause us to re-examine our response to being so interconnected. We have a choice. To approach our shared challenges from a place of fear, hoping to protect narrowly defined interests by turning inwards. Or we can reaffirm our trust in cooperation, understanding that our greatest fears can only be tackled by concerted collective action.
Our forebears were once at this fork in the road. They chose the path of trust. They founded the United Nations.
It is times like these when we have the most to gain by reminding ourselves of what the Charter’s preamble says. It speaks to a concern for future generations. It speaks about universal observance of human rights, respect for international law, and living together in peace as good neighbours. It speaks about uniting our strength, and combining our efforts to accomplish our aims.
These words of determination were in response to the devastation of war. They apply equally to the collective challenges we face today, and if we are to resolve these in an enduring way, we must look beyond government.
Inclusive multilateralism is one in which our common understandings are enriched by diverse perspectives. As governments, we owe it to ourselves to be open to the expertise and partnerships offered by stakeholders, whether they are from civil society, industry, or indigenous groups.
I have seen in the progress we have made through the Christchurch Call to Action, what can be achieved when governments, industry, and civil society work together in a multi-stakeholder capacity to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist content online, and I am utterly committed to further efforts on this important work.
New Zealand is committed to advancing Our Common Agenda, and sadly, as we have seen in recent times, an essential element of this is preparedness.
No one can argue for instance that the global community as a whole was adequately prepared for a global pandemic. It is clear that we will face further global health risks, and we have no excuses for remaining unprepared.
New Zealand strongly supports the ambitious and practical approach of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response. We will not just passively support the Independent Panel’s recommendations. We will actively engage on work streams to develop a pandemic treaty, convention or other international instrument; to improve global surveillance, validation and early response; and importantly, to strengthen the World Health Organisation.
If there is any lesson we can draw from the events of the past 18 months, it is the need for more, and better, cooperation. And with the need for better cooperation, comes the need for responsive and adaptive global institutions, including the United Nations.
I commend and thank the Secretary-General on his report and recommendations to advance Our Common Agenda. These provide us with a roadmap for a more inclusive and effective multilateralism. One that includes a voice for the needs of future generations and leaves no one behind.
As leaders, we have the power to shape our shared institutions and to make them fit for purpose. We must not shy away from this task.
I can think of no better way to reaffirm our kindness towards one another, our shared humanity, and our unity.
I hope you will join us.
Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā tātou katoa.
In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Mr President,
Mr Secretary General,
Your Excellencies:
It is a special pleasure to be part of this General Assembly, as our countries join in a common cause—to act on shared concerns; to be alert to serious global threats; and to move forward, faster, to the world that our people deserve, leaving no one behind.
I do not need to elaborate upon what we all know; today’s most critical challenges are global in scope—the deadly pandemic, climate change, violent conflicts exploited by global extremists, destabilising economic fault-lines, a continuing, global refugee crisis.
Our countries have a vast shared interest in responding effectively. That requires collective action, and the emphasis must be on action. Positive change cannot be willed into being. Our work must be coordinated and structured to deliver real-world impact.
Jordan has long supported a collective approach. Since our country was founded a hundred years ago, we have worked closely with regional and international partners to support peace, progress, and mutual respect worldwide. We know the hardships and difficulties, but we also see the tremendous opportunities to build a better world.
My friends,
Global partnership is critical to resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts in modern history—the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The bitter war on Gaza this past year was a reminder that the current situation is simply unsustainable. And the suffering we continue to see points us once more to the critical need to keep supporting UNRWA, as it continues to fulfil its UN mandate and provide vital humanitarian services to 5.7 million vulnerable Palestinian refugees.
But how many more homes will be lost? How many more children will die, before the world wakes up? Genuine security for either side—indeed, for the whole world—can only be achieved through the two-state solution, a solution that leads to the establishment of an independent, sovereign, and viable Palestinian state on the basis of the June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side-by-side with Israel in peace and security.
And Jerusalem is at the heart of this peace. Billions of people around the world hold this Holy City dear.
For our part, Jordan will continue working to preserve the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, under Hashemite Custodianship.
I believe Jerusalem’s holiness to Muslims, Christians, and Jews can and must bring us together. With international help, the Holy City can be, not a cause of division, but a symbol of unity for all to see.
My friends,
Elsewhere in the region, Lebanon is facing a dire humanitarian and economic situation. Desperate living-conditions are looming for millions—family tables without food, homes losing electricity and water, workplaces unable to operate. In this time of great need, we owe the Lebanese people our full support, to enable them to rise from this crisis. And that demands a well-planned, well-executed international response, engaging all of us.
And the world must not forget the millions of refugees in host countries like Lebanon. Jordanians well understand what a serious impact this has. For generations, our country has sacrificed to help millions of refugees fleeing injustice and danger. The wellbeing of these millions and the communities that host them remains an international responsibility. It is vital to keep up support for UNHCR, the World Food Programme, and others that care for and offer hope to refugees and their host communities.
My friends,
Leaving people in need, innocents in jeopardy, and conflicts unresolved plays into the hands of global extremists, who exploit the despair, frustration, and anger these crises leave in their wake.
Although we may have won some battles, the fight against terrorism and
extremism is not yet over. Our action—collective, global action—remains essential.
To address the totality of the problem and the need, Jordan continues to work closely with our partners. Through the Aqaba Process, a holistic approach, we have helped bring together concerned leaders, to coordinate, exchange best practices, develop new strategies, and more.
My friends,
If humanity faced no other threats at all, we would still need to unite to face the most existential of our time—the global climate crisis. As one of the water-poorest countries in the world, Jordan is painfully aware of the threat. Our National Green Growth Action Plan is designed to ensure energy efficiency and strengthen our resilience in water and agriculture.
But no country can combat climate change on its own. And that is a powerful reminder of the need to develop new ways to respond as one world, one humanity, to all the crises and challenges we face.
It is for this reason that Jordan has been calling for regional networks of resiliency to pool our resources and respond quickly and smoothly to needs as they arise. And we stand ready to utilise our country's strategic location—at the crossroads of Asia, Africa, and Europe—to facilitate the broadest international response.
But every country has strengths and capabilities to offer; every region has capacities to speed forward the larger global response; and every international body has powers to contribute, to guide, reinforce, and coordinate global action.
In this General Assembly, together, we can re-think, re-calibrate and re-direct our world away from danger.
We know the threats; we know the opportunities. Now, together, let's take the actions we need.
Thank you.President of the 76th Session of the UN General Assembly, Mr Abdulla Shahid,
Secretary General, Mr António Guterres,
Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Colleagues,
Friends,
We join today’s General Debate from around the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic has forever changed the nature of multilateral engagement, of diplomacy, of business, of basic human interaction.
And yet even as we are separated by the expanses of geography, the noble ideals of fellowship, solidarity and cooperation stand firm.
They are the bedrock on which the United Nations was formed 76 years ago, and they have been our guide as we confront the worst global health emergency in over a century.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused great devastation around the world.
Millions of lives have been lost and livelihoods have been destroyed.
It has shaken our sense of well-being and security.
Yet, the strong bonds of solidarity between nations have enabled us to overcome great challenges.
It was through multilateral solidarity, support and cooperation between Member States that countries in need were able to access much needed medical equipment and supplies.
In dealing with the Covid 19 pandemic it is generally agreed that vaccines are the greatest defence that humanity has against the ravages of this pandemic. It is therefore a great concern that the global community has not sustained the principles of solidarity and cooperation in securing equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines.
It is an indictment on humanity that more than 82 per cent of the world’s vaccine doses have been acquired by wealthy countries, while less than one per cent has gone to low-income countries.
Unless we address this as a matter of urgency, the pandemic will last much longer and new mutations of the virus will emerge.
South Africa reaffirms its call for fair and equitable distribution of vaccines.
We urge all member states to support the proposal for a temporary waiver of certain provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights to allow more countries, particularly low- and middle-income countries, to produce COVID-19 vaccines.
In this interconnected world, no country is safe until every country is safe.
We need to prepare now for future pandemics and work with greater determination towards the goal of universal health coverage.
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must increase investment towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by providing low-income countries with the means of implementation.
In this respect, the G20 Debt Standstill Initiative is a welcome response to the fiscal and liquidity challenges faced by least developed economies.
The agreement on the allocation of $650 billion in Special Drawing Rights is significant, but it is insufficient to meet the extent of the need.
South Africa therefore reiterates its call for 25% of the total allocation, amounting to around $162 billion, to be made available to the African continent.
Mr President,
Climate change is an existential crisis for the entire world, yet poor countries are particularly vulnerable.
Although we bear the least responsibility for causing climate change, African countries are among those that carry the greatest cost.
For the forthcoming COP 26 in Glasgow to respond adequately to the crisis we face, we need to see greater ambition and progress on mitigation, adaptation and the means of implementation.
COP26 must therefore launch a formal programme of work on the implementation of the Global Goal on Adaptation.
The pandemic has been a stark reminder of our mutual dependency, and that instability in one region of the world inevitably impacts its neighbours.
That is why we seek to enhance the relationship between the UN and the African Union in maintaining peace, financing peacebuilding efforts, and advancing post-conflict reconstruction and development.
South Africa continues with its efforts to contribute to international peace and security through our membership of the Peacebuilding Commission and our continued engagement in UN peacekeeping.
The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination has been raised in this General Assembly for almost as long as this body has been in existence.
We raise it again today, not because we are bound by practice to do so, but because we resolutely believe that there shall be no peace and no justice until the Palestinian people are free from occupation and are able to exercise the rights for which this United Nations stands.
We have a responsibility, as the nations of the world, to spare no effort in finding a just, lasting and peaceful solution based on internationally agreed parameters enshrined in the relevant UN resolutions.
We reiterate our position that the people of Western Sahara have the right to self-determination in line with the relevant African Union decisions and UN Security Council resolutions.
South Africa further affirms its solidarity with the Cuban people and calls for the lifting of the economic embargo that has caused untold damage to the country’s economy and people.
Mr President,
This year marks 12 years since the start of the Inter-Governmental Negotiations process and 16 years since the World Summit of 2005, where world leaders unanimously agreed on early reform of the Security Council.
We have not honoured this undertaking.
South Africa reiterates its call for urgent reform and a move to text-based negotiations through which an agreement can ultimately be reached.
We must address the under-representation of the African continent in the UN system, and ensure that the voice of the African continent and of the Global South in general is strengthened in the multilateral system.
Concurrent with achieving equitable geographical representation in the UN we must also address the question of gender parity.
Yesterday, we marked the 20th anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the World Conference against Racism in South Africa.
This remains the international community’s blueprint for action to fight racism and other forms of intolerance.
We are bound by a common responsibility to fight both the legacy of past racism and the manifestation in the present.
Racism, like sexism, xenophobia and homophobia, demeans us all.
It undermines our humanity and stifles our efforts to build a world rooted in tolerance, respect and human rights.
Let us use this anniversary to renew our commitment to combatting racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance wherever they are found.
Mr President,
The challenges we face are immense.
We have to drive the global recovery.
We have to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We have to advance gender equality and the empowerment of women.
We have to address climate change, maintain peace and security, and protect society’s most vulnerable.
Above all, we must close the wounds of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment that are preventing societies from realising their full potential.
This can only be done within the framework of a revitalised and reformed multilateral system, with a strong, capable United Nations at its centre.
At this defining moment, this General Assembly of the nations of the world is once again being called upon to inspire, to guide and to lead.
The UN stands as a beacon of hope for all who dream of a better world.
Let us, together, with the United Nations as our instrument, write a new history for humankind – one of equality, freedom, fundamental rights and shared prosperity for all.
Leaving no-one behind
I thank you.By reminding us of the extent to which our destinies are linked – for better and for worse – the pandemic crisis has reminded us of the value of what has united us at this organization for over 75 years. The will to cooperate, the primacy of law over force, unconditional respect for the human person: the principles of our Charter have not lost any of their meaning. In fact, quite the opposite. Today’s crises and challenges have made them even more essential.
Our security, our health and our planet are now common goods, which together we must strive to preserve. This imperative is not abstract, it is not an ideal.
It is, in very concrete terms, the perspective of each of our choices.
And just as definitively, it is our punishment each time we are divided, each time we give up, each time we are powerless.
Because in a world of exchanges and interdependencies, a world with environmental emergencies, a world facing worrying attitudes of brutalization and the constant temptation of unilateralism, everything that we do together – and conversely, everything that we fail to do – involves us all. We must be aware of this and learn lessons from it. Together.
Although the foundations of the multilateral system have remained solid in the face of attacks in recent years, too many uncontrolled risks are building up. On behalf of France, my first message to you today is thus one of responsibility.
Our first shared responsibility is to maintain international peace and security.
And it is in danger when power games are heightened, when bloc mentalities reappear, when our regulatory frameworks collapse, when attempts at fait accompli policies increase.
That is why France is calling for a P5 Summit to set out a joint action programme.
To enable the Security Council to fully exercise its mandate.
And to start dialogue on the key issues of arms control and our collective security.
And that is why we are taking action and will continue to do so for peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific with our willing partners in the region and other Europeans alongside us. As an Indo-Pacific

nation, France has major interests in the region, as does Europe which has just set out a strategy in this area.
International peace and security is thus at risk each time a crisis breaks out or reaches a new level.
In Afghanistan, our duty is to provide the people with necessary humanitarian assistance and it is in our common interest to have clear political and security requirements with regard to the regime in Kabul: all links with terrorist organizations must be severed.
Twenty years after the events of September 11, we know what a rebuilt haven for terrorists would mean for us.
In the Levant and the Sahel, we must, for the same reason, continue to fight the terrorist threat, work to restore dialogue where it has broken down and give the people new prospects for the future by working towards stability and development.
Recently, the President of the French Republic, Emmanuel Macron, travelled to Baghdad to support the Iraqis’ determined efforts to come together and restore their sovereignty.
In the Sahel, we are adapting our military structure to retain our long-term action capabilities, to meet the expectations of our regional partners and to remain fully available to our international partners, those from the Coalition for the Sahel and those serving within MINUSMA. These efforts, which are producing real results, as can be seen by the recent killing of Abu Walid Al-Sahrawi, are not sustainable without political stability and respect for the democratic process. I particularly have in mind the timetable for elections in Mali, which must be strictly observed.
In Libya, there is now a credible path to restore unity and sovereignty in the country, provided that all parties fulfil their obligations, the foreign mercenaries withdraw, the ceasefire remains in place and elections are held as planned on 24 December.
France hopes that the Security Council, Libya’s neighbours and those which have influence over the country can collaborate to achieve our shared objective of completing the ongoing transition.
This is the aim of the international conference to support the political process and restore sovereignty in Libya, which we will host in Paris on 12 November.
Whether in the divided Middle East, along the contact line in Ukraine, in Nagorno-Karabakh or the South Caucasus, where the risk of conflict still cannot be ruled out, we must prevent tensions, uphold international law and collectively support the implementation of concrete political solutions.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear programme, we must be absolutely unequivocal. Iran cannot be allowed to think time is on its side, because the more dangerous its nuclear programme becomes, the greater the risk of a major crisis.
The positions taken by the United States yesterday cannot justify Iran’s continued violation of its JCPOA commitments.

France will take all necessary action to encourage dialogue. But the only possible path remains an agreement to establish that Iran is once again fulfilling its obligations. It is therefore essential that negotiations resume very quickly.
Violations of international humanitarian law also constitute a serious threat to international peace and security.
Particularly when humanitarian and medical personnel are targeted, even as they are providing emergency relief to populations. We must therefore equip ourselves with the means to better prevent these crimes and punish those who are guilty of committing them – in Syria, Yemen, Niger, the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and everywhere else.
Our responsibility – ladies and gentlemen – is also to build pragmatic and inclusive responses to the major global challenges that determine our shared future.
Starting with the COVID-19 challenge which is not yet behind us.
We need to be very clear: the health of some depends on the health of all. We must therefore pursue efforts that, through the ACT-A initiative, have already provided 255 million vaccine doses to 141 countries. We cannot allow the vaccine divide between the North and the South to widen any further.
Because the very meaning and credibility of multilateralism is at stake.
And because we know that if immunity is not global, there will be no immunity.
There is an urgent need to accelerate deliveries to ensure that each vaccine delivered is administered properly and to strengthen our production capacities on all continents.
France will continue to work in close cooperation with its partners, especially those in Africa.
Our commitment to provide 60 million doses will be achieved by the end of the year.
And we are proud to contribute to the financing of a project to transfer technology to South Africa, which should help Africa develop autonomous production capacities of mRNA vaccines.
International solidarity must also prevail when it comes to the other challenge of the pandemic crisis: the challenge of economic recovery.
A response to the emergency was provided with the debt deferment initiative that we took at the G20 and the establishment of a common framework that can now be used for its implementation. But we must go further by building a new pact with Africa that President Macron called for at the Summit on the Financing of African Economies in May 2021.
The G20 must commit to ensuring that the allocation of special drawing rights we decided upon in the IMF is swiftly supplemented by the reallocation of a portion of them to countries which need them most.

France is ready to transfer 20% of its SDR allocation to African economies to strengthen the resilience of societies and support the transition to a sustainable development model and meet our objectives for the climate and the environment.
The environmental emergency must be at the heart of each of our future choices.
Without succumbing to fatalism, because the IPCC experts have told us that if we swiftly lower our emissions, we can still limit warming to 2° or even 1.5°C. We must act urgently, but it is not too late!
However when we act it must be with no half measures, because - as the Secretary-General has firmly stated – we are now on a catastrophic pathway due to insufficient commitments that are leading us to global heating of 2.7°C for which we will all, without exception, pay a heavy price.
COP26 which will begin on 1 November will therefore be a moment of truth.
Each of us must shoulder our responsibility and provide a contribution that is commensurate with what is at stake. Namely human lives, international stability, and the future of the generations to come. We must rally around the objective of climate neutrality by 2050 before it is too late. Here again, France will show its solidarity by providing €6 billion a year and devoting more than a third of its financing to climate adaptation.
This fight for the climate must go hand in hand with the fight for biodiversity. In Marseille at the IUCN World Conservation Congress, held in early September, we made strong commitments, that we must now implement, particularly the symbolic project of the Great Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel.
We must also put climate finance to work for biodiversity, as the connections between the two topics are now well recognized.
During this time of global economy recovery, we must lastly ensure that our trade practices are fully compatible with our international solidarity efforts and our climate and environmental objectives.
By providing new levers in accordance with WTO law, such as the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism that we wish to establish in Europe to fight carbon leakage, in the same way that we wish to fight imported deforestation and violations of social rights across our value chains.
And by working, at the same time, on a tangible “greening” of the multilateral trade framework at the WTO ministerial meeting this year, starting with an ambitious agreement for regulating fisheries subsidies. The future of our oceans depend on it.
We also have a responsibility with regard to the very principles of multilateralism, of which we are the guardians.
The responsibility, first of all, to preserve our ability to act in the name of these principles and promote a truly multilateral order.
In this regard, Secretary-General, I would like to commend your action and your efforts to inject new impetus into the United Nations system. We will work by your side throughout your second term.

While supporting our collective institutions, including in their reform efforts, we must also continue to develop project multilateralism.
That of the Alliance for Multilateralism, which we launched two years ago with my German colleague and which was able to play its full role from the start of the pandemic.
And the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas, which is doing an outstanding job in Iraq, Syria, Mali and Afghanistan, in cooperation with UNESCO.
We have the responsibility to defend these principles where they are wavering.
In Afghanistan, where the achievements of the last 20 years cannot be erased. Particularly when it comes to the access to education and the rights of women and girls.
And everywhere where the universal scope of human rights is being challenged.
Because universal human rights are the first political and legal translation of the unity of humankind, without which this organization, our organization, would have no foundation. This is a commitment – I would like to recall – that the United Nations Member States freely consented to sign and respect.
These principles that unite us, we have the responsibility to keep them alive today, by upholding them up to and including the digital realm.
We have seen increasingly irresponsible behaviours flourish, without managing, unfortunately, to provide an international normative response to regulate them and to ensure that the rights and freedoms of all are respected.
The introduction of a minimum universal 15% tax for multinational companies will help achieve this. We therefore call on all States to support this vital measure.
France and its European partners even intend to adopt actual legislation on digital markets. We encourage our international partners to follow us down this path, and we invite them to work with us to establish a new digital public order in the wake of the Paris Call and the Christchurch Call to Action, which, since 2019, has enabled us to take decisive action to remove terrorist content from the Internet.
Collective responsibility in international peacekeeping and security; shared responsibility in tackling today’s major challenges; responsibility of each of us with regard to what unites us: for France this is what the historic turning point we are experiencing calls for. We must all rise to the challenge.
While our country is preparing to take over the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2022, you can – ladies and gentlemen – count on our determination to fully assume our share of this three-pronged responsibility.
Engaging us in all the security, solidarity and equality combats.
To rebuild, with you, our shared world.
Thank you.Mr President, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
An inspection of the fossil record over the last 178 million years – since mammals first appeared – reveals that the average mammalian species exists for about a million years before it evolves into something else or vanishes into extinction.
Of our allotted lifespan of a million, humanity has been around for about 200,000.
In other words, we are still collectively a youngster.
If you imagine that million years as the lifespan of an individual human being – about eighty years – then we are now sweet 16.
We have come to that fateful age when we know roughly how to drive and we know how to unlock the drinks cabinet and to engage in all sorts of activity that is not only potentially embarrassing but also terminal.
In the words of the Oxford philosopher Toby Ord “we are just old enough to get ourselves into serious trouble”.
We still cling with part of our minds to the infantile belief that the world was made for our gratification and pleasure and we combine this narcissism with an assumption of our own immortality.
We believe that someone else will clear up the mess we make, because that is what someone else has always done.
We trash our habitats again and again with the inductive reasoning that we have got away with it so far, and therefore we will get away with it again.
My friends the adolescence of humanity is coming to an end.
We are approaching that critical turning point – in less than two months – when we must show that we are capable of learning, and maturing, and finally taking responsibility for the destruction we are inflicting, not just upon our planet but ourselves.
It is time for humanity to grow up.
It is time for us to listen to the warnings of the scientists – and look at Covid, if you want an example of gloomy scientists being proved right –
and to understand who we are and what we are doing.
The world – this precious blue sphere with its eggshell crust and wisp of an atmosphere – is not some indestructible toy,
some bouncy plastic romper room against which we can hurl ourselves to our heart’s content.
Daily, weekly, we are doing such irreversible damage that long before a million years are up,
we will have made this beautiful planet effectively uninhabitable – not just for us but for many other species.
And that is why the Glasgow COP26 summit is the turning point for humanity.
We must limit the rise in temperatures – whose appalling effects were visible even this summer – to 1.5 degrees.
We must come together in a collective coming of age.
We must show we have the maturity and wisdom to act.
And we can.
Even in this feckless youth we have harnessed clean energy from wind and wave and sun.
We have released energy from within the atom itself
and from hydrogen, and we have found ways to store that energy in increasingly capacious batteries and even in molten salt.
We have the tools for a green industrial revolution
but time is desperately short.
Two days ago in New York we had a session in which we heard from the leaders of the nations most threatened by climate change:
the Marshall Islands, the Maldives, Bangladesh and many others.
And they spoke of the hurricanes and the flooding and the fires caused by the extreme meteorological conditions the world is already seeing.
And the tragedy is that because of our past inaction
there are further rises in temperature that are already baked in – baked is the word.
And if we keep on the current track then the temperatures will go up by 2.7 degrees or more by the end of the century.
And never mind what that will do to the ice floes:
we will see desertification, drought, crop failure, and mass movements of humanity on a scale not seen before,
not because of some unforeseen natural event or disaster
but because of us,
because of what we are doing now.
And our grandchildren will know that we are the culprits
and that we were warned
and they will know that it was this generation that came centre stage
to speak and act on behalf of posterity
and that we missed our cue
and they will ask what kind of people we were to be so selfish and so short sighted.
In just 40 days time we need the world to come to Glasgow
to make the commitments necessary.
And we are not talking about stopping the rise in temperatures -
it is alas too late for that -
but to restrain that growth, as I say, to 1.5 degrees.
And that means we need to pledge collectively to achieve carbon neutrality – net zero – by the middle of the century.
And that will be an amazing moment if we can do it
because it will mean that for the first time in centuries humanity is no longer
adding to the budget of carbon in the atmosphere,
no longer thickening that invisible quilt that is warming the planet,
and it is fantastic that we now have countries
representing 70 per cent of the world’s GDP committed to this objective.
But if we are to stave off these hikes in temperature we must go further
and faster – we need all countries to step up and commit to very substantial reductions by 2030 -
and I passionately believe that we can do it by making commitments in four areas – coal, cars, cash and trees.
I am not one of those environmentalists who takes a moral pleasure in excoriating humanity for its excess.
I don’t see the green movement as a pretext for a wholesale assault on capitalism.
Far from it.
The whole experience of the Covid pandemic
is that the way to fix the problem is through science and innovation,
the breakthroughs and the investment that are made possible by capitalism and by free markets,
and it is through our Promethean faith in new green technology that we are cutting emissions in the UK.
When I was a kid we produced almost 80 per cent of our electricity from coal;
that is now down to two per cent or less
and will be gone altogether by 2024.
We have put in great forests of beautiful wind turbines on the drowned prairies of Doggerland beneath the North Sea.
In fact we produce so much offshore wind that I am thinking of changing my name to Boreas Johnson in honour of the North Wind.
And I know that we are ambitious in asking the developing world to end the use of coal power by 2040
and for the developed world to do so by 2030,
but the experience of the UK shows that it can be done
and I thank President Xi for what he has done to end China’s international financing of coal and I hope China will now go further and phase out the domestic use of coal as well,
because the experience of the UK shows it can be done.
And when I was elected mayor of London only 13 years ago,
I was desperate to encourage more electric vehicles
and we put in charging points around the city.
And I am afraid that in those days they were not greatly patronised.
But the market in EVs in the UK is now growing at an extraordinary pace -
maybe two thirds every year -
and Nissan is sufficiently confident to invest £1 billion in a new EV factory and a gigafactory for the batteries.
And that is because we have set a hard deadline for the sale of new hydrocarbon ICEs of 2030
and again we call on the world to come together to drive this market so that by 2040
there are only zero emission vehicles on sale anywhere in the world.
And you can make these cuts in pollution while driving jobs and growth:
we have cut our greenhouse gas emissions by 44 per cent in the last 30 years
while expanding our GDP by 78 per cent.
And we will now go further by implementing one of the biggest nationally determined contributions
- the NDC is the pledge we ask every country to make in cutting carbon –
going down by 68 per cent by 2030, compared to where we were in 1990.
We are making a huge bet on hydrogen, we are expanding nuclear,
we are helping people to reduce their own household CO2.
We are working towards Jet Zero – the first large carbon free passenger plane.
And we also recognise that this is not just about using technical fixes for CO2:
we need to restore the natural balance,
we need to halt and reverse the loss of trees and biodiversity by 2030,
and that is why we in the UK are committed to beautifying the landscape,
strengthening our protection against flooding,
by planting millions more trees.
We must also work towards the crucial Kunming summit in China
and I call on all nations to follow the example of Imran Khan
who has pledged to plant 10 billion trees in Pakistan alone.
And we in the developed world must recognise our obligation to help.
We started this industrial revolution in Britain:
we were the first to send the great puffs of acrid smoke to the heavens
on a scale to derange the natural order.
And though we were setting in train a new era of technology that was itself to lead to a massive global reduction in poverty,
emancipating billions around the world,
we were also unwittingly beginning to quilt the great tea cosy of CO2
and so we understand when the developing world looks to us to help them
and we take our responsibilities.
And that’s why two years ago I committed that the UK would provide £11.6 billion to help the rest of the world to tackle climate change
and in spite of all the pressures on finances caused by Covid, we have kept that promise to the letter.
And I am so pleased and encouraged by some of the pledges we have heard here at UNGA,
including from Denmark, and now a very substantial commitment from the US that brings us within touching distance of the $100 billion pledge.
But we must go further, and we must be clear that government alone will not be able to do enough
We must work together so that the international financial institutions – the IMF, the World Bank -
are working with governments around the world
to leverage in the private sector,
because it is the trillions of dollars of private sector cash that will enable developing nations – and the whole world – to make the changes necessary.
It was the UK government that set the strike price for the private sector to come in and transform our country into the Saudi Arabia of wind,
and only yesterday the UK’s first sovereign green bond raised £10 billion on the markets,
from hard-headed investors who want to make money.
And these investments will not only help the countries of the world to tackle climate change:
they will produce millions and millions of high wage, high skill jobs,
and today’s workforce and the next generation will have the extra satisfaction of knowing that they are not only doing something useful
- such as providing clean energy -
but helping to save the planet at the same time.
And every day green start-ups are producing new ideas,
from feeding seaweed to cows to restrain their traditional signs of digestive approval,
to using AI and robotics to enhance food production.
And it is these technological breakthroughs that will cut the cost for consumers,
so that we have nothing to fear and everything to gain from this green industrial revolution.
And when Kermit the frog sang It’s Not Easy Bein’ Green
I want you to know he was wrong -
and he was also unnecessarily rude to Miss Piggy.
We have the technology:
we have the choice before us.
Sophocles is often quoted as saying that there are many terrifying things in the world, but none is more terrifying than man,
and it is certainly true that we are uniquely capable of our own destruction, and the destruction of everything around us.
But what Sophocles actually said was that man is deinos
and that means not just scary but awesome -
and he was right.
We are awesome in our power to change things
and awesome in our power to save ourselves,
and in the next 40 days we must choose what kind of awesome we are going to be.
I hope that COP 26 will be a 16th birthday for humanity in which we choose to grow up,
to recognise the scale of the challenge we face,
to do what posterity demands we must,
and I invite you in November to celebrate what I hope will be a coming of age and to blow out the candles of a world on fire.
See you in Glasgow.Israel is a lighthouse in a stormy sea.
A beacon of democracy,
diverse by design,
innovative by nature
and eager to contribute to the world –
despite being in the toughest neighborhood on earth.
We are an ancient nation.
Returned - to our ancient homeland,
Revived - our ancient language,
Restored - our ancient sovereignty.
Israel is a miracle of Jewish revival.
Am Yisrael Chai - the nation of Israel is alive,  and the 
State of Israel is its beating heart.
For way too long, Israel was defined by wars with our 
neighbors. 
But this is not what Israel is about.
 
This is not what the people of Israel are about.
Israelis don’t wake up in the morning thinking about the 
conflict.
Israelis want to lead a good life,
take care of our families,
and build a better world for our children.
Which means that from time to time, we might need to 
leave our jobs,  say goodbye to our families,
and rush to the battlefield to defend our country —
just like my friends and I have had to do ourselves.
They should not be judged for it.
Israelis remember the dark horrors of our past,
but remain determined to look ahead,
to build a brighter future.

Distinguished delegates,
There are two plagues that are challenging the very fabric 
of society at this moment,
One is the coronavirus,
Which has killed over 5 million people around the globe,
the other, has also shaken the world as we know it—
It’s the disease of political polarization.
Both coronavirus and polarization can erode public trust in 
our institutions,
Both - can paralyze nations
If left unchecked, their effects on society — can be 
devastating. 
In Israel, we faced both, and rather than accept them as a 
force of nature,
we stood up,
took action,
And we can already see the horizon.

In a polarized world,
Where algorithms fuel our anger,
people on the right and on the left operate in two separate 
realities,
each in their own social media bubble,
they hear only the voices that confirm what they already
believe in.
People end up hating each other.
Societies – get torn apart.
Countries broken from within – go nowhere.
In Israel, after four elections in two years, with a fifth 
looming, the people yearned for an antidote:
Calm. Stability. An honest attempt for political 
normalcy.
Inertia is always the easiest choice.
But there are moments in time where leaders have to take 
the wheel a moment before the cliff,
Face the heat,
And drive the country to safety.
About a hundred days ago my partners and I formed a 
new government in Israel.
The most diverse government in our history.
What started as a political accident, can now turn into a 
purpose.
And that purpose is unity.
Today we sit together, around one table.
We speak to each other with respect,
we act with decency,
and we carry a message:
Things can be different.
It’s okay to disagree,
it’s okay—in fact vital—that different people think 
differently,
it’s even okay to argue.
For healthy debate is a basic tenet of the Jewish tradition 
and one of the secrets to the success of the start-up 
nation.
What we have proven, is that even in the age of social 
media,
We can debate, without hate.

The second great disease we're all facing is the
coronavirus, sweeping the world.
To overcome –  we going to need to make new
discoveries,
gain new insights,
and achieve new breakthroughs.
It all begins with the pursuit of knowledge.
The State of Israel is on the front lines of the search for 
this vital knowledge.
We developed a model, which fuses the wisdom of 
science with the power of policymaking.
The Israeli model has three guiding principles:
One — the country must stay open
We all paid a huge price: an economic price, a physical 
price and an emotional price—for bringing life to a 
standstill in 2020.
To bring economies back to growth,  children back to 
school,  and parents back to work,
Lockdowns, restrictions, quarantines – cannot work in the 
long run.
Our model, rather than locking people down in passive 
sleep-mode,
recruits them to the effort.
For example we asked Israeli families to carry out hometesting of their children so we can keep schools open—
and indeed schools stayed open.
The Second Rule—vaccinate early.
Right from the start, Israelis were quick to get vaccinated.
 
We are in a race against a deadly virus and we must try to 
be ahead of it.
In July we were the first to learn that the vaccines were 
waning—which is what brought a surge in Delta cases.
It was then when my government decided to administer a 
third dose of vaccine—the booster—to the Israeli public.
It was a tough decision, given that at the time the FDA 
hadn't yet approved it.
We faced a choice to either drag Israel into yet another set 
of lockdowns,
further harm our economy and society;
or to double-down on vaccines.
We chose the latter.
We pioneered the booster shot.

Two months in I can report that it works:
With a third dose, you're 7 times more protected than with 
two doses, and 40 times more protected than without any 
vaccine.
As a result, Israel is on course to escape the fourth wave 
without a lockdown,
without further harm to our economy.
Israel's economy is growing, and unemployment is down.
I'm glad that our actions have inspired other countries to 
follow with the booster.
The third rule – Adapt and move quickly.
We formed a national task force that meets everyday, to 
bypass slow governmental bureaucracy,
make quick decisions and act on them right away.
Trial and error is key.
Every day is a new day, with new data and new 
decisions.
When something works, 
we keep it.
When it doesn't, we ditch it.
Running a country during a pandemic is not only about 
health.
It's about carefully balancing all aspects of life that are 
affected by corona, especially Jobs and education.
 
The only person that has a good vantage point of all of this 
– is the national leader of any given country. 
Above all, we're doing everything in our power to provide 
people with the tools needed to protect their lives. 
The ancient Jewish text, the Talmud, says that:
"Whoever saves one life, is as if he saved an entire world",
And that's what we aspire to do.

Distinguished delegates,
While Israel strives to do good, we cannot lose sight for 
one moment of what’s happening in our neighborhood.
Israel is, quite literally, surrounded by Hezbollah, Shia 
militias, Islamic Jihad, and Hamas.
On our borders.
These terror groups seek to dominate the Middle East and 
spread radical Islam across the world.
What do they all have in common?
They all want to destroy my country,
And they're all backed by Iran. 
They get their funding from Iran,  they get their training
from Iran, and they get their weapons from Iran.
Iran’s great goal is crystal clear to anybody who cares to 
open their eyes: 
Iran seeks to dominate the region — and seeks to do so 
under a nuclear umbrella.
For the past three decades Iran has spread its carnage 
and destruction around the Middle East, country after 
country:
Lebanon. Iraq. Syria. Yemen. & Gaza.
What do all these places have in common?
They are all falling apart.
Their citizens — hungry and suffering.
Their economies —collapsing.
Like the Midas touch, Iran's regime has the "Mullah-touch" 
—
Every place Iran touches —fails.
If you think Iranian terror is confined to the Israel– you're 
wrong.
 Just this year, Iran made operational a new deadly 
terror unit – swarms of killer UAVs armed with lethal 
weapons that can attack any place any time.
They plan to blanket the skies of the Middle East with this 
lethal force.
Iran has already used these deadly UAVs—called Shahed 
136-- to attack Saudi Arabia, US targets in Iraq and civilian 
ships at sea, killing A Brit and a Romanian.
Iran plans to arm its proxies in Yemen, Iraq, Syria and 
Lebanon with hundreds and then thousands of these 
deadly drones.
Experience tells us that what starts in the Middle East, 
doesn't stop there. 

Distinguished delegates,
In 1988, Iran set up a "death commission" that ordered the 
mass murder of 5,000 political activists.
They were hanged from cranes.
This "death commission" was made up of four people;
Ebrahim Raisi - Iran's new president, was one of them.
(Pause)
Raisi's also oversaw the murder of Iranian children.
His nickname is "the butcher of Tehran", because that's 
exactly what he did - butchered his own people.
One of the witnesses of this massacre, stated in her 
testimony, that when Raisi would finish a round of murder, 
he'd throw a party, pocketing the money of those he just 
executed… and then would sit down to eat cream cakes.
He celebrated the murder of his own people, by devouring 
cream cakes.
And now Raisi is Iran's new president.
This is who we're dealing with.

Over the past few years, Iran has made a major leap 
forward,
in its nuclear R&D,
in its production-capacity,
and in its enrichment.
Iran's nuclear weapon program is at a critical point.
[pause]
All red lines have been crossed.
Inspections — ignored.
All wishful-thinking — proven false.
Iran is violating the IAEAs safeguard agreements — and 
it's getting away with it.
They harass inspectors and sabotage their investigations 
—  and they’re getting away with it.
They enrich Uranium to the level of 60% which is one step 
short of weapons-grade material — and they’re getting 
away with it.
Evidence which clearly proves Iran's intentions for nuclear 
weapons in secret sites in Toorkooz-abad, Teheran & 
Marivan — is ignored.
Iran’s nuclear program has hit a watershed moment;
and so has our tolerance.
Words do not stop centrifuges from spinning.
 
[pause]
There are those in the world who seem to view Iran's 
pursuit of nuclear weapons as an inevitable reality,
or they've just become tired of hearing about it.
Israel doesn't have that privilege.
We will not tire.
We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.
I want to tell you something:
Iran is much weaker, much more vulnerable than it 
seems.
It's economy is sinking,
Its regime is rotten and divorced from the younger 
generation,
Its corrupt government fails to even bring water to large 
parts of the country.
The weaker they are, the more extreme they go.
If we put our heads to it,
if we're serious about stopping it,
if we use all our resourcefulness,
we can prevail.
And that's what we're going to do.

But not everything is dark in the Middle East.
Alongside worrying trends, there are also rays of light.
 First and foremost the growing ties Israel is forging with 
Arab and Muslim countries.   Ties that began 42 years 
ago with Israel’s historic peace agreement with Egypt,
continued 27 years ago with Israel's peace agreement with 
Jordan,
and even more recently with the "Abraham Accords" —
that normalized our relations with the United Arab 
Emirates, Bahrain and Morocco.
More is to come.

At a ripe young age of 73, more and more nations are 
understanding Israel's value and unique place in the 
world.
Some friends have stood with us since our founding.
The United States of America is a long time, trusted friend 
of Israel, as we saw, yet again—just a few days ago in 
congress.
Alongside our old friends, we are gaining new friends — in 
the Middle East and beyond.
Last week this manifested itself with the defeat of the 
racist, anti-Semitic, Durban conference.
This conference was originally meant to be against
racism,  but over the years turned into a conference of
racism — against Israel and the Jewish people.
And the world's had enough of this.
I thank the 38 countries (38!) who chose truth over lies, 
and skipped the conference.
And to those countries who chose to participate in this 
farce, I say:  Attacking Israel doesn’t make you morally 
superior, fighting the only democracy in the Middle East 
doesn’t make you "Woke", adopting cliché's about Israel 
without bothering to learn the basic facts, well.. that's just 
plain lazy.
Every member state in this building has a choice.
It’s not a political choice, but a moral one.
It’s a choice between darkness and light.
Darkness that persecutes political prisoners, murders the 
innocent, abuses women & minorities, and seeks to end 
the modern world as we know it.
Or light — that pursues freedom, prosperity and 
opportunity.

Over the past 73 years, the State of Israel — the people of 
Israel — have achieved so much in the face of so much.
And yet, I can say with full confidence:  Our best days 
are ahead of us.
Israel is a nation of great hope,
a nation that has brought the heritage of the Torah to life 
in modern-day Israel,
a nation of an unbreakable spirit.
.מעט מן האור דוחה הרבה מן החושך
A bit of light dispels much darkness.
The lighthouse among the stormy seas –
Stands tall,
Stands strong,
And her light shines brighter than ever.
Thank youGreetings to you all.
Mr President,
Mr Secretary-General,
Friends,
I greet you in te reo Māori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand.
As I deliver this address to the General Assembly from here in New Zealand, it strikes me that even when global events threaten to disconnect and divide us, a shared instinct to connect with one another, still prevails.
I have often described New Zealand as being remote, but connected. The COVID-19 pandemic has made both parts of this statement truer than ever. In some ways, we now feel that remoteness more keenly. The vast ocean surrounding our islands have taken on an even greater significance in a time when our border controls are our first line of defence against a highly contagious, global virus.
Despite this physical distancing, the pandemic has demonstrated more starkly than ever just how closely connected we all are. We live in a world where domestic decisions made half a world away, are as significant to us as those made by our nearest neighbours.
In many ways, COVID-19 is an illustration of global transboundary problems at a local level. Here is an invisible threat, which no one is safe from, and the very thing keeping us safe – is each other. We have placed our trust in the actions of neighbours and strangers – to wear masks, to distance, to get vaccinated and support others to do so, and we live collectively with the consequences.
It has been a privilege for me as a leader, to witness the practical application of New Zealanders’ values to these challenges.
Values like manaakitanga and whanaungatanga, which in the Māori language mean kindness, and a shared sense of humanity and connectedness. Values like kotahitanga, or a shared aspiration and unity towards a common goal.
These values have seen New Zealanders take care of one another, and work together to limit the transmission of COVID-19 in our communities.
Now these values are not unique to New Zealand. They are universal. They underpin the Charter of the United Nations. One need only read the preamble to see them reflected back at us.
No community, nation, or region acting alone can address COVID-19. It is a complex, global problem that requires a global solution. Equitable access to safe and effective vaccines for everyone is essential to our response and recovery.
New Zealand is working with others, especially Australia, to support full vaccine coverage for Pacific island countries. And the COVAX Facility is doing essential work distributing vaccines worldwide. But more must be done to support this effort. New Zealand is proud to have been amongst the first countries to donate doses to the COVAX Advance Market Commitment in addition to our financial support.
New Zealand continues to work in WTO and APEC to support a waiver of intellectual property protections for vaccines and other measures to increase availability.
Without equitable access for all, we risk further variants developing which could undermine or undo our progress.
At the same time that the direct impacts of COVID-19 have brought immeasurable pain to many across the world, it has also exacerbated and further complicated other existing global challenges. We know what these challenges are. We articulated them as areas of action in the UN Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Declaration.
The pandemic has been the ultimate disrupter. It has changed our realities, and given us cause to pause and reflect. In the disruption is an opportunity for us to reset. To adjust some of our fundamental settings to put us in a better position to respond to our shared challenges.
We have heard so much about ‘building back better’. We must do better. Like the drafters of the Charter, we owe future generations our commitment to hand down a better world forged through cooperation.
Fortunately for us, we already have a blueprint for such a world in the Sustainable Development Goals, and the 2030 Agenda. The 2030 Agenda recognises that as our shared challenges are interconnected, so too must be our responses. As we face a series of interlinked global crises that demand action, now is the time for us to recommit to the SDGs.
COVID-19 cannot be an excuse for not achieving the SDGs. In fact, it’s a further reason why we must.
There is perhaps no better example of a global crisis that demands action than climate change.
Climate change is one of the most pervasive crises of our time. From rising sea levels to shifting weather patterns, the impacts are global in scope, unprecedented in scale, and happening right now.
Climate change touches all of our lives, but countries in the Pacific are some of the most affected, despite having contributed least to the problem. Pacific leaders view climate change as the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the region.
Any global response that fails to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels is unacceptable. This is our goal, and our collective efforts must achieve it. The latest science from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is stark.
The climate crisis cannot be beaten through incrementalism. The science demands that we do so much more.
New Zealand has made the 1.5 degree limit the heart of our domestic climate change legislation. We have committed to a 2050 target and we are revising our Nationally Determined Contribution.
As we mitigate, we must also adapt. This year New Zealand conducted its first national climate change risk assessment to tell us where to focus our effort, and within two years we will have a national adaptation plan. But we have already begun our journey. New Zealand has a programme to plant for instance, one billion trees by 2028. This will store carbon, but it will also support forest resilience, prevent erosion, improve biodiversity, and support our rural and indigenous communities.
Lifting the ambition of our nationally determined contributions is vital, but there are also collective actions we need to take.
This includes bringing an end to fossil fuel and other environmentally harmful subsidies. It includes pooling our resources and knowledge through the Global Research Alliance so that we can grow more food without growing emissions. It includes negotiating an agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability. New Zealand is actively pursuing all of these outcomes.
We must collectively address the unjust and potentially destabilising consequences of climate change.
For Small Island Developing States, one of the gravest consequences is sea-level rise. The ocean is central to the culture and livelihoods of the peoples of the Pacific. Pacific countries have also planned their economies and long-term development in reliance on the maritime zones and resources guaranteed to them under the Law of the Sea Convention.
It is only right that as an international community, we work to ensure the maintenance of those zones and rights in the face of climate change-related sea-level rise.
As a contribution to this objective, I was pleased to join my fellow Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in issuing the ‘Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-related Sea-Level Rise’, in August this year.
Climate change is closely interlinked with another crisis of a planetary scale – that of global biodiversity loss.
As much as we are all interconnected as nations, so too are we connected with nature and the services it provides. We depend on it for the air we breathe, and the economies we have built. Biodiversity loss threatens our well-being, our prosperity, and our health. It will both accelerate climate change, and make its impacts worse.
This is a challenge that requires us to work across barriers and silos. For New Zealand’s part, we have adopted the Aotearoa New Zealand Biodiversity Strategy 2020 – Te Mana o te Taiao – which will guide our actions domestically for the protection, restoration and sustainable use of biodiversity.
We simply cannot achieve the 2030 Agenda unless we unite with collective ambition to reverse biodiversity loss by 2030. We have an opportunity to do this by adopting and implementing an ambitious and transformational post-2020 global biodiversity framework at the upcoming Conference of Parties. New Zealand is committed to this, and I urge you to join us.
As with biodiversity on land, ocean biodiversity is equally important. New Zealand looks forward to concluding the negotiations on an UN treaty for the conservation and sustainable use of high seas biodiversity.
But as we turn our mind to the challenges we face globally, we must turn to the most important thing of all – he tangata, he tangata, he tangata – it is people, people, people.
More than 120 million people have been pushed into extreme poverty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Inequality within and between countries has deepened.
These consequences were never inevitable, and there are steps we can take to reverse these trends and improve the lives of those impacted.
Too many people go hungry every day. New Zealand invests heavily in sustainable food production, and what we produce feeds many times our own population. But we have seen that at the global level, food systems are neither sustainable nor resilient. They suffer from, and contribute to, the overlapping impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss. Transformational change is needed to ensure that everyone has access to the nutrition they need.
This week’s Food Systems Summit is an important step, and it must be the beginning of an ongoing effort. We will do our part in supporting these efforts, including on initiatives that acknowledge the leadership of indigenous peoples in food systems and increase global ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture.
For our part – this is an area where we are working hard, with a unique agreement between our food sector, government and Māori to reduce agricultural emissions through a pricing mechanism. We are determined to show the world what is possible.
At the same time we must include making trade more open and inclusive. COVID-19 disrupted global supply chains, while at the same time it illustrated the importance of open trade to protecting the health of people and lifting them out of poverty and hunger. We must commit to ensuring the flow of essential goods and services, and reject any temptation to turn inwards and focus on protectionism.
We know that poverty and inequality drive conflict and instability, and we are also seeing this, in heightened civil unrest and conflict. Humanitarian crises have worsened. We are seeing this in Afghanistan and there are many more.
As an international community we must rise to the challenge of meeting the growing humanitarian need. But we also have to intensify our efforts to prevent conflict and build peace. New Zealand looks forward to playing a part in this effort as we join the Peacebuilding Commission in 2022.
As leaders, we have a responsibility to foster and sustain peace in our societies. We know what the necessary conditions are. Yes, this includes the absence of poverty, hunger, and material deprivation. But it is also something more. Peaceful societies are inclusive societies, where diversity is embraced and everyone has both the means and the opportunities to contribute to the fullness of their potential. Where women and girls are lifted up and encouraged to exercise their voice and their agency.
Whatever our political or constitutional systems, no nation will ever be truly peaceful in the absence of these basic conditions, founded on the fundamental and equal rights of every person.
And where peace fails, we must all do our part to strengthen and improve respect for the laws of armed conflict, and to enhance the protection of civilians. Preventing both the use of illegal weapons, and the illegal use of legal weapons, is essential, as is ensuring there is no impunity for any such use. This work is a shared responsibility, and one which we pursue alongside our tireless efforts to rid the world of nuclear weapons and the spectre of a conflict that no one can recover from.
All of these challenges we share might cause us to re-examine our response to being so interconnected. We have a choice. To approach our shared challenges from a place of fear, hoping to protect narrowly defined interests by turning inwards. Or we can reaffirm our trust in cooperation, understanding that our greatest fears can only be tackled by concerted collective action.
Our forebears were once at this fork in the road. They chose the path of trust. They founded the United Nations.
It is times like these when we have the most to gain by reminding ourselves of what the Charter’s preamble says. It speaks to a concern for future generations. It speaks about universal observance of human rights, respect for international law, and living together in peace as good neighbours. It speaks about uniting our strength, and combining our efforts to accomplish our aims.
These words of determination were in response to the devastation of war. They apply equally to the collective challenges we face today, and if we are to resolve these in an enduring way, we must look beyond government.
Inclusive multilateralism is one in which our common understandings are enriched by diverse perspectives. As governments, we owe it to ourselves to be open to the expertise and partnerships offered by stakeholders, whether they are from civil society, industry, or indigenous groups.
I have seen in the progress we have made through the Christchurch Call to Action, what can be achieved when governments, industry, and civil society work together in a multi-stakeholder capacity to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist content online, and I am utterly committed to further efforts on this important work.
New Zealand is committed to advancing Our Common Agenda, and sadly, as we have seen in recent times, an essential element of this is preparedness.
No one can argue for instance that the global community as a whole was adequately prepared for a global pandemic. It is clear that we will face further global health risks, and we have no excuses for remaining unprepared.
New Zealand strongly supports the ambitious and practical approach of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response. We will not just passively support the Independent Panel’s recommendations. We will actively engage on work streams to develop a pandemic treaty, convention or other international instrument; to improve global surveillance, validation and early response; and importantly, to strengthen the World Health Organisation.
If there is any lesson we can draw from the events of the past 18 months, it is the need for more, and better, cooperation. And with the need for better cooperation, comes the need for responsive and adaptive global institutions, including the United Nations.
I commend and thank the Secretary-General on his report and recommendations to advance Our Common Agenda. These provide us with a roadmap for a more inclusive and effective multilateralism. One that includes a voice for the needs of future generations and leaves no one behind.
As leaders, we have the power to shape our shared institutions and to make them fit for purpose. We must not shy away from this task.
I can think of no better way to reaffirm our kindness towards one another, our shared humanity, and our unity.
I hope you will join us.
Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā tātou katoa.
In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Mr President,
Mr Secretary General,
Your Excellencies:
It is a special pleasure to be part of this General Assembly, as our countries join in a common cause—to act on shared concerns; to be alert to serious global threats; and to move forward, faster, to the world that our people deserve, leaving no one behind.
I do not need to elaborate upon what we all know; today’s most critical challenges are global in scope—the deadly pandemic, climate change, violent conflicts exploited by global extremists, destabilising economic fault-lines, a continuing, global refugee crisis.
Our countries have a vast shared interest in responding effectively. That requires collective action, and the emphasis must be on action. Positive change cannot be willed into being. Our work must be coordinated and structured to deliver real-world impact.
Jordan has long supported a collective approach. Since our country was founded a hundred years ago, we have worked closely with regional and international partners to support peace, progress, and mutual respect worldwide. We know the hardships and difficulties, but we also see the tremendous opportunities to build a better world.
My friends,
Global partnership is critical to resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts in modern history—the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The bitter war on Gaza this past year was a reminder that the current situation is simply unsustainable. And the suffering we continue to see points us once more to the critical need to keep supporting UNRWA, as it continues to fulfil its UN mandate and provide vital humanitarian services to 5.7 million vulnerable Palestinian refugees.
But how many more homes will be lost? How many more children will die, before the world wakes up? Genuine security for either side—indeed, for the whole world—can only be achieved through the two-state solution, a solution that leads to the establishment of an independent, sovereign, and viable Palestinian state on the basis of the June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side-by-side with Israel in peace and security.
And Jerusalem is at the heart of this peace. Billions of people around the world hold this Holy City dear.
For our part, Jordan will continue working to preserve the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, under Hashemite Custodianship.
I believe Jerusalem’s holiness to Muslims, Christians, and Jews can and must bring us together. With international help, the Holy City can be, not a cause of division, but a symbol of unity for all to see.
My friends,
Elsewhere in the region, Lebanon is facing a dire humanitarian and economic situation. Desperate living-conditions are looming for millions—family tables without food, homes losing electricity and water, workplaces unable to operate. In this time of great need, we owe the Lebanese people our full support, to enable them to rise from this crisis. And that demands a well-planned, well-executed international response, engaging all of us.
And the world must not forget the millions of refugees in host countries like Lebanon. Jordanians well understand what a serious impact this has. For generations, our country has sacrificed to help millions of refugees fleeing injustice and danger. The wellbeing of these millions and the communities that host them remains an international responsibility. It is vital to keep up support for UNHCR, the World Food Programme, and others that care for and offer hope to refugees and their host communities.
My friends,
Leaving people in need, innocents in jeopardy, and conflicts unresolved plays into the hands of global extremists, who exploit the despair, frustration, and anger these crises leave in their wake.
Although we may have won some battles, the fight against terrorism and
extremism is not yet over. Our action—collective, global action—remains essential.
To address the totality of the problem and the need, Jordan continues to work closely with our partners. Through the Aqaba Process, a holistic approach, we have helped bring together concerned leaders, to coordinate, exchange best practices, develop new strategies, and more.
My friends,
If humanity faced no other threats at all, we would still need to unite to face the most existential of our time—the global climate crisis. As one of the water-poorest countries in the world, Jordan is painfully aware of the threat. Our National Green Growth Action Plan is designed to ensure energy efficiency and strengthen our resilience in water and agriculture.
But no country can combat climate change on its own. And that is a powerful reminder of the need to develop new ways to respond as one world, one humanity, to all the crises and challenges we face.
It is for this reason that Jordan has been calling for regional networks of resiliency to pool our resources and respond quickly and smoothly to needs as they arise. And we stand ready to utilise our country's strategic location—at the crossroads of Asia, Africa, and Europe—to facilitate the broadest international response.
But every country has strengths and capabilities to offer; every region has capacities to speed forward the larger global response; and every international body has powers to contribute, to guide, reinforce, and coordinate global action.
In this General Assembly, together, we can re-think, re-calibrate and re-direct our world away from danger.
We know the threats; we know the opportunities. Now, together, let's take the actions we need.
Thank you.President of the 76th Session of the UN General Assembly, Mr Abdulla Shahid,
Secretary General, Mr António Guterres,
Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Colleagues,
Friends,
We join today’s General Debate from around the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic has forever changed the nature of multilateral engagement, of diplomacy, of business, of basic human interaction.
And yet even as we are separated by the expanses of geography, the noble ideals of fellowship, solidarity and cooperation stand firm.
They are the bedrock on which the United Nations was formed 76 years ago, and they have been our guide as we confront the worst global health emergency in over a century.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused great devastation around the world.
Millions of lives have been lost and livelihoods have been destroyed.
It has shaken our sense of well-being and security.
Yet, the strong bonds of solidarity between nations have enabled us to overcome great challenges.
It was through multilateral solidarity, support and cooperation between Member States that countries in need were able to access much needed medical equipment and supplies.
In dealing with the Covid 19 pandemic it is generally agreed that vaccines are the greatest defence that humanity has against the ravages of this pandemic. It is therefore a great concern that the global community has not sustained the principles of solidarity and cooperation in securing equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines.
It is an indictment on humanity that more than 82 per cent of the world’s vaccine doses have been acquired by wealthy countries, while less than one per cent has gone to low-income countries.
Unless we address this as a matter of urgency, the pandemic will last much longer and new mutations of the virus will emerge.
South Africa reaffirms its call for fair and equitable distribution of vaccines.
We urge all member states to support the proposal for a temporary waiver of certain provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights to allow more countries, particularly low- and middle-income countries, to produce COVID-19 vaccines.
In this interconnected world, no country is safe until every country is safe.
We need to prepare now for future pandemics and work with greater determination towards the goal of universal health coverage.
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must increase investment towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by providing low-income countries with the means of implementation.
In this respect, the G20 Debt Standstill Initiative is a welcome response to the fiscal and liquidity challenges faced by least developed economies.
The agreement on the allocation of $650 billion in Special Drawing Rights is significant, but it is insufficient to meet the extent of the need.
South Africa therefore reiterates its call for 25% of the total allocation, amounting to around $162 billion, to be made available to the African continent.
Mr President,
Climate change is an existential crisis for the entire world, yet poor countries are particularly vulnerable.
Although we bear the least responsibility for causing climate change, African countries are among those that carry the greatest cost.
For the forthcoming COP 26 in Glasgow to respond adequately to the crisis we face, we need to see greater ambition and progress on mitigation, adaptation and the means of implementation.
COP26 must therefore launch a formal programme of work on the implementation of the Global Goal on Adaptation.
The pandemic has been a stark reminder of our mutual dependency, and that instability in one region of the world inevitably impacts its neighbours.
That is why we seek to enhance the relationship between the UN and the African Union in maintaining peace, financing peacebuilding efforts, and advancing post-conflict reconstruction and development.
South Africa continues with its efforts to contribute to international peace and security through our membership of the Peacebuilding Commission and our continued engagement in UN peacekeeping.
The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination has been raised in this General Assembly for almost as long as this body has been in existence.
We raise it again today, not because we are bound by practice to do so, but because we resolutely believe that there shall be no peace and no justice until the Palestinian people are free from occupation and are able to exercise the rights for which this United Nations stands.
We have a responsibility, as the nations of the world, to spare no effort in finding a just, lasting and peaceful solution based on internationally agreed parameters enshrined in the relevant UN resolutions.
We reiterate our position that the people of Western Sahara have the right to self-determination in line with the relevant African Union decisions and UN Security Council resolutions.
South Africa further affirms its solidarity with the Cuban people and calls for the lifting of the economic embargo that has caused untold damage to the country’s economy and people.
Mr President,
This year marks 12 years since the start of the Inter-Governmental Negotiations process and 16 years since the World Summit of 2005, where world leaders unanimously agreed on early reform of the Security Council.
We have not honoured this undertaking.
South Africa reiterates its call for urgent reform and a move to text-based negotiations through which an agreement can ultimately be reached.
We must address the under-representation of the African continent in the UN system, and ensure that the voice of the African continent and of the Global South in general is strengthened in the multilateral system.
Concurrent with achieving equitable geographical representation in the UN we must also address the question of gender parity.
Yesterday, we marked the 20th anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the World Conference against Racism in South Africa.
This remains the international community’s blueprint for action to fight racism and other forms of intolerance.
We are bound by a common responsibility to fight both the legacy of past racism and the manifestation in the present.
Racism, like sexism, xenophobia and homophobia, demeans us all.
It undermines our humanity and stifles our efforts to build a world rooted in tolerance, respect and human rights.
Let us use this anniversary to renew our commitment to combatting racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance wherever they are found.
Mr President,
The challenges we face are immense.
We have to drive the global recovery.
We have to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We have to advance gender equality and the empowerment of women.
We have to address climate change, maintain peace and security, and protect society’s most vulnerable.
Above all, we must close the wounds of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment that are preventing societies from realising their full potential.
This can only be done within the framework of a revitalised and reformed multilateral system, with a strong, capable United Nations at its centre.
At this defining moment, this General Assembly of the nations of the world is once again being called upon to inspire, to guide and to lead.
The UN stands as a beacon of hope for all who dream of a better world.
Let us, together, with the United Nations as our instrument, write a new history for humankind – one of equality, freedom, fundamental rights and shared prosperity for all.
Leaving no-one behind
I thank you.By reminding us of the extent to which our destinies are linked – for better and for worse – the pandemic crisis has reminded us of the value of what has united us at this organization for over 75 years. The will to cooperate, the primacy of law over force, unconditional respect for the human person: the principles of our Charter have not lost any of their meaning. In fact, quite the opposite. Today’s crises and challenges have made them even more essential.
Our security, our health and our planet are now common goods, which together we must strive to preserve. This imperative is not abstract, it is not an ideal.
It is, in very concrete terms, the perspective of each of our choices.
And just as definitively, it is our punishment each time we are divided, each time we give up, each time we are powerless.
Because in a world of exchanges and interdependencies, a world with environmental emergencies, a world facing worrying attitudes of brutalization and the constant temptation of unilateralism, everything that we do together – and conversely, everything that we fail to do – involves us all. We must be aware of this and learn lessons from it. Together.
Although the foundations of the multilateral system have remained solid in the face of attacks in recent years, too many uncontrolled risks are building up. On behalf of France, my first message to you today is thus one of responsibility.
Our first shared responsibility is to maintain international peace and security.
And it is in danger when power games are heightened, when bloc mentalities reappear, when our regulatory frameworks collapse, when attempts at fait accompli policies increase.
That is why France is calling for a P5 Summit to set out a joint action programme.
To enable the Security Council to fully exercise its mandate.
And to start dialogue on the key issues of arms control and our collective security.
And that is why we are taking action and will continue to do so for peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific with our willing partners in the region and other Europeans alongside us. As an Indo-Pacific

nation, France has major interests in the region, as does Europe which has just set out a strategy in this area.
International peace and security is thus at risk each time a crisis breaks out or reaches a new level.
In Afghanistan, our duty is to provide the people with necessary humanitarian assistance and it is in our common interest to have clear political and security requirements with regard to the regime in Kabul: all links with terrorist organizations must be severed.
Twenty years after the events of September 11, we know what a rebuilt haven for terrorists would mean for us.
In the Levant and the Sahel, we must, for the same reason, continue to fight the terrorist threat, work to restore dialogue where it has broken down and give the people new prospects for the future by working towards stability and development.
Recently, the President of the French Republic, Emmanuel Macron, travelled to Baghdad to support the Iraqis’ determined efforts to come together and restore their sovereignty.
In the Sahel, we are adapting our military structure to retain our long-term action capabilities, to meet the expectations of our regional partners and to remain fully available to our international partners, those from the Coalition for the Sahel and those serving within MINUSMA. These efforts, which are producing real results, as can be seen by the recent killing of Abu Walid Al-Sahrawi, are not sustainable without political stability and respect for the democratic process. I particularly have in mind the timetable for elections in Mali, which must be strictly observed.
In Libya, there is now a credible path to restore unity and sovereignty in the country, provided that all parties fulfil their obligations, the foreign mercenaries withdraw, the ceasefire remains in place and elections are held as planned on 24 December.
France hopes that the Security Council, Libya’s neighbours and those which have influence over the country can collaborate to achieve our shared objective of completing the ongoing transition.
This is the aim of the international conference to support the political process and restore sovereignty in Libya, which we will host in Paris on 12 November.
Whether in the divided Middle East, along the contact line in Ukraine, in Nagorno-Karabakh or the South Caucasus, where the risk of conflict still cannot be ruled out, we must prevent tensions, uphold international law and collectively support the implementation of concrete political solutions.
With regard to the Iranian nuclear programme, we must be absolutely unequivocal. Iran cannot be allowed to think time is on its side, because the more dangerous its nuclear programme becomes, the greater the risk of a major crisis.
The positions taken by the United States yesterday cannot justify Iran’s continued violation of its JCPOA commitments.

France will take all necessary action to encourage dialogue. But the only possible path remains an agreement to establish that Iran is once again fulfilling its obligations. It is therefore essential that negotiations resume very quickly.
Violations of international humanitarian law also constitute a serious threat to international peace and security.
Particularly when humanitarian and medical personnel are targeted, even as they are providing emergency relief to populations. We must therefore equip ourselves with the means to better prevent these crimes and punish those who are guilty of committing them – in Syria, Yemen, Niger, the Central African Republic, Ethiopia and everywhere else.
Our responsibility – ladies and gentlemen – is also to build pragmatic and inclusive responses to the major global challenges that determine our shared future.
Starting with the COVID-19 challenge which is not yet behind us.
We need to be very clear: the health of some depends on the health of all. We must therefore pursue efforts that, through the ACT-A initiative, have already provided 255 million vaccine doses to 141 countries. We cannot allow the vaccine divide between the North and the South to widen any further.
Because the very meaning and credibility of multilateralism is at stake.
And because we know that if immunity is not global, there will be no immunity.
There is an urgent need to accelerate deliveries to ensure that each vaccine delivered is administered properly and to strengthen our production capacities on all continents.
France will continue to work in close cooperation with its partners, especially those in Africa.
Our commitment to provide 60 million doses will be achieved by the end of the year.
And we are proud to contribute to the financing of a project to transfer technology to South Africa, which should help Africa develop autonomous production capacities of mRNA vaccines.
International solidarity must also prevail when it comes to the other challenge of the pandemic crisis: the challenge of economic recovery.
A response to the emergency was provided with the debt deferment initiative that we took at the G20 and the establishment of a common framework that can now be used for its implementation. But we must go further by building a new pact with Africa that President Macron called for at the Summit on the Financing of African Economies in May 2021.
The G20 must commit to ensuring that the allocation of special drawing rights we decided upon in the IMF is swiftly supplemented by the reallocation of a portion of them to countries which need them most.

France is ready to transfer 20% of its SDR allocation to African economies to strengthen the resilience of societies and support the transition to a sustainable development model and meet our objectives for the climate and the environment.
The environmental emergency must be at the heart of each of our future choices.
Without succumbing to fatalism, because the IPCC experts have told us that if we swiftly lower our emissions, we can still limit warming to 2° or even 1.5°C. We must act urgently, but it is not too late!
However when we act it must be with no half measures, because - as the Secretary-General has firmly stated – we are now on a catastrophic pathway due to insufficient commitments that are leading us to global heating of 2.7°C for which we will all, without exception, pay a heavy price.
COP26 which will begin on 1 November will therefore be a moment of truth.
Each of us must shoulder our responsibility and provide a contribution that is commensurate with what is at stake. Namely human lives, international stability, and the future of the generations to come. We must rally around the objective of climate neutrality by 2050 before it is too late. Here again, France will show its solidarity by providing €6 billion a year and devoting more than a third of its financing to climate adaptation.
This fight for the climate must go hand in hand with the fight for biodiversity. In Marseille at the IUCN World Conservation Congress, held in early September, we made strong commitments, that we must now implement, particularly the symbolic project of the Great Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel.
We must also put climate finance to work for biodiversity, as the connections between the two topics are now well recognized.
During this time of global economy recovery, we must lastly ensure that our trade practices are fully compatible with our international solidarity efforts and our climate and environmental objectives.
By providing new levers in accordance with WTO law, such as the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism that we wish to establish in Europe to fight carbon leakage, in the same way that we wish to fight imported deforestation and violations of social rights across our value chains.
And by working, at the same time, on a tangible “greening” of the multilateral trade framework at the WTO ministerial meeting this year, starting with an ambitious agreement for regulating fisheries subsidies. The future of our oceans depend on it.
We also have a responsibility with regard to the very principles of multilateralism, of which we are the guardians.
The responsibility, first of all, to preserve our ability to act in the name of these principles and promote a truly multilateral order.
In this regard, Secretary-General, I would like to commend your action and your efforts to inject new impetus into the United Nations system. We will work by your side throughout your second term.

While supporting our collective institutions, including in their reform efforts, we must also continue to develop project multilateralism.
That of the Alliance for Multilateralism, which we launched two years ago with my German colleague and which was able to play its full role from the start of the pandemic.
And the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas, which is doing an outstanding job in Iraq, Syria, Mali and Afghanistan, in cooperation with UNESCO.
We have the responsibility to defend these principles where they are wavering.
In Afghanistan, where the achievements of the last 20 years cannot be erased. Particularly when it comes to the access to education and the rights of women and girls.
And everywhere where the universal scope of human rights is being challenged.
Because universal human rights are the first political and legal translation of the unity of humankind, without which this organization, our organization, would have no foundation. This is a commitment – I would like to recall – that the United Nations Member States freely consented to sign and respect.
These principles that unite us, we have the responsibility to keep them alive today, by upholding them up to and including the digital realm.
We have seen increasingly irresponsible behaviours flourish, without managing, unfortunately, to provide an international normative response to regulate them and to ensure that the rights and freedoms of all are respected.
The introduction of a minimum universal 15% tax for multinational companies will help achieve this. We therefore call on all States to support this vital measure.
France and its European partners even intend to adopt actual legislation on digital markets. We encourage our international partners to follow us down this path, and we invite them to work with us to establish a new digital public order in the wake of the Paris Call and the Christchurch Call to Action, which, since 2019, has enabled us to take decisive action to remove terrorist content from the Internet.
Collective responsibility in international peacekeeping and security; shared responsibility in tackling today’s major challenges; responsibility of each of us with regard to what unites us: for France this is what the historic turning point we are experiencing calls for. We must all rise to the challenge.
While our country is preparing to take over the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2022, you can – ladies and gentlemen – count on our determination to fully assume our share of this three-pronged responsibility.
Engaging us in all the security, solidarity and equality combats.
To rebuild, with you, our shared world.
Thank you.Mr President, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
An inspection of the fossil record over the last 178 million years – since mammals first appeared – reveals that the average mammalian species exists for about a million years before it evolves into something else or vanishes into extinction.
Of our allotted lifespan of a million, humanity has been around for about 200,000.
In other words, we are still collectively a youngster.
If you imagine that million years as the lifespan of an individual human being – about eighty years – then we are now sweet 16.
We have come to that fateful age when we know roughly how to drive and we know how to unlock the drinks cabinet and to engage in all sorts of activity that is not only potentially embarrassing but also terminal.
In the words of the Oxford philosopher Toby Ord “we are just old enough to get ourselves into serious trouble”.
We still cling with part of our minds to the infantile belief that the world was made for our gratification and pleasure and we combine this narcissism with an assumption of our own immortality.
We believe that someone else will clear up the mess we make, because that is what someone else has always done.
We trash our habitats again and again with the inductive reasoning that we have got away with it so far, and therefore we will get away with it again.
My friends the adolescence of humanity is coming to an end.
We are approaching that critical turning point – in less than two months – when we must show that we are capable of learning, and maturing, and finally taking responsibility for the destruction we are inflicting, not just upon our planet but ourselves.
It is time for humanity to grow up.
It is time for us to listen to the warnings of the scientists – and look at Covid, if you want an example of gloomy scientists being proved right –
and to understand who we are and what we are doing.
The world – this precious blue sphere with its eggshell crust and wisp of an atmosphere – is not some indestructible toy,
some bouncy plastic romper room against which we can hurl ourselves to our heart’s content.
Daily, weekly, we are doing such irreversible damage that long before a million years are up,
we will have made this beautiful planet effectively uninhabitable – not just for us but for many other species.
And that is why the Glasgow COP26 summit is the turning point for humanity.
We must limit the rise in temperatures – whose appalling effects were visible even this summer – to 1.5 degrees.
We must come together in a collective coming of age.
We must show we have the maturity and wisdom to act.
And we can.
Even in this feckless youth we have harnessed clean energy from wind and wave and sun.
We have released energy from within the atom itself
and from hydrogen, and we have found ways to store that energy in increasingly capacious batteries and even in molten salt.
We have the tools for a green industrial revolution
but time is desperately short.
Two days ago in New York we had a session in which we heard from the leaders of the nations most threatened by climate change:
the Marshall Islands, the Maldives, Bangladesh and many others.
And they spoke of the hurricanes and the flooding and the fires caused by the extreme meteorological conditions the world is already seeing.
And the tragedy is that because of our past inaction
there are further rises in temperature that are already baked in – baked is the word.
And if we keep on the current track then the temperatures will go up by 2.7 degrees or more by the end of the century.
And never mind what that will do to the ice floes:
we will see desertification, drought, crop failure, and mass movements of humanity on a scale not seen before,
not because of some unforeseen natural event or disaster
but because of us,
because of what we are doing now.
And our grandchildren will know that we are the culprits
and that we were warned
and they will know that it was this generation that came centre stage
to speak and act on behalf of posterity
and that we missed our cue
and they will ask what kind of people we were to be so selfish and so short sighted.
In just 40 days time we need the world to come to Glasgow
to make the commitments necessary.
And we are not talking about stopping the rise in temperatures -
it is alas too late for that -
but to restrain that growth, as I say, to 1.5 degrees.
And that means we need to pledge collectively to achieve carbon neutrality – net zero – by the middle of the century.
And that will be an amazing moment if we can do it
because it will mean that for the first time in centuries humanity is no longer
adding to the budget of carbon in the atmosphere,
no longer thickening that invisible quilt that is warming the planet,
and it is fantastic that we now have countries
representing 70 per cent of the world’s GDP committed to this objective.
But if we are to stave off these hikes in temperature we must go further
and faster – we need all countries to step up and commit to very substantial reductions by 2030 -
and I passionately believe that we can do it by making commitments in four areas – coal, cars, cash and trees.
I am not one of those environmentalists who takes a moral pleasure in excoriating humanity for its excess.
I don’t see the green movement as a pretext for a wholesale assault on capitalism.
Far from it.
The whole experience of the Covid pandemic
is that the way to fix the problem is through science and innovation,
the breakthroughs and the investment that are made possible by capitalism and by free markets,
and it is through our Promethean faith in new green technology that we are cutting emissions in the UK.
When I was a kid we produced almost 80 per cent of our electricity from coal;
that is now down to two per cent or less
and will be gone altogether by 2024.
We have put in great forests of beautiful wind turbines on the drowned prairies of Doggerland beneath the North Sea.
In fact we produce so much offshore wind that I am thinking of changing my name to Boreas Johnson in honour of the North Wind.
And I know that we are ambitious in asking the developing world to end the use of coal power by 2040
and for the developed world to do so by 2030,
but the experience of the UK shows that it can be done
and I thank President Xi for what he has done to end China’s international financing of coal and I hope China will now go further and phase out the domestic use of coal as well,
because the experience of the UK shows it can be done.
And when I was elected mayor of London only 13 years ago,
I was desperate to encourage more electric vehicles
and we put in charging points around the city.
And I am afraid that in those days they were not greatly patronised.
But the market in EVs in the UK is now growing at an extraordinary pace -
maybe two thirds every year -
and Nissan is sufficiently confident to invest £1 billion in a new EV factory and a gigafactory for the batteries.
And that is because we have set a hard deadline for the sale of new hydrocarbon ICEs of 2030
and again we call on the world to come together to drive this market so that by 2040
there are only zero emission vehicles on sale anywhere in the world.
And you can make these cuts in pollution while driving jobs and growth:
we have cut our greenhouse gas emissions by 44 per cent in the last 30 years
while expanding our GDP by 78 per cent.
And we will now go further by implementing one of the biggest nationally determined contributions
- the NDC is the pledge we ask every country to make in cutting carbon –
going down by 68 per cent by 2030, compared to where we were in 1990.
We are making a huge bet on hydrogen, we are expanding nuclear,
we are helping people to reduce their own household CO2.
We are working towards Jet Zero – the first large carbon free passenger plane.
And we also recognise that this is not just about using technical fixes for CO2:
we need to restore the natural balance,
we need to halt and reverse the loss of trees and biodiversity by 2030,
and that is why we in the UK are committed to beautifying the landscape,
strengthening our protection against flooding,
by planting millions more trees.
We must also work towards the crucial Kunming summit in China
and I call on all nations to follow the example of Imran Khan
who has pledged to plant 10 billion trees in Pakistan alone.
And we in the developed world must recognise our obligation to help.
We started this industrial revolution in Britain:
we were the first to send the great puffs of acrid smoke to the heavens
on a scale to derange the natural order.
And though we were setting in train a new era of technology that was itself to lead to a massive global reduction in poverty,
emancipating billions around the world,
we were also unwittingly beginning to quilt the great tea cosy of CO2
and so we understand when the developing world looks to us to help them
and we take our responsibilities.
And that’s why two years ago I committed that the UK would provide £11.6 billion to help the rest of the world to tackle climate change
and in spite of all the pressures on finances caused by Covid, we have kept that promise to the letter.
And I am so pleased and encouraged by some of the pledges we have heard here at UNGA,
including from Denmark, and now a very substantial commitment from the US that brings us within touching distance of the $100 billion pledge.
But we must go further, and we must be clear that government alone will not be able to do enough
We must work together so that the international financial institutions – the IMF, the World Bank -
are working with governments around the world
to leverage in the private sector,
because it is the trillions of dollars of private sector cash that will enable developing nations – and the whole world – to make the changes necessary.
It was the UK government that set the strike price for the private sector to come in and transform our country into the Saudi Arabia of wind,
and only yesterday the UK’s first sovereign green bond raised £10 billion on the markets,
from hard-headed investors who want to make money.
And these investments will not only help the countries of the world to tackle climate change:
they will produce millions and millions of high wage, high skill jobs,
and today’s workforce and the next generation will have the extra satisfaction of knowing that they are not only doing something useful
- such as providing clean energy -
but helping to save the planet at the same time.
And every day green start-ups are producing new ideas,
from feeding seaweed to cows to restrain their traditional signs of digestive approval,
to using AI and robotics to enhance food production.
And it is these technological breakthroughs that will cut the cost for consumers,
so that we have nothing to fear and everything to gain from this green industrial revolution.
And when Kermit the frog sang It’s Not Easy Bein’ Green
I want you to know he was wrong -
and he was also unnecessarily rude to Miss Piggy.
We have the technology:
we have the choice before us.
Sophocles is often quoted as saying that there are many terrifying things in the world, but none is more terrifying than man,
and it is certainly true that we are uniquely capable of our own destruction, and the destruction of everything around us.
But what Sophocles actually said was that man is deinos
and that means not just scary but awesome -
and he was right.
We are awesome in our power to change things
and awesome in our power to save ourselves,
and in the next 40 days we must choose what kind of awesome we are going to be.
I hope that COP 26 will be a 16th birthday for humanity in which we choose to grow up,
to recognise the scale of the challenge we face,
to do what posterity demands we must,
and I invite you in November to celebrate what I hope will be a coming of age and to blow out the candles of a world on fire.
See you in Glasgow.Israel is a lighthouse in a stormy sea.
A beacon of democracy,
diverse by design,
innovative by nature
and eager to contribute to the world –
despite being in the toughest neighborhood on earth.
We are an ancient nation.
Returned - to our ancient homeland,
Revived - our ancient language,
Restored - our ancient sovereignty.
Israel is a miracle of Jewish revival.
Am Yisrael Chai - the nation of Israel is alive,  and the 
State of Israel is its beating heart.
For way too long, Israel was defined by wars with our 
neighbors. 
But this is not what Israel is about.
 
This is not what the people of Israel are about.
Israelis don’t wake up in the morning thinking about the 
conflict.
Israelis want to lead a good life,
take care of our families,
and build a better world for our children.
Which means that from time to time, we might need to 
leave our jobs,  say goodbye to our families,
and rush to the battlefield to defend our country —
just like my friends and I have had to do ourselves.
They should not be judged for it.
Israelis remember the dark horrors of our past,
but remain determined to look ahead,
to build a brighter future.

Distinguished delegates,
There are two plagues that are challenging the very fabric 
of society at this moment,
One is the coronavirus,
Which has killed over 5 million people around the globe,
the other, has also shaken the world as we know it—
It’s the disease of political polarization.
Both coronavirus and polarization can erode public trust in 
our institutions,
Both - can paralyze nations
If left unchecked, their effects on society — can be 
devastating. 
In Israel, we faced both, and rather than accept them as a 
force of nature,
we stood up,
took action,
And we can already see the horizon.

In a polarized world,
Where algorithms fuel our anger,
people on the right and on the left operate in two separate 
realities,
each in their own social media bubble,
they hear only the voices that confirm what they already
believe in.
People end up hating each other.
Societies – get torn apart.
Countries broken from within – go nowhere.
In Israel, after four elections in two years, with a fifth 
looming, the people yearned for an antidote:
Calm. Stability. An honest attempt for political 
normalcy.
Inertia is always the easiest choice.
But there are moments in time where leaders have to take 
the wheel a moment before the cliff,
Face the heat,
And drive the country to safety.
About a hundred days ago my partners and I formed a 
new government in Israel.
The most diverse government in our history.
What started as a political accident, can now turn into a 
purpose.
And that purpose is unity.
Today we sit together, around one table.
We speak to each other with respect,
we act with decency,
and we carry a message:
Things can be different.
It’s okay to disagree,
it’s okay—in fact vital—that different people think 
differently,
it’s even okay to argue.
For healthy debate is a basic tenet of the Jewish tradition 
and one of the secrets to the success of the start-up 
nation.
What we have proven, is that even in the age of social 
media,
We can debate, without hate.

The second great disease we're all facing is the
coronavirus, sweeping the world.
To overcome –  we going to need to make new
discoveries,
gain new insights,
and achieve new breakthroughs.
It all begins with the pursuit of knowledge.
The State of Israel is on the front lines of the search for 
this vital knowledge.
We developed a model, which fuses the wisdom of 
science with the power of policymaking.
The Israeli model has three guiding principles:
One — the country must stay open
We all paid a huge price: an economic price, a physical 
price and an emotional price—for bringing life to a 
standstill in 2020.
To bring economies back to growth,  children back to 
school,  and parents back to work,
Lockdowns, restrictions, quarantines – cannot work in the 
long run.
Our model, rather than locking people down in passive 
sleep-mode,
recruits them to the effort.
For example we asked Israeli families to carry out hometesting of their children so we can keep schools open—
and indeed schools stayed open.
The Second Rule—vaccinate early.
Right from the start, Israelis were quick to get vaccinated.
 
We are in a race against a deadly virus and we must try to 
be ahead of it.
In July we were the first to learn that the vaccines were 
waning—which is what brought a surge in Delta cases.
It was then when my government decided to administer a 
third dose of vaccine—the booster—to the Israeli public.
It was a tough decision, given that at the time the FDA 
hadn't yet approved it.
We faced a choice to either drag Israel into yet another set 
of lockdowns,
further harm our economy and society;
or to double-down on vaccines.
We chose the latter.
We pioneered the booster shot.

Two months in I can report that it works:
With a third dose, you're 7 times more protected than with 
two doses, and 40 times more protected than without any 
vaccine.
As a result, Israel is on course to escape the fourth wave 
without a lockdown,
without further harm to our economy.
Israel's economy is growing, and unemployment is down.
I'm glad that our actions have inspired other countries to 
follow with the booster.
The third rule – Adapt and move quickly.
We formed a national task force that meets everyday, to 
bypass slow governmental bureaucracy,
make quick decisions and act on them right away.
Trial and error is key.
Every day is a new day, with new data and new 
decisions.
When something works, 
we keep it.
When it doesn't, we ditch it.
Running a country during a pandemic is not only about 
health.
It's about carefully balancing all aspects of life that are 
affected by corona, especially Jobs and education.
 
The only person that has a good vantage point of all of this 
– is the national leader of any given country. 
Above all, we're doing everything in our power to provide 
people with the tools needed to protect their lives. 
The ancient Jewish text, the Talmud, says that:
"Whoever saves one life, is as if he saved an entire world",
And that's what we aspire to do.

Distinguished delegates,
While Israel strives to do good, we cannot lose sight for 
one moment of what’s happening in our neighborhood.
Israel is, quite literally, surrounded by Hezbollah, Shia 
militias, Islamic Jihad, and Hamas.
On our borders.
These terror groups seek to dominate the Middle East and 
spread radical Islam across the world.
What do they all have in common?
They all want to destroy my country,
And they're all backed by Iran. 
They get their funding from Iran,  they get their training
from Iran, and they get their weapons from Iran.
Iran’s great goal is crystal clear to anybody who cares to 
open their eyes: 
Iran seeks to dominate the region — and seeks to do so 
under a nuclear umbrella.
For the past three decades Iran has spread its carnage 
and destruction around the Middle East, country after 
country:
Lebanon. Iraq. Syria. Yemen. & Gaza.
What do all these places have in common?
They are all falling apart.
Their citizens — hungry and suffering.
Their economies —collapsing.
Like the Midas touch, Iran's regime has the "Mullah-touch" 
—
Every place Iran touches —fails.
If you think Iranian terror is confined to the Israel– you're 
wrong.
 Just this year, Iran made operational a new deadly 
terror unit – swarms of killer UAVs armed with lethal 
weapons that can attack any place any time.
They plan to blanket the skies of the Middle East with this 
lethal force.
Iran has already used these deadly UAVs—called Shahed 
136-- to attack Saudi Arabia, US targets in Iraq and civilian 
ships at sea, killing A Brit and a Romanian.
Iran plans to arm its proxies in Yemen, Iraq, Syria and 
Lebanon with hundreds and then thousands of these 
deadly drones.
Experience tells us that what starts in the Middle East, 
doesn't stop there. 

Distinguished delegates,
In 1988, Iran set up a "death commission" that ordered the 
mass murder of 5,000 political activists.
They were hanged from cranes.
This "death commission" was made up of four people;
Ebrahim Raisi - Iran's new president, was one of them.
(Pause)
Raisi's also oversaw the murder of Iranian children.
His nickname is "the butcher of Tehran", because that's 
exactly what he did - butchered his own people.
One of the witnesses of this massacre, stated in her 
testimony, that when Raisi would finish a round of murder, 
he'd throw a party, pocketing the money of those he just 
executed… and then would sit down to eat cream cakes.
He celebrated the murder of his own people, by devouring 
cream cakes.
And now Raisi is Iran's new president.
This is who we're dealing with.

Over the past few years, Iran has made a major leap 
forward,
in its nuclear R&D,
in its production-capacity,
and in its enrichment.
Iran's nuclear weapon program is at a critical point.
[pause]
All red lines have been crossed.
Inspections — ignored.
All wishful-thinking — proven false.
Iran is violating the IAEAs safeguard agreements — and 
it's getting away with it.
They harass inspectors and sabotage their investigations 
—  and they’re getting away with it.
They enrich Uranium to the level of 60% which is one step 
short of weapons-grade material — and they’re getting 
away with it.
Evidence which clearly proves Iran's intentions for nuclear 
weapons in secret sites in Toorkooz-abad, Teheran & 
Marivan — is ignored.
Iran’s nuclear program has hit a watershed moment;
and so has our tolerance.
Words do not stop centrifuges from spinning.
 
[pause]
There are those in the world who seem to view Iran's 
pursuit of nuclear weapons as an inevitable reality,
or they've just become tired of hearing about it.
Israel doesn't have that privilege.
We will not tire.
We will not allow Iran to acquire a nuclear weapon.
I want to tell you something:
Iran is much weaker, much more vulnerable than it 
seems.
It's economy is sinking,
Its regime is rotten and divorced from the younger 
generation,
Its corrupt government fails to even bring water to large 
parts of the country.
The weaker they are, the more extreme they go.
If we put our heads to it,
if we're serious about stopping it,
if we use all our resourcefulness,
we can prevail.
And that's what we're going to do.

But not everything is dark in the Middle East.
Alongside worrying trends, there are also rays of light.
 First and foremost the growing ties Israel is forging with 
Arab and Muslim countries.   Ties that began 42 years 
ago with Israel’s historic peace agreement with Egypt,
continued 27 years ago with Israel's peace agreement with 
Jordan,
and even more recently with the "Abraham Accords" —
that normalized our relations with the United Arab 
Emirates, Bahrain and Morocco.
More is to come.

At a ripe young age of 73, more and more nations are 
understanding Israel's value and unique place in the 
world.
Some friends have stood with us since our founding.
The United States of America is a long time, trusted friend 
of Israel, as we saw, yet again—just a few days ago in 
congress.
Alongside our old friends, we are gaining new friends — in 
the Middle East and beyond.
Last week this manifested itself with the defeat of the 
racist, anti-Semitic, Durban conference.
This conference was originally meant to be against
racism,  but over the years turned into a conference of
racism — against Israel and the Jewish people.
And the world's had enough of this.
I thank the 38 countries (38!) who chose truth over lies, 
and skipped the conference.
And to those countries who chose to participate in this 
farce, I say:  Attacking Israel doesn’t make you morally 
superior, fighting the only democracy in the Middle East 
doesn’t make you "Woke", adopting cliché's about Israel 
without bothering to learn the basic facts, well.. that's just 
plain lazy.
Every member state in this building has a choice.
It’s not a political choice, but a moral one.
It’s a choice between darkness and light.
Darkness that persecutes political prisoners, murders the 
innocent, abuses women & minorities, and seeks to end 
the modern world as we know it.
Or light — that pursues freedom, prosperity and 
opportunity.

Over the past 73 years, the State of Israel — the people of 
Israel — have achieved so much in the face of so much.
And yet, I can say with full confidence:  Our best days 
are ahead of us.
Israel is a nation of great hope,
a nation that has brought the heritage of the Torah to life 
in modern-day Israel,
a nation of an unbreakable spirit.
.מעט מן האור דוחה הרבה מן החושך
A bit of light dispels much darkness.
The lighthouse among the stormy seas –
Stands tall,
Stands strong,
And her light shines brighter than ever.
Thank youGreetings to you all.
Mr President,
Mr Secretary-General,
Friends,
I greet you in te reo Māori, the language of the indigenous people of Aotearoa New Zealand.
As I deliver this address to the General Assembly from here in New Zealand, it strikes me that even when global events threaten to disconnect and divide us, a shared instinct to connect with one another, still prevails.
I have often described New Zealand as being remote, but connected. The COVID-19 pandemic has made both parts of this statement truer than ever. In some ways, we now feel that remoteness more keenly. The vast ocean surrounding our islands have taken on an even greater significance in a time when our border controls are our first line of defence against a highly contagious, global virus.
Despite this physical distancing, the pandemic has demonstrated more starkly than ever just how closely connected we all are. We live in a world where domestic decisions made half a world away, are as significant to us as those made by our nearest neighbours.
In many ways, COVID-19 is an illustration of global transboundary problems at a local level. Here is an invisible threat, which no one is safe from, and the very thing keeping us safe – is each other. We have placed our trust in the actions of neighbours and strangers – to wear masks, to distance, to get vaccinated and support others to do so, and we live collectively with the consequences.
It has been a privilege for me as a leader, to witness the practical application of New Zealanders’ values to these challenges.
Values like manaakitanga and whanaungatanga, which in the Māori language mean kindness, and a shared sense of humanity and connectedness. Values like kotahitanga, or a shared aspiration and unity towards a common goal.
These values have seen New Zealanders take care of one another, and work together to limit the transmission of COVID-19 in our communities.
Now these values are not unique to New Zealand. They are universal. They underpin the Charter of the United Nations. One need only read the preamble to see them reflected back at us.
No community, nation, or region acting alone can address COVID-19. It is a complex, global problem that requires a global solution. Equitable access to safe and effective vaccines for everyone is essential to our response and recovery.
New Zealand is working with others, especially Australia, to support full vaccine coverage for Pacific island countries. And the COVAX Facility is doing essential work distributing vaccines worldwide. But more must be done to support this effort. New Zealand is proud to have been amongst the first countries to donate doses to the COVAX Advance Market Commitment in addition to our financial support.
New Zealand continues to work in WTO and APEC to support a waiver of intellectual property protections for vaccines and other measures to increase availability.
Without equitable access for all, we risk further variants developing which could undermine or undo our progress.
At the same time that the direct impacts of COVID-19 have brought immeasurable pain to many across the world, it has also exacerbated and further complicated other existing global challenges. We know what these challenges are. We articulated them as areas of action in the UN Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Declaration.
The pandemic has been the ultimate disrupter. It has changed our realities, and given us cause to pause and reflect. In the disruption is an opportunity for us to reset. To adjust some of our fundamental settings to put us in a better position to respond to our shared challenges.
We have heard so much about ‘building back better’. We must do better. Like the drafters of the Charter, we owe future generations our commitment to hand down a better world forged through cooperation.
Fortunately for us, we already have a blueprint for such a world in the Sustainable Development Goals, and the 2030 Agenda. The 2030 Agenda recognises that as our shared challenges are interconnected, so too must be our responses. As we face a series of interlinked global crises that demand action, now is the time for us to recommit to the SDGs.
COVID-19 cannot be an excuse for not achieving the SDGs. In fact, it’s a further reason why we must.
There is perhaps no better example of a global crisis that demands action than climate change.
Climate change is one of the most pervasive crises of our time. From rising sea levels to shifting weather patterns, the impacts are global in scope, unprecedented in scale, and happening right now.
Climate change touches all of our lives, but countries in the Pacific are some of the most affected, despite having contributed least to the problem. Pacific leaders view climate change as the single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the region.
Any global response that fails to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels is unacceptable. This is our goal, and our collective efforts must achieve it. The latest science from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is stark.
The climate crisis cannot be beaten through incrementalism. The science demands that we do so much more.
New Zealand has made the 1.5 degree limit the heart of our domestic climate change legislation. We have committed to a 2050 target and we are revising our Nationally Determined Contribution.
As we mitigate, we must also adapt. This year New Zealand conducted its first national climate change risk assessment to tell us where to focus our effort, and within two years we will have a national adaptation plan. But we have already begun our journey. New Zealand has a programme to plant for instance, one billion trees by 2028. This will store carbon, but it will also support forest resilience, prevent erosion, improve biodiversity, and support our rural and indigenous communities.
Lifting the ambition of our nationally determined contributions is vital, but there are also collective actions we need to take.
This includes bringing an end to fossil fuel and other environmentally harmful subsidies. It includes pooling our resources and knowledge through the Global Research Alliance so that we can grow more food without growing emissions. It includes negotiating an agreement on climate change, trade and sustainability. New Zealand is actively pursuing all of these outcomes.
We must collectively address the unjust and potentially destabilising consequences of climate change.
For Small Island Developing States, one of the gravest consequences is sea-level rise. The ocean is central to the culture and livelihoods of the peoples of the Pacific. Pacific countries have also planned their economies and long-term development in reliance on the maritime zones and resources guaranteed to them under the Law of the Sea Convention.
It is only right that as an international community, we work to ensure the maintenance of those zones and rights in the face of climate change-related sea-level rise.
As a contribution to this objective, I was pleased to join my fellow Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in issuing the ‘Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-related Sea-Level Rise’, in August this year.
Climate change is closely interlinked with another crisis of a planetary scale – that of global biodiversity loss.
As much as we are all interconnected as nations, so too are we connected with nature and the services it provides. We depend on it for the air we breathe, and the economies we have built. Biodiversity loss threatens our well-being, our prosperity, and our health. It will both accelerate climate change, and make its impacts worse.
This is a challenge that requires us to work across barriers and silos. For New Zealand’s part, we have adopted the Aotearoa New Zealand Biodiversity Strategy 2020 – Te Mana o te Taiao – which will guide our actions domestically for the protection, restoration and sustainable use of biodiversity.
We simply cannot achieve the 2030 Agenda unless we unite with collective ambition to reverse biodiversity loss by 2030. We have an opportunity to do this by adopting and implementing an ambitious and transformational post-2020 global biodiversity framework at the upcoming Conference of Parties. New Zealand is committed to this, and I urge you to join us.
As with biodiversity on land, ocean biodiversity is equally important. New Zealand looks forward to concluding the negotiations on an UN treaty for the conservation and sustainable use of high seas biodiversity.
But as we turn our mind to the challenges we face globally, we must turn to the most important thing of all – he tangata, he tangata, he tangata – it is people, people, people.
More than 120 million people have been pushed into extreme poverty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Inequality within and between countries has deepened.
These consequences were never inevitable, and there are steps we can take to reverse these trends and improve the lives of those impacted.
Too many people go hungry every day. New Zealand invests heavily in sustainable food production, and what we produce feeds many times our own population. But we have seen that at the global level, food systems are neither sustainable nor resilient. They suffer from, and contribute to, the overlapping impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss. Transformational change is needed to ensure that everyone has access to the nutrition they need.
This week’s Food Systems Summit is an important step, and it must be the beginning of an ongoing effort. We will do our part in supporting these efforts, including on initiatives that acknowledge the leadership of indigenous peoples in food systems and increase global ambition to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture.
For our part – this is an area where we are working hard, with a unique agreement between our food sector, government and Māori to reduce agricultural emissions through a pricing mechanism. We are determined to show the world what is possible.
At the same time we must include making trade more open and inclusive. COVID-19 disrupted global supply chains, while at the same time it illustrated the importance of open trade to protecting the health of people and lifting them out of poverty and hunger. We must commit to ensuring the flow of essential goods and services, and reject any temptation to turn inwards and focus on protectionism.
We know that poverty and inequality drive conflict and instability, and we are also seeing this, in heightened civil unrest and conflict. Humanitarian crises have worsened. We are seeing this in Afghanistan and there are many more.
As an international community we must rise to the challenge of meeting the growing humanitarian need. But we also have to intensify our efforts to prevent conflict and build peace. New Zealand looks forward to playing a part in this effort as we join the Peacebuilding Commission in 2022.
As leaders, we have a responsibility to foster and sustain peace in our societies. We know what the necessary conditions are. Yes, this includes the absence of poverty, hunger, and material deprivation. But it is also something more. Peaceful societies are inclusive societies, where diversity is embraced and everyone has both the means and the opportunities to contribute to the fullness of their potential. Where women and girls are lifted up and encouraged to exercise their voice and their agency.
Whatever our political or constitutional systems, no nation will ever be truly peaceful in the absence of these basic conditions, founded on the fundamental and equal rights of every person.
And where peace fails, we must all do our part to strengthen and improve respect for the laws of armed conflict, and to enhance the protection of civilians. Preventing both the use of illegal weapons, and the illegal use of legal weapons, is essential, as is ensuring there is no impunity for any such use. This work is a shared responsibility, and one which we pursue alongside our tireless efforts to rid the world of nuclear weapons and the spectre of a conflict that no one can recover from.
All of these challenges we share might cause us to re-examine our response to being so interconnected. We have a choice. To approach our shared challenges from a place of fear, hoping to protect narrowly defined interests by turning inwards. Or we can reaffirm our trust in cooperation, understanding that our greatest fears can only be tackled by concerted collective action.
Our forebears were once at this fork in the road. They chose the path of trust. They founded the United Nations.
It is times like these when we have the most to gain by reminding ourselves of what the Charter’s preamble says. It speaks to a concern for future generations. It speaks about universal observance of human rights, respect for international law, and living together in peace as good neighbours. It speaks about uniting our strength, and combining our efforts to accomplish our aims.
These words of determination were in response to the devastation of war. They apply equally to the collective challenges we face today, and if we are to resolve these in an enduring way, we must look beyond government.
Inclusive multilateralism is one in which our common understandings are enriched by diverse perspectives. As governments, we owe it to ourselves to be open to the expertise and partnerships offered by stakeholders, whether they are from civil society, industry, or indigenous groups.
I have seen in the progress we have made through the Christchurch Call to Action, what can be achieved when governments, industry, and civil society work together in a multi-stakeholder capacity to eliminate terrorist and violent extremist content online, and I am utterly committed to further efforts on this important work.
New Zealand is committed to advancing Our Common Agenda, and sadly, as we have seen in recent times, an essential element of this is preparedness.
No one can argue for instance that the global community as a whole was adequately prepared for a global pandemic. It is clear that we will face further global health risks, and we have no excuses for remaining unprepared.
New Zealand strongly supports the ambitious and practical approach of the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response. We will not just passively support the Independent Panel’s recommendations. We will actively engage on work streams to develop a pandemic treaty, convention or other international instrument; to improve global surveillance, validation and early response; and importantly, to strengthen the World Health Organisation.
If there is any lesson we can draw from the events of the past 18 months, it is the need for more, and better, cooperation. And with the need for better cooperation, comes the need for responsive and adaptive global institutions, including the United Nations.
I commend and thank the Secretary-General on his report and recommendations to advance Our Common Agenda. These provide us with a roadmap for a more inclusive and effective multilateralism. One that includes a voice for the needs of future generations and leaves no one behind.
As leaders, we have the power to shape our shared institutions and to make them fit for purpose. We must not shy away from this task.
I can think of no better way to reaffirm our kindness towards one another, our shared humanity, and our unity.
I hope you will join us.
Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā tātou katoa.
In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Mr President,
Mr Secretary General,
Your Excellencies:
It is a special pleasure to be part of this General Assembly, as our countries join in a common cause—to act on shared concerns; to be alert to serious global threats; and to move forward, faster, to the world that our people deserve, leaving no one behind.
I do not need to elaborate upon what we all know; today’s most critical challenges are global in scope—the deadly pandemic, climate change, violent conflicts exploited by global extremists, destabilising economic fault-lines, a continuing, global refugee crisis.
Our countries have a vast shared interest in responding effectively. That requires collective action, and the emphasis must be on action. Positive change cannot be willed into being. Our work must be coordinated and structured to deliver real-world impact.
Jordan has long supported a collective approach. Since our country was founded a hundred years ago, we have worked closely with regional and international partners to support peace, progress, and mutual respect worldwide. We know the hardships and difficulties, but we also see the tremendous opportunities to build a better world.
My friends,
Global partnership is critical to resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts in modern history—the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
The bitter war on Gaza this past year was a reminder that the current situation is simply unsustainable. And the suffering we continue to see points us once more to the critical need to keep supporting UNRWA, as it continues to fulfil its UN mandate and provide vital humanitarian services to 5.7 million vulnerable Palestinian refugees.
But how many more homes will be lost? How many more children will die, before the world wakes up? Genuine security for either side—indeed, for the whole world—can only be achieved through the two-state solution, a solution that leads to the establishment of an independent, sovereign, and viable Palestinian state on the basis of the June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side-by-side with Israel in peace and security.
And Jerusalem is at the heart of this peace. Billions of people around the world hold this Holy City dear.
For our part, Jordan will continue working to preserve the historic and legal status quo of Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, under Hashemite Custodianship.
I believe Jerusalem’s holiness to Muslims, Christians, and Jews can and must bring us together. With international help, the Holy City can be, not a cause of division, but a symbol of unity for all to see.
My friends,
Elsewhere in the region, Lebanon is facing a dire humanitarian and economic situation. Desperate living-conditions are looming for millions—family tables without food, homes losing electricity and water, workplaces unable to operate. In this time of great need, we owe the Lebanese people our full support, to enable them to rise from this crisis. And that demands a well-planned, well-executed international response, engaging all of us.
And the world must not forget the millions of refugees in host countries like Lebanon. Jordanians well understand what a serious impact this has. For generations, our country has sacrificed to help millions of refugees fleeing injustice and danger. The wellbeing of these millions and the communities that host them remains an international responsibility. It is vital to keep up support for UNHCR, the World Food Programme, and others that care for and offer hope to refugees and their host communities.
My friends,
Leaving people in need, innocents in jeopardy, and conflicts unresolved plays into the hands of global extremists, who exploit the despair, frustration, and anger these crises leave in their wake.
Although we may have won some battles, the fight against terrorism and
extremism is not yet over. Our action—collective, global action—remains essential.
To address the totality of the problem and the need, Jordan continues to work closely with our partners. Through the Aqaba Process, a holistic approach, we have helped bring together concerned leaders, to coordinate, exchange best practices, develop new strategies, and more.
My friends,
If humanity faced no other threats at all, we would still need to unite to face the most existential of our time—the global climate crisis. As one of the water-poorest countries in the world, Jordan is painfully aware of the threat. Our National Green Growth Action Plan is designed to ensure energy efficiency and strengthen our resilience in water and agriculture.
But no country can combat climate change on its own. And that is a powerful reminder of the need to develop new ways to respond as one world, one humanity, to all the crises and challenges we face.
It is for this reason that Jordan has been calling for regional networks of resiliency to pool our resources and respond quickly and smoothly to needs as they arise. And we stand ready to utilise our country's strategic location—at the crossroads of Asia, Africa, and Europe—to facilitate the broadest international response.
But every country has strengths and capabilities to offer; every region has capacities to speed forward the larger global response; and every international body has powers to contribute, to guide, reinforce, and coordinate global action.
In this General Assembly, together, we can re-think, re-calibrate and re-direct our world away from danger.
We know the threats; we know the opportunities. Now, together, let's take the actions we need.
Thank you.President of the 76th Session of the UN General Assembly, Mr Abdulla Shahid,
Secretary General, Mr António Guterres,
Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Colleagues,
Friends,
We join today’s General Debate from around the world.
The COVID-19 pandemic has forever changed the nature of multilateral engagement, of diplomacy, of business, of basic human interaction.
And yet even as we are separated by the expanses of geography, the noble ideals of fellowship, solidarity and cooperation stand firm.
They are the bedrock on which the United Nations was formed 76 years ago, and they have been our guide as we confront the worst global health emergency in over a century.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused great devastation around the world.
Millions of lives have been lost and livelihoods have been destroyed.
It has shaken our sense of well-being and security.
Yet, the strong bonds of solidarity between nations have enabled us to overcome great challenges.
It was through multilateral solidarity, support and cooperation between Member States that countries in need were able to access much needed medical equipment and supplies.
In dealing with the Covid 19 pandemic it is generally agreed that vaccines are the greatest defence that humanity has against the ravages of this pandemic. It is therefore a great concern that the global community has not sustained the principles of solidarity and cooperation in securing equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines.
It is an indictment on humanity that more than 82 per cent of the world’s vaccine doses have been acquired by wealthy countries, while less than one per cent has gone to low-income countries.
Unless we address this as a matter of urgency, the pandemic will last much longer and new mutations of the virus will emerge.
South Africa reaffirms its call for fair and equitable distribution of vaccines.
We urge all member states to support the proposal for a temporary waiver of certain provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights to allow more countries, particularly low- and middle-income countries, to produce COVID-19 vaccines.
In this interconnected world, no country is safe until every country is safe.
We need to prepare now for future pandemics and work with greater determination towards the goal of universal health coverage.
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must increase investment towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals by providing low-income countries with the means of implementation.
In this respect, the G20 Debt Standstill Initiative is a welcome response to the fiscal and liquidity challenges faced by least developed economies.
The agreement on the allocation of $650 billion in Special Drawing Rights is significant, but it is insufficient to meet the extent of the need.
South Africa therefore reiterates its call for 25% of the total allocation, amounting to around $162 billion, to be made available to the African continent.
Mr President,
Climate change is an existential crisis for the entire world, yet poor countries are particularly vulnerable.
Although we bear the least responsibility for causing climate change, African countries are among those that carry the greatest cost.
For the forthcoming COP 26 in Glasgow to respond adequately to the crisis we face, we need to see greater ambition and progress on mitigation, adaptation and the means of implementation.
COP26 must therefore launch a formal programme of work on the implementation of the Global Goal on Adaptation.
The pandemic has been a stark reminder of our mutual dependency, and that instability in one region of the world inevitably impacts its neighbours.
That is why we seek to enhance the relationship between the UN and the African Union in maintaining peace, financing peacebuilding efforts, and advancing post-conflict reconstruction and development.
South Africa continues with its efforts to contribute to international peace and security through our membership of the Peacebuilding Commission and our continued engagement in UN peacekeeping.
The right of the Palestinian people to self-determination has been raised in this General Assembly for almost as long as this body has been in existence.
We raise it again today, not because we are bound by practice to do so, but because we resolutely believe that there shall be no peace and no justice until the Palestinian people are free from occupation and are able to exercise the rights for which this United Nations stands.
We have a responsibility, as the nations of the world, to spare no effort in finding a just, lasting and peaceful solution based on internationally agreed parameters enshrined in the relevant UN resolutions.
We reiterate our position that the people of Western Sahara have the right to self-determination in line with the relevant African Union decisions and UN Security Council resolutions.
South Africa further affirms its solidarity with the Cuban people and calls for the lifting of the economic embargo that has caused untold damage to the country’s economy and people.
Mr President,
This year marks 12 years since the start of the Inter-Governmental Negotiations process and 16 years since the World Summit of 2005, where world leaders unanimously agreed on early reform of the Security Council.
We have not honoured this undertaking.
South Africa reiterates its call for urgent reform and a move to text-based negotiations through which an agreement can ultimately be reached.
We must address the under-representation of the African continent in the UN system, and ensure that the voice of the African continent and of the Global South in general is strengthened in the multilateral system.
Concurrent with achieving equitable geographical representation in the UN we must also address the question of gender parity.
Yesterday, we marked the 20th anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the World Conference against Racism in South Africa.
This remains the international community’s blueprint for action to fight racism and other forms of intolerance.
We are bound by a common responsibility to fight both the legacy of past racism and the manifestation in the present.
Racism, like sexism, xenophobia and homophobia, demeans us all.
It undermines our humanity and stifles our efforts to build a world rooted in tolerance, respect and human rights.
Let us use this anniversary to renew our commitment to combatting racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance wherever they are found.
Mr President,
The challenges we face are immense.
We have to drive the global recovery.
We have to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We have to advance gender equality and the empowerment of women.
We have to address climate change, maintain peace and security, and protect society’s most vulnerable.
Above all, we must close the wounds of poverty, inequality and underdevelopment that are preventing societies from realising their full potential.
This can only be done within the framework of a revitalised and reformed multilateral system, with a strong, capable United Nations at its centre.
At this defining moment, this General Assembly of the nations of the world is once again being called upon to inspire, to guide and to lead.
The UN stands as a beacon of hope for all who dream of a better world.
Let us, together, with the United Nations as our instrument, write a new history for humankind – one of equality, freedom, fundamental rights and shared prosperity for all.
Leaving no-one behind
I thank you.