
Introduction
 [Mr.] President of the General Assembly, Excellencies,
 Before I begin, please allow me a personal observation.
 As I address you, I am conscious that I am speaking to virtually the entire
world.
 In my previous career, I was an astronaut and I had the opportunity to see
the entire world from the vantage point of space.
 I have flown over all of your countries and I have reflected a great deal on
our planet, Earth.

 I have realized that Earth is the cradle of all humanity and that we all come
from the same place and that we have nowhere else to go.
o – and that we must find a way to get along with each other.
o – and that we must take care of our planet- a planet that we are
visibly damaging.
 Space offers the unique perspective of seeing beyond one’s own national
borders.
 In that sense, this body, the United Nations, offers that same perspective.
 I am honoured to be here with you today on behalf of Canada’s newly reelected Government, led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
 I would like to begin my address by respectfully acknowledging that the
land on which we gather today is the traditional unceded territory of the
Lenape (Le-NOP-ay) people.
 Fellow delegates, friends – we are assembled today at one of the most
challenging times in generations.
 The world is facing simultaneous and cascading crises, including climate
change, the COVID-19 pandemic, and threats to international peace and
security, which serve to exacerbate inequalities, test our resilience and
shine a bright light on the shortcomings of our systems and institutions.
 But not for the first time has this institution faced such formidable
challenges. We must not be querulous or faint-hearted in the face of the
hardships and difficulties of our modern world. That is not why we are
here. 
 We must learn from the vision and courage of those who have gone before,
and we must think of the hopes and aspirations of those who will inherit
the world we leave behind. 

 From the ashes of World War 2, our parents and grandparents responded
to the unprecedented social and economic collapse of the 1930’s and 40’s
with its accompanying death and destruction, by building a new
international order based on rules and strong international institutions to
bring stability, prosperity and peace for the generations that would follow. 
They did not wring their hands in despair. They rolled up their sleeves and
went to work. 
 Climate change, COVID-19, the rise of authoritarianism and inequality –
these are the challenges of our time. They are ours to solve and overcome.
 In doing so, we must look toward the future with optimism. Just as our
parents and grandparents stepped up to the challenges of their moment, so
too must we recognize and seize our own opportunity to shape the future.
Climate Change
 [Mr.] President, there is no more perfect example of where multilateral
solutions and political will are needed than in addressing the impact of
climate change.
 Like all of you in this great hall, Canada is not immune to the climate crisis. 
Earlier this year, the west coast of Canada faced a record-setting heatwave
– in some places reaching over 49 degrees Celsius – which saw hundreds of
people lose their lives, and an entire town in the province of British
Columbia destroyed.
 This is our new reality.
 We know that the world expects leadership from the United Nations. 
 When we attend COP-26 this fall, young people around the world will be
looking to us to increase our ambition and strengthen global cooperation.
 We cannot let them down. It is in our hands.

 In Canada, you have a steadfast and dedicated partner.
 We are doing our part at home – including putting a price on carbon that
will rise to $170 per tonne by 2030, and increasing our emissions
reductions targets – and also internationally, including recently doubling
our climate finance contribution to $5.3 billion over the next five years.
 [Mr. President,] over successive generations, we have worked together to
help multilateralism evolve to meet our needs. To expand to new areas,
and refine old approaches.
 Together, we harnessed hope, confronted fear, and innovated to try to
improve lives the world over.
 It was messy, it was hard, and it was often slow. But more often than not,
obstacles were overcome by a combination of global ingenuity and political
will. 
 That same capacity for human ingenuity is still there. It is this collective
political will that we must re-ignite. It is in our hands.
 There are those who stand at this podium and argue that national
sovereignty is the sole bedrock of international relations, and that this is
the essential purpose of the Charter. 
 In response, I would say that challenges like climate change are a
compelling reminder as to why a multilateral response remains necessary. 
 Put simply: governments acting alone cannot overcome the problems
facing our world. Our founders knew that. They said it, and they proved it
right by their deeds. 
Rising Inequalities
 The cost of turning inward will be catastrophic for people around the world,
and only lead to rising inequality.

 Last year, as all of our governments focused on our domestic response to
COVID-19, we moved backwards on meeting some of our sustainable
development goals. Extreme poverty spiked for the first time in three
decades.
 The pandemic forced us to take stock of growing inequalities within our
own societies, with seniors, racialized people, women, the LGBTQ2+
community and Indigenous peoples bearing the worst of the economic
slowdown. The pandemic also fanned racism, antisemitism and
Islamophobia, and exacerbated inequalities between countries, with the
richest among us having speedy access to vaccines, while citizens in poorer
countries struggle for their health and well-being.
 We know what must be done. We just need to choose to do it. It is in our
hands.
 In the immediate term, as the pandemic continues to rage in most parts of
the world, we must focus on scaling up production and equitable
distribution of vaccines, and on the economic reality facing least developed
and middle-income countries, such as rising debt levels and liquidity
challenges.
 Addressing these inequalities and fostering a more robust spirit of global
solidarity in the face of these daunting challenges reflects not only Canada’s
values and interests, but also the values and interests of the United
Nations. It is in our hands.
Authoritarianism
 We know that isolationism also contributes to growing authoritarianism.
 In the face of the COVID crisis, some have seized opportunities to erode
civil liberties, freedom of expression and other universal human rights.
 Yet, we do not need to look far back in history to know that politics based
on lies, deception, exclusion and inequality creates hardship and pain for
people around the world. The spread of systematic misinformation and

propaganda on social media and through the internet has made us realize
that the digital revolution comes with risks and dangers we cannot ignore. 
 Canada will continue to stand firm against the forces of lying and fear, of
oppression and hate, of criminality and corruption. For this is
fundamentally who we are as Canadians.
 Our commitment to human rights and the rule of law extends well beyond
our shores. Canada will continue its work to promote respect for the rights
of people everywhere.
 For example, we will continue to press for democracy and the rule of law in
Myanmar, where the overthrow of the elected government by the
Tatmadaw has caused much hardship and suffering to the Myanmari
people, and we support all efforts to end the military dictatorship and
assure the rights of all peoples of Myanmar, including the Rohingya, whose
lives are threatened by a genocidal regime. 
 Canada will continue to lead efforts to maintain judicial independence,
media freedoms, and the rule of law. We must all continue to fight against
impunity.
 I stand before you to say this is not something we simply talk about. It is
something we do. Two days ago, we welcomed back to Canada Michael
Kovrig and Michael Spavor, who were imprisoned by the Chinese
government after Canada applied both Canadian and international law in
response to a request for extradition of a Chinese citizen. 
 Canada observed the rule of law, and two Canadian citizens paid a heavy
price for this commitment. We did so as a matter of principle, and we are
proud of the courage of our two citizens, the good faith and resilience of
their families, and the determination and creativity of our diplomats. We
continue to oppose the way these two fine people were treated.

 And on that I want to recognize the support of our many international
partners in standing with these Canadian citizens, as well as those who
helped in developing and signing the Declaration on Arbitrary Detention in
state-to-state relations.
 Our solidarity in defence of human rights and international law is an
important signal. We must continue to stand together, united in our shared
determination to defend our values and principles.
 There is a reason respect for human rights is one of the three pillars of the
United Nations. Canada will never forget this experience and this lesson. 
We shall continue to press for an end to arbitrary detention, wherever and
however it occurs. 
Peace & Security
 The institutions and rules that we have established over the 76-year history
of the United Nations have underpinned decades of world peace and
growing prosperity. 
 There have been no world wars. Extreme poverty has been significantly
reduced.
 But the benefits of multilateralism were not always distributed broadly,
evenly or fairly. And the potential for peace remains unrealized in far too
many places.
 For the truth is that every region of the world is affected by a lack of peace
– whether in the Americas, the Middle-East, Africa, Ukraine, Haiti, the Sahel
or Afghanistan – and we far too often lack the political will necessary to
build peace. 
 I had the opportunity to visit the Middle East earlier this summer, and
listened carefully to Israeli and Palestinian leaders as well as
representatives of civil society. 

 Canada is deeply committed to Israel’s right as a member of the United
Nations to live in peace and security. We also believe that a two state
solution is the better way to address the needs and concerns of both
Israelis and Palestinians, and we encourage direct negotiations to reach this
critical objective. 
 Conflict, no matter its geography or cause, is not simply an issue of national
sovereignty. Insecurity somewhere invariably leads to insecurity elsewhere
and we all pay the price. 
 Effective responses to these issues are also in our hands.
Refugee & Humanitarian Crises
 We know that climate change, food insecurity and conflict will continue to
exacerbate the challenge of forced migration and humanitarian need in the
years to come.
 Make no mistake: this will affect all of us, and requires that we address
these issues together.
 The numbers of refugees and other forcibly displaced people are already
hitting record highs year after year. We must listen to their voices and give
them a place at the table.
 Humanitarian assistance must keep pace, but should not be viewed as a
substitute for addressing the root causes of the problems forcing people to
flee in the first place.
 For our part, through dedicated asylum policies, Canada will also provide
refuge for those who put themselves at personal risk by defending
democracy and upholding human rights.
 Canadians are a welcoming people. When we saw the tragedy befalling the
Syrian people, Canadians opened their hearts and their homes, bonding
together to personally help people rebuild their lives. Where some see risk,
we see opportunity.

 In just a few short years, in communities across Canada, Syrians have built
businesses, raised their children and become part of the fabric of our
country – just as many other communities did before them.
 This is Canada’s competitive advantage. We welcome people in need, but
also understand that their hard work, talents and cultures enrich us all.
Many come to Canada to flee, and find a place in which they can not only
build a new life, but from which to build a better world.
 Now, faced with a heart wrenching situation in Afghanistan Canadians have
once again shown their openness to those who do not wish to live under
Taliban rule but prefer to stand up for democracy, human rights and gender
equality.
 In fact, Canadians overwhelmingly called on us to do more. And in response
to their generosity and welcoming spirit we have now committed to
welcoming 40,000 Afghan refugees to Canada – so that they too can
contribute to our success, while we continue to support their efforts for a
more peaceful, tolerant world.
Gender Equality & Indigenous Rights
 [Mr.] President, our participation in the United Nations comes with a
commitment to freedom, truth, and the rule of law.
 We also have the responsibility to speak for those who have been
marginalized, discriminated against, or shunned.
 We are proud of Canada’s achievements toward achieving gender equality
– both domestically and internationally. But we are not complacent.
 We will continue our focus on these issues at home – including removing
barriers that prevent women from fully participating in the workforce and
our economy, such as working to provide access to affordable, $10 a day
childcare for every young family in Canada.

 A recovery that does not promote the full participation of women in the
economy will not be fully successful.
 And we will continue our focus on these issues internationally –through
improving girls’ education, reducing early and forced marriage, and through
our significant support to local feminist movements around the world.
 We also have the responsibility to hold each other and ourselves to
account.
 The rights of Indigenous Peoples have been an area of profound national
reflection in Canada due to greater awareness of past failures and
persistent challenges faced by First Nations, Inuit and Metis Peoples.
 We are committed to continuing on the path to reconciliation and know the
eyes of the world are on us.
 Earlier this year, we adopted the National day for truth and reconciliation
and we made the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
People the law of the land.
 Prime Minister Trudeau has committed to mandating each member of his
Cabinet with implementing it. We also committed to support systemic
change to address the tragedy of Missing and Murdered Indigenous
Women and Girls.
 By doing so, we are fully recognizing the hardship that racist colonial
policies have inflicted on successive generations of Indigenous people.
 The Government of Canada remains fully committed to protecting the
rights of Indigenous Peoples and improving their living standards.

The future is in our hands
 Colleagues, friends, I am optimistic.
 We have heard over this past week of the urgent and confounding
problems that we face as a global community. We know there is a digital
divide, that millions of children have been locked down and locked out of
schooling, that pluralism faces a struggle against the forces of extremism
and even terrorism, that many are bewildered in the face of new
technologies that can invade our privacy, uproot our families, and change
the face of work. 
 But we have the solutions and tools at our disposal. If we listen to each
other and bring these critical issues to the centre of our work together, we
can make progress. It is in our hands. 
 We have a United Nations that, over this past year, has proven that it is up
to the operational challenge of delivering in the most difficult of situations.
 We have a menu of bold ideas and proven solutions. And here I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for putting forward his Common Agenda,
which we must all consider seriously.
 We know what must be done. We must marshall the political will to do it.
 This will require a shift in mindset. It is no secret that we spend too much
time talking and not enough time making decisions. 
 Our parents and grandparents rose to the challenge in 1945. Now it’s our
turn to work together to set the course for a fairer, more just and
sustainable future for all.

 It is in our hands. My most distinguished predecessor as Foreign Minister,
Nobel Prize winner Lester Pearson, put it this way: “The fact is that to every
challenge given by the threat of death and destruction, there has always
been the response from free people: It shall not be. By these responses we
have not only saved ourselves, but have insured our future”. 
 In this noble effort, you can count on Canada today and in the days,
months, and years ahead. 
 Thank you.