The President: I have great pleasure in welcoming His Excellency Mr. José Ulisses Correia e Silva, Prime Minister and Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde, and inviting him to address the Assembly. Mr. Silva (Cabo Verde) (spoke in Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the delegation): It is a privilege for me, as a Cabo Verdean, to greet all the peoples of the United Nations represented here by their highest dignitaries. I extend a special greeting to Secretary-General António Guterres in recognition of how he has been leading and elevating the United Nations system to new heights in all areas, from human rights to peace and from the struggle against inequalities and injustice to sustainable development. I welcome the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 73/339, on cooperation with the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. Cabo Verde congratulates Mr. Tijjani Muhammad Bande of Nigeria on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session. He can count on the support of Cabo Verde. We agree with him on the virtues of multilateral diplomacy in the service of peace and development. Cabo Verde is a country with 559 years of history. Our history is one of ambition, resilience, triumph and adaptation. We have lived for centuries in a country where rainfall is sparse and uneven. We experienced hunger in the 1940s. Today, we are much more resilient and face periods of drought, always with the assurance African country to join the Transport Decarbonization Alliance. As part of our energy transition strategy, we intend to gradually replace all internal combustion vehicles with electric vehicles by 2050. That is our modest contribution to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in transportation. Cabo Verde has demonstrated its alignment, commitment and credibility with respect to the broader ideals of the United Nations. We wish to position Cabo Verde as a useful interlocutor in promoting dialogue, peace and tolerance among nations and as a credible ally for cooperative security against such transnational crimes as drug trafficking, trafficking in persons and terrorism. We are taking all steps to implement the 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in an effort that involves Government, companies, civil society organizations and international partners. We seek even greater commitment in order to achieve our ultimate goal of developed status. For the United Nations, which will celebrate 75 years of existence in 2020, and for each country individually, this is a great moment to accelerate our actions towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals if we actually wish to leave no one behind and achieve one of the more humanistic goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Time is short and we need concrete action to reverse the direction and breadth of climate change. Time is short and we must implement effective responses to the challenge of poverty and its consequences. Time is short and we must commit to peace. The current generation of political players does not have all the time in the world and must be held accountable to humankind. The time has arrived for us to move beyond intentions. It is time for us to undertake concrete, measurable and committed actions to fulfil the aspirations of our peoples and our global needs. It is time to improve the world. The Acting President: On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister and Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde for the statement he has just made. Mr. José Ulisses Correia e Silva, Prime Minister and Minister of Reform of the Republic of Cabo Verde, was escorted from the rostrum.
