
Mr. President,
Allow me to start by congratulating you and the 
sisterly country, Maldives, on your election as 
president of the Seventy-Sixth Session of the 
General Assembly.
My appreciation also goes to Mr. Volkan 
Bozkir, for his able guidance of the Seventy-Fifth 
Session.
Congratulations is also in order for Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, for once-again winning 
the vote of confidence to serve the United Nations. 
I also thank the host country for the facilities 
availed to us in the midst of a global pandemic. 
Mr. President,
This year’s General Assembly takes place while 
we continue to grapple with the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
The pandemic rattled all aspects of public and 
private life. It also revealed the power of innovation 
and the enormous potential of scientific research to 
serve humanity. 

I would like to take a moment to applaud the 
scientists, engineers, and everyone who have played 
a part in the discovery and rollout of the COVID-19 
vaccine. 
Evidently, science can serve humanity only if 
good faith and rationality guides politics.
Unfortunately, Africa, with negligible vaccination 
rate is left waiting for the drips from the surplus of 
others due to vaccine nationalism.
In addition, the economic devastation in 
developing countries from the pandemic is yet to be 
addressed by meaningful economic and financial 
measures.
We hope, countries with the means, would 
advance cooperation that is cognizant of the global 
nature of the problem. 
With this pandemic, there is no isolated safety. 
No one is safe until everyone is safe. 

Mr. President,
The true dignity and freedom of people lies with 
their ability to sustain themselves. Poverty and 
dependance on foreign aid cause political, 
governance, security, and human development 
challenges. 
Global-warming is the most alarming driver of 
poverty. Agrarian and pastoralist communities and 
economies like ours with these livelihoods face an 
existential challenge. 
The impacts of climate change are destroying 
arable land and biodiversity thereby disrupting our 
food system. Production of cash crops suffer from
quality and quantity problems. Perennial flood and 
drought are straining the emergency readiness we 
have in place.
 The targets under the environment and 
sustainable development agenda are overdue and 
can no more be overtaken by events. 

Hopefully, COP-26 will pave the way for climate 
financing and support to programs such as the 
Green Belt and Green Legacy afforestation 
initiatives that are restoring a long-lost ecosystem. 
Mr. President, 
In the past few years, we heard from this 
podium voices of justified concern and call for rule based world order and viable multilateralism. 
Ethiopia, has always been steadfast in its 
support for multilateral institutions. Our position 
emanates not from rhetoric but from our tragic 
ordeal during the days rule-based order was left in 
the shambles. 
We commend the declaration of return and 
renewal of commitment to multilateralism. At the 
same time, we see a glaring need to reiterate the 
fundamental values of sovereign-equality, non interference, and cooperation based on mutual 
benefit and respect. 

Multilateralism stands on the shoulders of 
states that ably-guard their sovereignty, territorial 
integrity and political independence.
Multilateralism will meet its objective only if states 
are able and free to manage their domestic and 
external affairs. 
Indeed, our human aspirations are inherently 
similar. However, our viewpoints that are 
underpinned by our diversity in cultures, history, 
and socio-economic reality will not always be fully aligned. 
This diversity shall be viewed as an asset and 
no one amongst us should wish to prevail over the 
other, especially when it comes to values and 
policies dealing with our internal and external 
affairs. 

Mr. President,
Three years ago, my country, Ethiopia 
embarked on a promising journey of reform. The 
changes we introduced, ushered-in democracy, 
human rights, human development, and regional 
stability. It also opened avenues for dialogue and 
unity among divergent political and interest groups. 
Tapping into Ethiopia’s rich history and 
enormous potential, the reform charted our 
inevitable and bright future - placing Ethiopia as a 
new horizon of hope.
It overturned a complex network of corruption, 
illegitimate political power, and illicit financial flows 
-- installed at the cost of national interest and the 
detriment of regional peace. 
The reform, however, was not without 
challenges. As any other democracy, our 
democratic process is an attempt to find a balance 
between stability and disruption. 

In Ethiopia, groups that consider equality as 
subjugation are making their best effort to create 
and prolong anarchy. 
At the hands of these lords of instability, we 
went through unimaginably inhumane attacks 
against citizens, instigation of violence, and 
destruction of property, that culminated in an 
attack against the Ethiopian army. 
On the night of November four last year, in a 
scheme orchestrated by a criminal group, the 
Ethiopian National Defense Force was attacked 
from within. The unsuspecting men and women in 
uniform were slain. 
The Government of Ethiopia, took the necessary 
measures to avert the grave danger imposed on us. 
Mr. President 
While the government was addressing 
humanitarian needs, the disruptors applied their 
cruel design to aggravate human suffering. We were
also caught by surprise, and to-be-honest,
unprepared for the twisted propaganda campaign. 

Little did we know the power of privatized 
politics and foreign policy that clouds the truth from
policy decisions.
The criminal enterprise and its enablers created 
and advertised horrific imagery of faked incidents. 
As if the real misery of our people is not enough, 
story lines are created to match not the facts but 
preconceived stereotypical attitudes. 
The Government of Ethiopia meeting-out its 
obligation to fulfil humanitarian needs, the 
declaration of humanitarian ceasefire, the
commissioning of investigations, and accountability 
measures have not mitigated the propaganda 
campaigns. At this stage, we are nearly convinced 
humanitarian assistance is a pretext for advancing 
political considerations. 
Accused by agenda-and-revenue driven media, 
convicted by misguided politics, we are now facing 
a unilateral coercive measure. Ethiopia opposed 
coercive measures, when it was applied against 
others, we advise against its application on 

Ethiopia. Prescriptions and punitive measures 
never helped improve situations or relations.
Mr. President 
The prudent measures we will continue to take 
are commensurate with the existential challenge we 
face. Despite the undue pressure, we shall live up 
to the solemn obligation to preserve the sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and the political independence of 
Ethiopia.
While cooperation and concern from our friends 
is welcome, we underline the need to employ 
constructive approach, cultivate trust and ensure 
understanding. Attempts to extend support or even 
opine on an internal issue of a state requires full 
understanding about the complexities of the 
problem.
It shall be noted, the challenge we are facing is 
not limited to the boundaries of Ethiopia. The entire 
region is facing the destructive path paved for it by
this group. Supporting Ethiopia overcome this 
criminal group is helping sustain regional peace.

Dialogue has always been our preferred course 
of action. Accordingly, Ethiopia is open to candid 
initiatives for peace. In this connection, we will work 
with the African Union and the High Representative 
for the Horn of Africa towards an Ethiopia led 
national dialogue. We only hope, the African Union 
will be given the space to apply its own wisdom. 
I also underscore my government’s unreserved 
commitment for the provision of humanitarian 
assistance and facilitate the operation of our 
humanitarian partners that adhere to the principles 
of neutrality, independence and humanity and the 
laws of the country. Apart from this, no excuse will 
justify any attempt to intervene in our internal 
affairs. 
Mr. President, 
Had it been for the plans of the internal and 
external destabilizers, Ethiopia would have turned 
into rubles where the greedy and the archaic feast 
and thrive. 

Not only that, the political map of the Horn of 
Africa would have altered, worsening its existing 
volatility. 
With the resilience of its people, and the 
foundational cultural and religious diversity that 
made up Ethiopia’s society, Ethiopia will continue 
overcoming its adversaries.
Ethiopia will always be a beacon of freedom and 
symbol of peace. As a nation that had never posed 
threat to security of other states, we will maintain 
our support to regional and global stability.
At this historic juncture, Ethiopia demands and 
Ethiopia deserves a similar cooperation it extended 
to others in the aftermath of attacks targeting their 
institutions. 
Mr. president,
The political and security landscape in Africa is 
on a path of adversity. Forcible overthrow of 
governments, joint military exercises, aggression, 
renewed appetite for intervention in sovereign 
countries, subversion and mercenaryism, 

normalized and renewed scramble for natural 
resources, secret military pacts, geo-political 
competitions and others are becoming pervasive. 
Unless we swiftly change course, this will be yet 
another round to destabilize Africa and 
disenfranchise Africans in the determination of our 
destiny. We hope there will be more countries to lift 
the banner of multilateralism rather than the 
vagaries of unilateralism. 
Accordingly, Ethiopia stands ready to avail 
bilateral mechanisms and diplomatic solutions to 
resolve the border dispute with Sudan. It is 
incumbent upon our two governments to work for 
peace for the sake of our people that have the 
strongest bond of fraternity. 
Mr. President 
The past year has also seen a milestone for the 
people of Ethiopia. Our experiment with democracy 
ascended one level with a free, fair, peaceful, and 
credible election with an unprecedented level of 
voter turnout. 

The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam – a 
hydroelectric dam project we fully financed 
underwent a second-year filling. Hopefully, we 
inspired others to develop local capability to plan, 
finance, and complete renewable energy projects.
However, our humble attempt to light the 
houses of millions of Ethiopians and create hope for 
our youth is politicized before global bodies. This 
peoples' project also received unending threats. 
Ironically, we are accused and threatened for 
drinking from our water. On the matter of the Nile 
and the GERD, our confidence is in the might of the 
truth, wisdom and justice that has always defined 
our path for cooperation. 
The generational desire to use our natural 
resources will not be stopped by a colonial legacy 
and monopolistic cause. We hope our negotiating 
partners are prepared for a win-win outcome under 
the African Union led process.

Mr. President,
I would like to conclude my statement with a 
very important note on the role of my country in 
peacekeeping. 
Our troops successfully completed missions in 
Darfur and Abyei. They paid the ultimate sacrifice 
in the most isolated mission areas, facing active 
intercommunal clashes, unconventional warfare 
methods, border disputes, and unabated 
administrative obstructions. 
Our troops have done justice to the most 
cherished name of their country through their 
service and sacrifice. I pay them my respects and 
express our pride. 
With the impending transition of the 
peacekeeping mission in Abyei, I would like to 
convey our best wishes for our two neighbors to 
amicably resolve their territorial dispute. We hope 
the sacrifices we made will not be in vain. 

I thank you, Mr. President, and assure you of 
Ethiopia’s full support for successful completion of 
your PRESIDENCY OF HOPE.
I thank you