Mr President, I congratulate you warmly on your assumption of office as
President of the General Assembly, the Assembly of humanity, and wish
you well in the management of our affairs. I congratulate also the
Secretary-General on his unanimous re-election for a second term. The
Common Agenda that he has outlined provides us with a powerful
framework within which to tackle effectively global issues in these first
decades of the 21st century.
The presence here, in New York, of one hundred and two (102) leaders
of nations, in this 76th Session, tells us of our resolve to return the world
to normalcy. We are not there yet, but we are making considerable
progress.
Back in 2017, when I made my first appearance at the General Assembly
as a newly elected President of Ghana, I said neither Ghana nor Africa
wanted to be scars on anybody’s conscience. I said we want to build
economies that are not dependent on charity and handouts, because long
and bitter experiences have taught us that, no matter how generous the
charity, we would remain poor.
Between 2017 to 2020, Ghana recorded an average growth rate of 7%,
amongst the highest in the world. In 2020, when the global economy and
sub-Saharan Africa’s contracted by 3.5% and 2.1%, respectively, Ghana
was one of the few countries that produced a positive growth rate. This
is a testament to our determination to build a Ghana Beyond Aid.
One year on, although infection rates and deaths are relatively lower in
the Region, the virus's impact on economies and livelihoods has been
damaging. The latest numbers from the African Development Bank
indicate that African economies, which contracted by 2.1% in 2020, are
yet to return to pre-pandemic levels. More than thirty million Africans fell
into extreme poverty in 2020, and nearly forty million could do so in 2021.
The social impact has been devastating; over one hundred and three
million African jobs have been lost. Women, who account for forty percent
(40%) of total employment, have been most hard hit.
Mr. President, we are listening to the scientists: it is evident that
vaccination is the way to protect populations, and revitalise societies. To
vaccinate seventy percent (70%) in the shortest possible time, as is being
done elsewhere in the world, means some nine hundred million Africans
have to be vaccinated. The Afreximbank’s structuring of the Africa Vaccine
Acquisition Taskforce's two-billion-dollar acquisition of four hundred
million Johnson & Johnson vaccines is part of the historic African Union's
COVID-19 Vaccine Development and Access Strategy. It is a critical
milestone in our collective fight against the pandemic, in a continent
suffering the worst brunt of vaccine nationalism. The Africa Vaccine
Acquisition Taskforce vaccine programme, partly manufactured in South
Africa, is the single largest and most far-reaching trade transaction since
the entry into force of the African Continental Free Trade Area in January
this year. It is eloquent testimony to the benefits of domestic production
and pooled procurement in Africa, as envisioned by the African
Continental Free Trade Area Agreement.
Ghana agrees with the call of the Rome Declaration of Global Health for
voluntary licensing and technology transfers to boost vaccine production.
The Africa Union is working with WHO, WTO and other global partners to
expand its vaccine manufacturing and deployment.
We, in Ghana, have, so far, received five million doses, which have been
administered to frontline health workers and those classified as being
most at risk. Five million is not a figure to be sneered at, particularly when
we consider the situation in many other African countries. We are grateful
that our efforts at the management of the pandemic and vaccine
distribution have been recognised, and we have received these amounts
so far. We are still hoping to vaccinate twenty million of our people by the
end of the year.
One unfortunate development appears to be the recent measures on entry
into some countries in Europe, which suggest that Covishield, the Oxford-
AstraZeneca vaccine manufactured in India, is not recognised by these
countries. What is intriguing is the fact that this vaccine was donated to
African countries through the COVAX facility. The use of vaccines as a tool
for immigration control will be a truly regressive step.
Mr President, the last time there was such an upheaval in the world was
during the Second World War, which led to the establishment of a new
world order. This organisation, the United Nations, and the other Bretton
Woods institutions were created to maintain international peace and
security, help rebuild the shattered post-war economy, and promote
global economic cooperation.
Even before the pandemic outbreak, many had concluded that the current
structure of global economic co-operation, designed some seventy-seven
(77) years ago, has proven inadequate to finance infrastructure and
economic transformation in developing countries. Given the incapacity of
the global financial system to produce the necessary outcomes to finance
sustainable development, we need a constructive review. COVID-19
provides a great chance to rethink global economic co-operation, based
on the principles of mutuality, equity, sustainability, and collective
prosperity envisaged by the SDGs.
There is no question but that, if the famous gathering in San Francisco
was to take place today, it would be a significantly different United Nations
Charter that would be written. In much the same way, a World Bank or
IMF or WHO, that is born today, would be radically different institutions
from those that were set up after the World War, as many of the countries
in today’s world, especially in Africa and the Caribbean, were not present
in San Francisco.
The pandemic has also shown us that, the great advances in science and
technology notwithstanding, we still have a lot to learn and discover about
the human body and about life. Thus far, in spite of the grisly predictions
of dead bodies littering the streets of Africa, and in spite of not having
had as much access to vaccines as the developed world, Africa seems,
mercifully, to have escaped the worst of the COVID death rates. And, for
that, we thank God.
Ghana wants to share a few thoughts, which, we believe, should form the
basis for the new global co-operation.
Firstly, we need to strengthen the funding of the existing global health
organisations. This must include a greater, more predictable base of
multilateral funding for WHO and Regional Centres of Disease Controls,
which play the central roles in global health security. It will require
dedicating an additional one percent (1%) of GDP to funding global
health. This is an investment in a global public good, not aid.
Secondly, we must develop more resilient finances to build back better,
and for future preparedness. Across the African continent, revenues have
decreased by as much as one hundred and fifty billion dollars ($150
billion), as economies are still reeling from the economic impact of the
pandemic. African governments have already spent scarce reserves
fighting the pandemic, and providing social protection to millions of
affected households. Ghana has been advocating that innovative
financing must also address structural challenges beyond responding to
immediate fiscal needs, by providing mechanisms to facilitate investments
in health infrastructure, technology, the environment, and people that
would bolster resilience and equitable recovery.
The IMF's unprecedented six hundred-and-fifty-billion-dollar ($650 billion)
SDR allocation offers a unique opportunity to provide additional financial
resources to address the vast and surging inequities the pandemic has
revealed, and a crisis to come. Africa’s allocation is some thirty-three
billion dollars ($33 billion). If there was ever a time for an African Marshall
Plan, it is now! The SDR infusion should be seized upon as a catalytic
effort to leapfrog Africa to the next level of human development, and
ensure sustained global prosperity. African leaders have advocated for a
prudent and transparent channelling of twenty-five to thirty-five percent
(25%-35%) of SDRs, that is one hundred and sixty to two hundred and
thirty billion dollars, from wealthier to vulnerable countries, one hundred
billion dollars ($100 billion) of which should be dedicated to Africa. We
welcome the support of the European countries represented at the Africa
Summit in France, the IMF, the G7 and G20, to some SDR redistribution.
Mr President, proceeds of channelled SDRs should fund vaccine
acquisition and manufacturing, climate and green investments, and a pan-
African Stability Mechanism, like the European Stability Mechanism, that
would safeguard financial stability on the continent. A part of the
redistribution should also help fund the recapitalisation of the African
Development Bank and Afreximbank to support industrialisation, privatesector
job creation and the African Continental Free Trade initiative.
Thirdly, we must re-position key multilateral organisations and
international financial institutions such as the United Nations, the other
Bretton Woods Institutions, and the G20 to reflect inclusiveness, support
country investments in global public goods, and ensure fast-tracked
financial support to build back better, and prepare for future pandemics.
For instance, the key to the G20's effectiveness is that it achieves
representative coverage of the global population and economy with a
diversified enough number of leaders at the table, to enable speed and
flexibility in deliberation and decision-making.
Admitting the African Union to an expanded G21 would have the same
galvanising effect within Africa that the EU's participation in the G20 has
within Europe, strengthening policy co-ordination and coherence across
the fifty-four (54) African economies. With the African Union at the table,
the group suddenly would have representation for fifty-four (54) more
countries, 1.3 billion more people, and $2.3 trillion more output. This
extraordinary increase in representation will add just one seat to the table,
and about ten minutes to the discussion. However, it will redefine global
policy co-ordination to enable a more prosperous, inclusive and
sustainable world to emerge.
Fourthly, we, in Africa, are as committed as any to the fight against
Climate Change. We believe, however, that the fight is better-advanced if
we are able to maintain the crucial balance between economic, political
and environmental imperatives – positions that we will be articulating in
Glasgow, at the COP 26 Conference, which should form part of the new
Global Compact.
Lastly, now more than ever, we must defend democracy, constitutional
rule and human rights in the world. In the last twenty-four (24) months,
we have witnessed assaults on democracy around the world, sometimes
even in developed countries where we had assumed that a consensus on
the democratic form of governance had been established.
Mr. President, in West Africa, recent events in Mali and Guinea have
undermined democratic governance in our Region. ECOWAS, the regional
body whose Authority I have the honour to be the current Chair, is
unreservedly committed to maintaining democratic governance in the
ECOWAS Community. That is why both Guinea and Mali, foundation
members of the Community, have been suspended from its organisation,
pending the restoration of democratic governance. We welcome the
support of the United Nations for the measures taken.
ECOWAS has given Guinea six (6) months to do so, and requested the
immediate release of President Alpha Conde. On my visit to Conakry last
Friday, the military leaders indicated their willingness to see to his
imminent release, and it is our hope that they will keep to their word. The
Authority has also made it clear to the military government in Mali, that it
is not prepared to negotiate an extension to the February deadline for the
holding of democratic elections, as the essential steps to be taken can,
with political will, be effected within the ECOWAS-sanctioned timetable. It
is better that a government, with a democratic mandate, be in place as
soon as possible, to implement the necessary reforms for the future
stability and growth of Mali, thereby enhancing capacity for the allimportant
fight against terrorism in Mali and in the wider Sahel.
We, in Ghana, highly resolve that we will continue to defend democracy
and constitutional rule, and uphold human rights. We shall work to
strengthen the institutions that support democracy in our country and in
our Region.
We shall continue to support the United Nations and other international
organisations to help remind us that, indeed, no man is an island, entire
of itself.
I thank you for your attention.