In the name of Allah- The Merciful- The Compassionate
Your Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid
President of the United Nations General Assembly
Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres
Secretary General of the United Nations
Your Majesties, Highnesses, & Excellencies Heads of Delegations
Ladies and Gentlemen
The Peace, Mercy, & Blessings of Allah be upon you
It pleases me at the outset to congratulate Your Excellency personally, and
congratulate the Republic of the Maldives on your election as President of the 76th
Session of the United Nations General Assembly, and to assure you of our total
support in everything that would facilitate the tasks of your workings.
I also would like to seize this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude for
the appreciated efforts of your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir
during his assumption the tasks of the presidency of the previous session.
In this regard, I cannot but extend congratulations to His Excellency, Mr.
Antonio Guterres, on his reelection as Secretary General of the United Nations,
which came in recognition of his remarkable efforts in leading this inveterate
Organization during his first term, the last year of which has witnessed a challenge
that has branched out in its dimensions, deepened in the magnitude of its perils, and
exceedingly exacerbated the losses in lives and earnings, whether moral or material.
Mr. President;
Our world is still pigmented in the mourning colors drawn by the Covid-19
pandemic, an epidemic of global nature characterized by the destructive ability to
cause damage, the absence of selectivity in claiming human lives, and imposing
repeated waves of emergency hegemony that has caused successive shocks affecting
the core of modern lifestyles, in their various humanitarian, political, economic and
environmental aspects.
By taking a quick glance at the recorded international figures and statistics,
we will notice the magnitude of the scars that will remain present for a long time in
the global conscience. From the number of casualties that has surpassed 4.5 million
people, to the number of confirmed recorded cases exceeding 200 million cases, and
the unbearable burden placed on the shoulders of health sectors and those working
in them, who deserve from us a pause of veneration and appreciation, for their
steadfastness in the first line of defense, despite the horrors that threatened the
collapse of numerous health systems across the world. This is in addition to the
exacerbation of the food insecurity crisis due to the disruption in supply lines, which
came as an expected outcome of the severe economic downturn and stagnation,
which the world has not witnessed in over 90 years, also the decrease in the services
provided by educational sectors , particularly in developing and least developed
countries, in such a way that it has become more threatening than ever before, to
cause regression in the gains achieved, and writing off the recorded achievements of
the sustainable development goals.
Mr. President;
Any follower of the realities of history will find that epidemics, despite the
gravity of their effects, have played pivotal roles as a major catalyst for change, and
rebuilding better at the political, economic, and social level. From this standpoint,
the Covid-19 pandemic was tantamount to a mirror to the world, reflecting its
weaknesses and revealing its flaws, manifested in several chronic aspects, among
which is the increase in rates of hunger and poverty, prolonged conflicts,
uncontrolled progress of modern technology, and its ramifications on cyber security,
and the spread of the scourge of terrorism, while the phenomenon of structural
disparities between countries has exacerbated, which in turn contributed to widening
the gaps among them. All these challenges and more have put international
multilateral work before a fateful test, between its viability or its stagnation and
decline.
Perhaps one of the most positive reflections that the pandemic has highlighted,
were represented in the emergence of modern patterns of creativity, innovation, and
adaptation, that has contributed to creating rapid responses and advanced forms of
cooperation within the societies themselves, or between countries. This is in addition
to the breakthrough in scientific research that was embodied in the race to defeat the
virus, through the production of multiple vaccines, that have proved their
effectiveness in providing the required immunization in practical terms, with
encouraging percentages. However, the bet on the ability of the international
community to make optimal use of this crisis to bring about a transformation for the
better to our world; lies in striving to ensure a fair and sustainable recovery that
leaves no one behind.
Mr. President;
Reaching the goal of recovery requires starting with several steps; most
important among which is giving critical priority to investing in data and information
infrastructure, since the availability of evidence based on digital technology will
contribute to enhancing decision-making processes for the programs and policies
aimed at mobilizing resources, and rebuilding after overcoming the crisis, in order
to shield societies from similar future crises. However the most outstanding and
urgent step, lies in finding the pace for a fair and secure distribution of vaccines, to
reach universal immunization levels.
In this context, the State of Kuwait has achieved one of the highest global
percentages recorded in providing vaccines, at a percentage that reached 72% for
citizens and residents alike, as well as the ability to maintain its system from
collapsing. My country continues to support international efforts to fight the Covid
19 pandemic, its total contributions amounted to 327.4 million dollars, the latest of
which was providing 40 million dollars to the GAVI Alliance and the COVAX
facility initiative, in an effort to enhance and fortify global health security.
Mr. President,
The Palestinian Question still occupies the central and pivotal position in our
Arab and Muslim worlds. Tension and instability will remain prevalent in our region,
unless the Palestinian people obtain all their legitimate political rights, and Israel,
the occupying authority, halts its practices and violations of international
humanitarian law, represented in the building of settlements, confiscation of land,
closure of areas, the continued imposition of the blockade on Gaza, and its
desecration of the sanctity of holy places. We emphasize the importance of
continuing to exert efforts, in order to restart the negotiations within a set time
schedule, to reach a just and comprehensive peace, according to the terms of
reference of the peace process, the resolutions of international legitimacy, and the
Arab Peace Initiative, to end the Israeli occupation and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian state, with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the borders
prior to 4 June 1967, and the return of the refugees. At the same time we praise the
historical roles of UNRWA in providing basic assistance to millions of Palestinian
refugees, and emphasize the importance of continuing to support its work.
Mr. President;
The continuation of the Syrian crisis, which has entered its 11th year, with all
the humanitarian pain it bears for the Syrian citizen inside and outside the country,
has remained as witness to the fact, that absence of consensus and international will,
from one side, and external interventions from another side, were the main reasons
for prolonging this bloody conflict. From here we renew our firm conviction, that
there is no military solution to it, and emphasize the importance of working to reach
a political settlement, according to the relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254, in a way that achieves and meets the aspirations and
hopes of the brotherly Syrian people.
Mr. President;
The continuing crisis in brotherly Yemen, and the growing and dangerous
threats it poses to regional peace and stability, has been linked to the observed reality
of how to deal with relevant Security Council resolutions and outputs. From here,
we renew our firm position that the only solution for this crisis, is the political
solution based on the three agreed upon terms of reference, these are; the GCC
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outputs of the National Dialogue
Conference, and the resolutions of the Security Council, especially resolution 2216.
We also renew our support to the Special Envoy of the Secretary General to Yemen.
At the same time we welcome the constructive roles undertaken by the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in order to activate the implementation of the Riyadh
Agreement, as well as its initiative for peace in Yemen. Simultaneously we renew
our condemnation to all the aggressions and attacks to which the Saudi territory was
subjected, and reaffirm our support to all actions and measures the Kingdom takes
to maintain its security and stability.
Mr. President;
The reaching by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, early this year, to elect
a President and his deputies for the Presidential Council, as well as a Prime Minister,
represented an illuminating sign on the ability of the international community,
represented by the United Nations to make a quantum leap on the peace bumpy road,
which has become increasingly slippery due to the prevalence of a sharp institutional
division for more than seven years, whose perilous indications exacerbated on the
peace and stability in the country and the states in the region. We renew our call to
the Libyan brothers on the necessity to attach priority to the high interests of the
country, as well as to the peaceful solutions based on the rejection of violence, and
the need to adhere to the outputs of international conferences and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to ensure completion of all the required arrangements to hold
the elections on its scheduled date, 24 December 2021, while expressing our hope
that these efforts will lead to measures that guarantee the security, stability, and
unity of Libya, and meets the aspirations of its brotherly people.
Mr. President;
The political, social, and economic fallouts from the outbreak of the
pandemic, have played a role in the spread of a state of global self-retroversion,
which terrorist and extremist groups has deliberately exploited in areas afflicted by
conflicts or suffer from security fragility, and as what the Middle East region has
suffered in particular, from growing subversive operations of terrorist organizations,
foremost among which is the Daesh terrorist group, was a main reason to intensify
efforts to combat this real danger in all its forms and manifestations, work on
draining its resources and eliminating its funding sources, as well as activating
international and regional counter-terrorism agreements.
In light of what a number of countries in our region are witnessing from the
growth of this destructive danger in Yemen, Libya, Syria, Somalia, and Iraq, the
international community has watched with great interest, the delicate developments
Afghanistan witnessed lately. In this regard, we call upon the Taliban movement and
all parties, for the need to exercise utmost self-restraint, in order to prevent
bloodshed, provide full protection to civilians, adhere to international obligations
and laws, and to preserve the security and stability of the country, as well as the
gains of the friendly Afghani people.
At that same regional level, starting from the principled premise related to the
consolidation of the rules of good-neighborliness contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, we renew our call to the Islamic Republic of Iran to take earnest
trust-building measures, to commence a dialogue built on the respect of the
sovereignty of states and non-intervention in their internal affairs, reducing tension
in the Gulf, and preserving the safety, security and freedom of maritime navigation
from any threats, in what contributes to laying the foundations of relations based on
mutual cooperation and respect, and in what reflects the future aspirations of all the
countries of the region, for a life of peace and stability, and in what achieves
prosperity and development of its peoples.
Among the sticking issues of regional character, the erosion of the nuclear
disarmament system has constituted a challenge of existential nature to the security
and stability of the region. In this regard, we look forward to concerted international
and regional efforts for the success of the objectives of the Conference concerned
with the establishment of a nuclear-free zone and other weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East, which the State of Kuwait will be presiding its second session in
the coming month of November, at the United Nations headquarters in New York.
Mr. President;
The continuation of the Corona pandemic, and its excessive plundering of the
gains achieved by states, to reach the sustainable development goals, have shown
the extent of intermeshing and interconnect between the various dimensions of
sustainability, whereby the issue of climate change and the ecological systems
associated with it, were not isolated from global impact waves. In this regard, we
look forward for the results of the United Nations Conference on climate change,
scheduled to be held in Glasgow in the coming month of November, to lead to
finding a constructive review that would ensure measuring the progress
accomplished and point out shortcomings, based on the principle of shared
responsibility, taking into consideration the disparity in responsibilities and
burdens, in order to contribute to halting environmental degradation, exacerbated by
the noticeable increase in temperatures, in the severity of storms and flooding, as
well as shrinking green spaces resulting from the repeated phenomenon of forest
fires in number of countries, which will have dire environmental fallouts.
In conclusion, I cannot but renew our adherence to the international
multilateral system, and to the principles and aims of the United Nations Charter, in
order to ensure the development and strengthening of international governance, to
guarantee the realization of its lofty mission, in preserving international peace and
security, and to serve all mankind.
The Peace, Mercy and Blessings of Allah be upon you.
