New York, 22 September 2021
Dear President of the United Nations General Assembly,
Dear Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
A few weeks ago, my country, the Republic of Moldova, celebrated the 30-th anniversary of
its independence. I want to use this opportunity to once again congratulate my fellow
citizens on this important milestone for us! Together, we chose democracy and freedom
over corruption and state capture. It is my great honor to address today this high-level UN
forum on their behalf.
Some voices claim that multilateralism is no longer relevant in this day and age. That we
cannot work together efficiently any longer at countering global challenges because we are
too much inward looking as a result of our own overwhelming domestic problems. Our
world today, however, faces extraordinary challenges, both in magnitude and in kind. These,
I claim, can only be solved together.
Most of today’s global challenges spill over national borders as our world is more
interconnected than ever before. The Covid-19 pandemic, climate change, growing
international security challenges, and the fragility of international rules-based order, all
require joint work in search for sustainable solutions. These problems cannot be solved
alone. We require genuine, concerted international efforts to provide truly sustainable
solutions for our future.
My country experiences some of these challenges first-hand. And I stand before you today
to convey our willingness and readiness to work with the UN institutions and the
international community to find sustainable solutions to these challenges that affect us
both collectively and individually.
Let me go through these four challenges separately.
First, there is no doubt that the Covid-19 pandemic has been the biggest challenge of our
generation so far. Like most other states, the Republic of Moldova has been hit hard. But our
own experience of dealing with the crisis has been filled with hope and gratitude. Gratitude
for the tremendous global endeavor of solidarity that supported my country’s work to
contain the virus. And hope - that solidarity can make us all more resilient.
Thanks to our external partners, my fellow citizens could start vaccination already in
March. We now have a sufficient supply of vaccines for our citizens. Our healthcare system
received important international support. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the
European Union and its member states, the World Health Organization, and the entire UN
family, and all our friends and partners for their continuous help to fight this pandemic
worldwide. As more countries get access to vaccines, our greatest task ahead is to promote
immunization, relaunch our economies and reopen our societies. This can only be achieved
through collective effort.
Second, climate change – another major challenge we are all faced with. We live through its
consequences as we speak - extreme weather, record-high temperatures, floods affecting
every country.
For the Republic of Moldova, climate change means severe droughts every few years, floods,
ruined crops and livelihoods of people.
The footprint of the Republic of Moldova for climate change has been low, and we are
committed to keeping it this way. As we seek to modernize our economy, we pledge to do so
in a sustainable way. Expanding our forests, transitioning to a green and circular economy,
promoting clean energy, preserving water and land resources, promoting responsible and
sustainable production and consumption is our way forward.
Third, international security. We see more and more security crises arising in different
parts of our planet. In an interdependent world, their aftershocks can be felt across the
globe. When referring to our region, we are seriously concerned with the deteriorating
security situation in the Black Sea area.
Here I would like to stress once again that the Republic of Moldova is a state committed to
peace. We remain firmly committed to identifying a peaceful, political solution to the
conflict in the Transnistrian region of our country, based on Moldova’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. We will also continue
promoting confidence-building measures with a strong emphasis on protecting
fundamental rights and freedoms in the Transnistrian region – a pressing issue for my
country.
In the spirit of Moldova’s Constitutional neutrality and international law, I would also like to
reiterate that our position on the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Russian forces
remains unchanged. This includes the removal or destruction of ammunitions from the
Cobasna stockpiles which pose a security and environmental threat to the region as a
whole. We count on the support of the international community in this endeavor.
Erosion of democracy and the declining trust in the state that it produces is another
important global challenge I would like to address. This is particularly relevant for my
country. Democracy remains our universal ideal and a core value for our state. Rebuilding
citizens’ trust in public institutions, cleaning up the state from vested interests and
delivering decent public services is the cornerstone of Moldova’s further democratic
progress and modernization.
Democracy is threatened by several factors. One of them is the spread of disinformation.
While new social media platforms have been an important tool to mobilize and spread
democratic practices in many regions of the world, they are also enhancing disinformation,
which, in worst case scenarios, may seriously disrupt key democratic processes such as
elections. We need a global conversation and to jointly look for concrete solutions to the
dangers that disinformation poses to the rules-based international order.
Another factor that erodes democracy is corruption. Corruption undermines people’s trust
in their states. While no country is exempt from it, corruption disproportionately affects
poor states. It makes the state and its institutions weaker, more vulnerable, and less stable.
In the recent past, corruption transformed Moldova into a captured state. Corruption
became a threat to democracy and to our national security. Crooks used us as a transit
country to launder money through our institutions before depositing them abroad. We have
managed to overthrow these corrupt regimes, and now, our main task is to strengthen our
justice and law enforcement systems. We are committed to doing so, but fixing one end of
the problem does not make the problem disappear.
A system, in which criminals extract wealth and assets from countries with weak
institutions, store this capital in offshores, and then find safe haven in other countries, is
both unsustainable and unfair. Designing international rules for asset recovery could bring
more fairness to the global stage and do justice to weaker states.
As an international community, we need to design, apply, and rigorously monitor systems to
promote international transparency and accountability. We need to join efforts to combat
money-laundering and investigate illicit financial flows. We need to make better use of
asset seizure tools and to work together to suppress organized crime. The magnitude of the
challenge is so extensive that we need the serious involvement of all international and
national actors. We need an effective collective response to safeguard democracy and the
international rules-based order.
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary General,
Together we can propose better and more sustainable solutions to global challenges. These
should be, first and foremost, citizen-oriented. In last year’s elections, the citizens of
Moldova clearly said that our country can do better. Despite multiple setbacks, people
continued to fight tirelessly for our young democracy, for our European future.
With a strong mandate for change, we are beginning to clean up the state from corruption.
We are reforming the justice sector. We are launching a significant infrastructure build-up.
We are working on connecting Moldova to the rest of Europe through bridges, improved
railways, electricity and gas interconnectors. We are part of free trade areas both with the
EU and our neighbors to the East. We can provide excellent business opportunities to both.
We have a highly-educated, and hard-working population. We are becoming a good place
for investment. We have ambitious plans for digitalization of the economy and the public
sector. Protecting the environment is a central part of our reform process. Only a year ago,
these were just hopes. Today, we are turning these hopes into reality.
Distinguished audience,
We come from different parts of the world and we have different national agendas, but our
lives are interlinked. The global challenges I referred to bring us closer than ever. Their
complexity can only be overcome through collective efforts in search for sustainable
solutions. Such solutions are easier to find in today’s world, because we have at our
disposal not only great minds but also the necessary tools.
We salute the UN Secretary General's Report on "Our Common Agenda" as a
forward-looking blueprint for an enhanced global cooperation to effectively address the
common challenges.
Only through solidarity and closer international cooperation will we, UN Member States, be
able to overcome current and emerging challenges and reach the vision for a world where
people live in peace and prosperity, in harmony with nature.
Thank you.
