

Mr Secretary General of the United Nations;
Distinguished Heads of Delegations; 
Excellencies;
Ladies and Gentlemen!
It is with great pleasure and honour that I take part in the 76th session of 
the General Assembly, representing H.E Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of 
the Republic of Mozambique, who due to pressing issues related to his 
agenda, couldn’t be here in New York.
Excellencies,
Let us convey our warm congratulations to His Excellency Abdulla Shahid, 
for his election to the Presidency of the 76th Session of the General 
Assembly. 
We convey our appreciation to the excellent work done by his predecessor 
His Excellency Volkan Bozkir.
To our friend, the Secretary General of the United Nations, His Excellency 
António Guterres, we convey our words of appreciation for his exceptional 
leadership.

Excellencies,
The United Nations General Assembly is gathered once again at times
characterized by multiple challenges of global nature.
The theme chosen for the current session, reflects the unique and difficult 
context in which all the countries in the world find themselves since 2019, on 
account of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Since its outbreak, we have witnessed notable efforts by different actors: 
Governments, regional and international organizations, private sector, and 
civil society, in a joint effort to face this global phenomenon threatening 
humanity.
It is to commend the central role of the United Nations, including through 
the World Health Organization, in coordinating actions aimed at mobilizing 
means and resources to save lives and the world from the pandemic.
Mozambique has taken important measures, such as, introduction of 
restrictive measures, increasing testing capacity, community sensitization 
and capacity building campaigns about the importance of preventive care 
in the fight against COVID-19. 
Preventive care measures included putting in place public health and social 
measures and the distribution of vaccinnes.
Excellencies 

One of the main challenges we, the developing countries, such as ours, are 
faced with, relate to access to essential medicines and vaccines.
We believe that the private sector and the International Cooperation 
Partners have a crucial role to play in providing support and building the 
critical infrastructure needed to administer vaccines.
We are in favour of a temporary waiver of certain clauses of the Agreement 
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), to allow 
an efficient response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 Vaccines represent today, an essential good, intrinsincally linked to the right 
to live/life, a fundamental right which is incumbent on all of our countries to 
defend.
Historically, humanity has shown resilience when faced with great challenges. 
We are therefore hopeful that once more we shall overcome the pandemic.
Given the scarcity in resources, it is imperative that we renew our appeal to 
the International Community to channel its support so that we can jointly 
successfully defeat COVID-19.
Its impact on developing countries, challenges us all to find effective resource 
mobilisation means and mechanisms, aimed at stimulating the economic 
recovery of countries strongly hit by the pandemic, thus ensuring tha we are 
on track to achieve the Sustainable Deveopment Goals.
The pandemic had a negative impact on the economic slowdown in 
Mozambique in 2020.

Estimates indicate that we will resume our economic recovery this year 
averaging growth rates of 1.3% of GDP, followed by a more sustained 
recovery from 2022 onwards. 
We would like to thank, once more, our international partners for the support 
rendered towards actions aimed at fighting the pandemic.
In this context, the revitalization of the United Nations and of multilateralism 
is of utmost importance.
It is furthemore vital to revive the reform agenda of the United Nations in 
order to give impetus to cohesion, articulation, efficacy and efficiency of 
inclusive decision-making processes.
In this context, the strengthening of cooperation and joint efforts are 
essential to promote the global agenda and of a more just, equitable, 
balanced and safe world.
Mister President;
Excellencies;
The world continues to witness threats to international peace and security.
The prevalence of terrorism and violent extremism, combined with the 
proliferation and trade of arms constitute a serious threat to peace and 
security at national, regional and global levels.

The African continent is amongst the most affected regions by terrorism and 
violent extremism.
Terrorism merits the unmitigated attention of the whole international 
community, particularly of the United Nations, given the suffering and 
bereavement it causes in our respective countries. It is incumbent on all of 
us to come up with measures on how best to defeat it.
In our country, terrorist activities have been registered in some 
districts of the Cabo Delgado Province, in the northern part of 
Mozambique.
The level of destruction of the socio-economic tissue, the atrocities and 
massacres, the wanton destruction of infra-structure and looting of 
goods belonging to communities, have caused mourning, pain and 
profound suffering leading to an unprecedented humanitarian crisis.
Our Government has embarked on a coordinated response to face 
terrorism, with the involvement of various partners at national, regional 
and international levels, and we can highlight positive developments 
and progress in the fight against terrorism.
In this context, we count on the support of our regional body, SADC. 
We also count with the help of the Defense Forces of Rwanda.
The European Union, other international partners and friendly countries, 
have provided humanitarian assistance and training and modernization of 
our Defense and Security Forces. 

We wish to thank the international community for the support rendered to 
our efforts in the fight against terrorism and assistance of the displaced 
population.
Excellencies,
We would like also to thank the support rendered by the international 
community to the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of the 
former guerrilla elements of RENAMO, in the framework of the 
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
Mister President,
Excellencies,
Climate related issues are emerging as one of the most pressing issues at 
international level. The preservation of the human habitat/environment is 
intrinsically linked to the survival of human civilization.
Africa is one of the most vulnerable continents and most prone to natural 
disasters which are increasing in frequency and intensity. 
Mozambique’s location, makes it prone to natural disasters, particularly cyclones, 
occurring with higher frequency lately.

More than a year and half after the country was hit by cyclone IDAI, efforts are 
still ongoing aimed at reconstruction and recovery from the socio-economic 
damages caused.
It is therefore for this reason that Mozambique attaches particular importance to 
concerted efforts towards mitigating the effects of climate change within the 
SENDAI Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction and the Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change.
Climate change continues to pose a major obstacle to the implementation of 
socio-economic development programs in our countries.
Despite our negligible contribution to greenhouse emissions, it is countries 
like ours that are most affected by climate change, particularly by global 
warming. 
The cuts in international financing for programs aimed at promoting resilience 
and adaptation to climate change, has led to an adverse impact and constitutes a 
major challenge to developing countries.
Mister President,
Excellencies,
We believe that the development goals inscribed in the “Paris Declaration on Aid 
Effectiveness” are important elements in the measures aimed to “Rebuild 
Sustainably” our societies.

Effectively, they are a factor to consider when renewing our commitment to 
the Decade of Action to Deliver the Sustainable Goals and in the context of the 
implementation of the Agenda 2030.
The lack of resources could seriously jeopardize the achievement of the 
objectives under the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, should current resource
mobilization and disbursement patterns remain/persist unchanged.
In Mozambique, the implementation of the Agenda 2030 is undertaken in tandem 
with and aligned with the governments Five Year Program 2020-2024. 
Mister President,
Excellencies 
Our country reaffirms its commitment towards the implementation of 
international legal instruments aimed at strengthening peace and security, 
particularly the Arms Trade Treaty, the Nuclear Weapons Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and the Conventional Arms Convention.

Mr President,
Ladies and Gentlemen
Mozambique has taken the decision to present its candidature to be Non Permanent Member of the Security Council, in 2023-2024.
In the words of H.E Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of the Republic of 
Mozambique, and I quote: “The importance we attach to peace and security at 
national, regional and international levels, drives this historic decision to 
present, for the first time since our independence in 1975, our candidature to 
the prestigious seat of Non-Permanent Member of the Security Council”. End 
of quote.
In this context, we humbly request the support of all member states of the United 
Nations towards this objective.
Our candidature is an expression of our firm commitment towards building and 
maintaining international peace and security, the preservation and respect of 
human rights and the promotion of sustainable development. 
We therefore reiterate our commitment to serve with dedication and 
responsibility in order to ensure that the principles and objectives of the UN 
Charter remain a source of inspiration to our people in building well-being, peace 
and global security.
We aim to put the modest, yet meaningful experience of Mozambique, at the UN’s 
disposal in conflict mediation and resolution processes through dialogue.

Let me end by once again stressing Mozambique’s belief that under the United 
Nations stewardship and with the support of all member states, the solutions for 
contemporary problems, albeit challenging, are within reach/attainable.
Muito obrigado!