Mr. President
1. Namibia joins other member states in
congratulating you on your election as President
of the 76th session of the United Nations General
Assembly, which is convened under the theme:
Building resilience through hope- to recover
from COVID-19, rebuild sustainability, respond
to the needs of the planet, respect the rights of
people, and revitalize the United Nations.
2. We also wish to commend the Secretary General,
His Excellency António Guterres, for his
profound and moving statement, highlighting
the many challenges the world is faced with
today while imploring world leaders to act now
to solve these problems. Your Excellency, we
have heard your clarion call loud and clear.
Mr. President
3. For the second year in a row, the world finds
itself engulfed by the dark cloud of the Covid-19
pandemic which continues to claim thousands of
lives daily. However, there is a light at the end of
the tunnel.
4. Global efforts to develop vaccines have been a
scientific triumph and a testament to human
ingenuity. In just under a year the unimaginable
has happened. Several different vaccines have
been tested, and produced to be delivered to
millions around the world. Unfortunately, the
global rollout of the vaccine has not been
impervious to the scourge of inequality. Vaccine
Apartheid has resulted in significant disparities
in terms of vaccine rollout and availability, with
many people in developing countries left out. It
is a pity that we have a situation where in some
countries, citizens are at the stage of receiving
booster shots while in other countries, many are
still waiting to receive their first doses of
vaccines. Let us bear in mind that, “No one is
safe unless we are all safe.”
5. The Covid-19 has impacted poorer countries
more acutely and unevenly. Faced with high
levels of debt and insufficient access to finance,
developing countries are struggling to mitigate
the severe effects of the crisis. Namibia
however, aims deploy innovative approaches to
ensure sustainable economic development in
this volatile period of the Covid-19 pandemic
and Climate Change.
6. Given our renewable resources such as solar,
wind as well as the ocean, Namibia has decided
to prioritize the development of green and blue
economies. Furthermore, we are also well
positioned through our recent membership to
the High-Level Panel on Ocean Sustainability, to
design and champion a sustainable “blue
economy”, which will grow our economic base
and create the much-needed jobs, while also
tackling climate change.
7. Additionally, Namibia has made progress in
incubating renewable energy assets in the form
of Green Hydrogen and Ammonia as part of its
energy transition through green
industrialization. To this end, the country is at an
advanced stage in the bid evaluation process for
the development of several sites for the export
of green hydrogen.
Mr. President,
Responding to the needs of the planet requires
us to enhance our Governance architectures in
order to enable us to act in the best interest of
our planet and its citizens. To this extent, Africa
has come a long way from the days of the First
Wave of African leaders, extraordinary
personalities, who paved the way towards
independence. Following this period, global
conflict in the form of the Cold War, resulted in
Africa’s Second Wave leaders being caught up in
the malaise of military coups and One-Party
States. However, having emerged from this
tumultuous period, the Third Wave of African
leaders have ushered in an era defined by
democratic elections and term limits. As the
third President of Namibia since our
independence in 1990, I am in currently in my
second and final term which will end on March
20, 2025. This is the new order on the continent.
We admit that there have been reversals but
wherever such incidents have taken place, the
African Union, supported by respective Regional
Economic Communities (RECs), has ensured that
perpetrators are ostracised. This is the New
Africa, and Africa which belies in Constitutional
Order.
Mr. President,
8. Namibia stands firm in its belief that there is no
room for discrimination of any kind in this world.
In this regard, we remain committed to the
implementation of The Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, which embodies our firm
commitment as the international community to
rid the world from the scourges of racism,
xenophobia and related intolerance at the
national, regional and international level.
9. The question of Palestine, now into its 73rd year
after the Nakba, remains unresolved. On this
crucial issue, Namibia wishes to amplify the
statement by Secretary General Guterres who
explicitly stated that leaders on both sides
should “resume a meaningful dialogue,
recognizing the two-State solution as the only
pathway to a just and comprehensive peace”.
Similarly, it has now been nearly 50 years and
still the people of Western Sahara are waiting for
their right to exercise their inalienable right to
freedom and independence. Namibia welcomes
the appointment of His Excellency Alexander
Ivanko by the Secretary General as his Special
Representative for Western Sahara. We hope the
9. The question of Palestine, now into its 73rd year
after the Nakba, remains unresolved. On this
crucial issue, Namibia wishes to amplify the
statement by Secretary General Guterres who
explicitly stated that leaders on both sides
should “resume a meaningful dialogue,
recognizing the two-State solution as the only
pathway to a just and comprehensive peace”.
Similarly, it has now been nearly 50 years and
still the people of Western Sahara are waiting for
their right to exercise their inalienable right to
freedom and independence. Namibia welcomes
the appointment of His Excellency Alexander
Ivanko by the Secretary General as his Special
Representative for Western Sahara. We hope the
between Washington and Havana, to rekindle
that spirit of respect and peace between the USA
and Cuba, which President Obama pursued.
Mr. President
11. Namibia is committed to the reform of the
UN Security Council, as a member of the African
Union Committee of Ten. We therefore call on all
countries to support the reform of the UN
Security Council in line with the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
Mr. President,
12. As we continue to build back better, we
have a collective responsibility to ensure the
participation of women at all levels of
governance and economic activity as a symbol of
freedom and equality in society. Namibia
believes that women’s participation and
representation is central to equitable and
sustainable development. Thus, Namibia
continues to advocate for increased gender
equality around the world, and we set ourselves
the challenge of leading by example in our
policies, programmes and actions.
13. Similarly, we take cognizance of the fact
that our youth are the backbones of the global
village and the custodians of the keys to
humanity’s future. Therefore, Namibia remains
committed to supporting the development of our
young people and promoting greater youth
participation in all areas of society, since they
have a critical role to play in promoting global
peace and development.
Mr.President,
14. We face the most critical period in human
history. Global peace is at stake, human dignity
is at stake and the future of our global village is
at stake. As we meet in this global parliament of
humanity, we are called upon by the citizens of
this world to craft a collective way forward that
will ensure that we recover from the devastation
of Covid-19 and chart a way forward towards a
brighter future. Although the task may seem
daunting, through unity of purpose, we will
prevail. For where there is unity, there is hope to
overcome Covid-19, where there is unity, people
can return to rebuilding sustainably, where
there is unity, we can respond to the needs of
the planet and respect the rights of all people.
Indeed, through unity, we will revitalize the
United Nations, transforming it into a bastion of
global democracy that will save the world from
the scourge of war and reaffirm faith in the
fundamental human rights, dignity and worth of
each and every human being on this planet.
I thank you.