I have great pleasure in welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway, and inviting her to address the Assembly. Ms. Solberg (Norway): Norway is a firm supporter of a rules-based multilateral order. We are a consistent partner in efforts to promote sustainable development, peace, security and human rights. The world needs strong multilateral cooperation and institutions to tackle global challenges such as climate change, cybersecurity and terrorism, and the United Nations needs to be strengthened so that we are better equipped to respond to the current challenges. Norway wants to take part in that responsibility. That is why we are a candidate for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the period from 2021 to 2022. We are ready to serve and to build a more effective and transparent Council that will help us to solve our common challenges in a better way. We must all work to forge new partnerships. Those partnerships must build on common interests and objectives, regardless of geography or tradition. Norway supports a more representative Security Council that better reflects global realities. That includes the expansion of both permanent and non-permanent seats for Africa. We need reforms that ensure greater legitimacy and lead to better results for more people. The SecretaryGeneral has shown great leadership in reforming the United Nations, and Norway will continue to support the implementation of his reforms, both politically and financially. The consequences of instability affect us all. Areas of conflict and instability are breeding grounds for violent extremism and international terrorism, and those threats are not limited to the conflict areas themselves. Terrorist propaganda, incitement and resources can move across borders, both real and virtual, and there is no single ideology, religion or belief behind them. Global security threats require global responses. Broad international cooperation is essential among States, international organizations, non-governmental partners and the private sector. We also need to work within our communities to prevent radicalization. We must prevent the spread of terrorist content online without undermining human rights or freedom of expression. Norway is committed to the Christchurch Call to Action. We too have experienced the deadly outcome of online radicalization. Creating durable peace is crucial to long-term security. Norway’s extensive experience in conflict resolution and peacebuilding guides our work in the United Nations. Since the end of the Cold War, mediation and conflict resolution have been cornerstones of our foreign policy. At the request of the parties, we have been engaged in efforts to resolve conflicts all over the world, in Colombia, Venezuela, the Philippines and Afghanistan, on the African continent and in the Middle East. We always seek lasting solutions. There is so much to be gained if we succeed. That is why Norway is willing to take the political risk of engaging early and why we persist in our efforts over time. For example, we remain committed to a negotiated two-State solution between Israel and Palestine. As Chair of the International Donor Group for Palestine, Norway remains committed to strengthening the institutional foundation for a future Palestinian State. Norway also supports an inclusive peace process in Afghanistan. We welcome the progress made in talks between the United States and the Taliban and urge the parties to finalize an agreement, thereby opening the way for peace negotiations among Afghans. Address by Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly will now hear an address by the Prime Minister of Norway. Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway, was escorted to the rostrum. The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I have great pleasure in welcoming Her Excellency Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway, and inviting her to address the Assembly. Ms. Solberg (Norway): Norway is a firm supporter of a rules-based multilateral order. We are a consistent partner in efforts to promote sustainable development, peace, security and human rights. The world needs strong multilateral cooperation and institutions to tackle global challenges such as climate change, cybersecurity and terrorism, and the United Nations needs to be strengthened so that we are better equipped to respond to the current challenges. Norway wants to take part in that responsibility. That is why we are a candidate for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the period from 2021 to 2022. We are ready to serve and to build a more effective and transparent Council that will help us to solve our common challenges in a better way. We must all work to forge new partnerships. Those partnerships must build on common interests and objectives, regardless of geography or tradition. Norway supports a more representative Security Council that better reflects global realities. That includes the expansion of both permanent and non-permanent seats for Africa. We need reforms that ensure greater legitimacy and lead to better results for more people. The SecretaryGeneral has shown great leadership in reforming the United Nations, and Norway will continue to support the implementation of his reforms, both politically and financially. The consequences of instability affect us all. Areas of conflict and instability are breeding grounds for violent extremism and international terrorism, and those threats are not limited to the conflict areas themselves. Terrorist propaganda, incitement and resources can move across borders, both real and virtual, and there is no single ideology, religion or belief behind them. Global security threats require global responses. Broad international cooperation is essential among States, international organizations, non-governmental partners and the private sector. We also need to work within our communities to prevent radicalization. We must prevent the spread of terrorist content online without undermining human rights or freedom of expression. Norway is committed to the Christchurch Call to Action. We too have experienced the deadly outcome of online radicalization. Creating durable peace is crucial to long-term security. Norway’s extensive experience in conflict resolution and peacebuilding guides our work in the United Nations. Since the end of the Cold War, mediation and conflict resolution have been cornerstones of our foreign policy. At the request of the parties, we have been engaged in efforts to resolve conflicts all over the world, in Colombia, Venezuela, the Philippines and Afghanistan, on the African continent and in the Middle East. We always seek lasting solutions. There is so much to be gained if we succeed. That is why Norway is willing to take the political risk of engaging early and why we persist in our efforts over time. For example, we remain committed to a negotiated two-State solution between Israel and Palestine. As Chair of the International Donor Group for Palestine, Norway remains committed to strengthening the institutional foundation for a future Palestinian State. Norway also supports an inclusive peace process in Afghanistan. We welcome the progress made in talks between the United States and the Taliban and urge the parties to finalize an agreement, thereby opening the way for peace negotiations among Afghans. be inclusive. We must reach the most vulnerable and marginalized. Norway is increasing its efforts to target those groups. We have consistently met the United Nations target of allocating 0.2 per cent of our gross national income to least-developed countries, and we have decided to increase that support further. If elected to the Security Council, we will strive to ensure that the oceans do not become a new area of conflict. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea provides a legal framework for the oceans, ensuring predictability and stability and promoting peaceful international cooperation on the conservation and sustainable use of the world’s oceans. It ensures freedom of navigation at sea. It is vital to ensure that all States fully implement it. The threats facing the oceans are unprecedented — loss of biodiversity, marine pollution, climate change and the overexploitation of marine resources are just some of the challenges we are seeing. At the same time, the oceans holds the key to achieving many of the SDGs. They are a vital source of food, energy, medicine and employment. If managed wisely, they offer huge potential for human development. Safeguarding the oceans is a shared responsibility and a matter of global urgency. That is why I initiated the High-level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy two years ago. Next year, at the second United Nations Ocean Conference, we will present a to-do list for the oceans. In October, we will host the Our Ocean conference. Norway has also launched a development aid programme to combat marine litter. We believe that ocean-based climate action can be a key to achieving our commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In Paris, we made a commitment to delivering results and outlining new ambitions for significant reductions in carbon emissions by 2020. That is what Norway is doing. Almost 30 years ago, we introduced a carbon tax in Norway, including in our petrol sector. My Government’s budget proposal, to be presented next week, includes a 5 per cent increase in the tax on carbon emissions. With European Union emissions trading and our carbon tax, we are actively using market mechanisms to speed up the green shift in our economy. We are making it cheaper to be green and more expensive to pollute. The tax revenue will be used to reduce other taxes. With close to 45 per cent of our new passenger cars now zero-emission vehicles, we are going from black to green in our passenger transport sector and we are also starting to reform our goods transport system. As a major shipping nation, we are working in the International Maritime Organization to reduce emissions from ships, and we are scaling up the construction of offshore floating wind developments. We must all do our part, and Norway will strengthen its nationally determined contribution by 2020. I urge all other countries to do the same, because it is no longer possible to ignore the fact that climate change affects security. I am not talking about a scenario in the distant future. These security risks are already a reality for millions of people around the globe, and they are not going away. Norway supports the call to appoint a special representative for climate and security, and we believe that the Security Council must address climate security issues. Hurricane Dorian has reminded us of the devastating effects of the climate crisis, and Norway will continue to support the call for graduated countries to be eligible for official development assistance if they are severely affected by natural disasters. Some of the countries experiencing the worst effects of climate change are among the world’s lowest emitters. The threat to small island States is existential. Climate-vulnerable countries such as Tuvalu, Dominica and the Seychelles should not bear the burden of adapting to this new reality alone. We are far apart geographically, but the oceans connect us. As an ocean country close to the melting Arctic ice, we share a common concern and can feel the urgency of the crisis. We must invest in resilience. That makes sense in economic terms, too. Our forests, and especially the rainforests, have a vital role to play. For many years, Norway has championed emission reductions globally through our climate and forest initiative. We have continued to reduce deforestation by working with a number of countries, including in the Amazon. The initiative agreed on in Leticia by the Amazon countries has our full support. Norway will be working with all of the countries in the region — including Brazil, I hope — in order to reach a point where deforestation comes to a halt. But reducing future emissions is of little immediate help to those already affected. Norway is therefore scaling up its support for climate change adaptation, resilience and food security in climate-vulnerable countries. This is an urgent task, and Norway will be an active partner in getting it done. Much has changed since Norway’s previous term on the Security Council in 2001 and 2002. But our commitment to solving common problems through the United Nations has not changed. We are a consistent partner at the United Nations. We will remain a strong supporter of a rules-based international order. Ours is and will continue to be an independent voice, and we will strive to find common ground. Norway is ready to serve again on the Security Council, and of course we hope for the support of all Member States. The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank the Prime Minister of Norway for the statement she has just made. Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway, was escorted from the rostrum
