

I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your well-deserved 
election. It is so significant to see that a South Asian is 
chosen to preside over the proceedings of the 76th session 
of the UN General Assembly at a time when the world is 
ferment in the midst of COVID-19 and climate crisis. 
Please be assured, Mr. President, of Nepal’s full support in 
the discharge of your important responsibilities.
Let me also commend the outgoing President His Excellency 
Mr. Volkan Bozkir for successfully leading the 75th session 
of the Assembly during the trying times. 
I would like to place on record our warmest congratulations 
to UN Secretary General His Excellency Mr. Antonio 
Guterres on his reappointment for a second term of office 
and commend his leadership of our organization.
Mr. President
I would like to join world leaders in expressing our deepest 
condolences to the people across the world, who have lost 
their loved ones due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
COVID-19 has silently and cruelly claimed over 4.5 million 
lives. The crisis has brought the world to a grinding halt, 
devastated the global economy, pushed an additional 150 
million people into extreme poverty, and threatened to 
reverse hard-earned development gains. 

The covid crisis has exacerbated pre-existing and perennial 
challenges such as poverty, hunger, unemployment, 
inequalities, and climate change. 
This has exposed systemic weaknesses, vulnerabilities, and 
inadequacies in health system around the world. Nowhere
is this distinctly visible than in the most weak and vulnerable 
countries where people remain deprived of access to even 
basic civic amenities. 
The theme of the General Debate ‘building resilience 
through hope’ is both timely and pertinent. 
Recovering from COVID 19, rebuilding sustainably, 
responding to the needs of the planet, respecting the rights 
of people, and revitalizing the United Nations aptly mirrors 
the pressing priorities, challenges, and needs. 
Reviving hope is critical in times of crisis. We appreciate the 
efforts made by the international community including the 
United Nations system to address the challenges posed by 
COVID-19. 
We also welcome the pledges of funds and vaccines.
Increased commitment and resources are needed for these 
initiatives. 
Deepening vaccine inequality is leaving adverse socio economic impacts in many low-income countries. 

Fair and equitable access to vaccines must be ensured for 
everyone, everywhere. People’s lives should come first.
Vaccines must be declared as public goods for the benefit
of people’s lives.
In Nepal, saving lives, strengthening the health system, and 
pursuing economic recovery and transformation underpin 
our efforts to build a sustainable and resilient recovery. 
Despite constraints and challenges to access COVID-19 
vaccines, we have been able to vaccinate close to 20 
percent of our population.
We remain grateful to our immediate neighbours-India and 
China for their support in fighting the covid crisis. 
We also sincerely thank friendly countries, like United 
States, Britain, Japan and others for providing vaccines, 
critical medical equipment, and medicines in our fight 
against the pandemic.
Mr. President,
Recent developments in Afghanistan are of common 
concerns to all of us. People of Afghanistan deserve better. 
We call for an unhindered humanitarian access and full 
resumption of public services, including health and 
education for all sections of Afghan society. 

We urge all parties involved to ensure peace, security, and 
stability so that the Afghan people can live in dignity and 
enjoy their fundamental rights and freedom. We also urge 
Afghanistan to engage with the international community on 
the basis of the principles of the UN Charter and norms of 
international law. 
We call on all concerned parties in Myanmar to respect the 
will of the people, restore the democratic and constitutional 
process, and uphold the fundamental rights and freedom of 
the Myanmar’s people. 
We call for an immediate end to the hardships and 
sufferings of the common people in Libya, Syria, and 
Yemen. 
In the Middle East, we reiterate our long-standing position 
and want to see peace and security with a two-state 
solution for Israel and Palestine living side by side within 
secure and recognized international borders.
Mr. President,
For over 63 years, Nepal has consistently contributed to the 
UN peace operations to promote peace, security, and 
stability in the conflict-ridden parts of the world. 

We attach high importance to the safety and security of UN 
peacekeepers and the need for adequate training, 
resources, and modern technologies. It is in this spirit that 
we endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments in 
support of the ‘Action for Peacekeeping’ initiative. 
Nepal has endorsed the Kigali Principles on the protection 
of civilians and supports the UN Secretary General’s system wide zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse 
and aims for zero case scenario in peacekeeping. 
As one of the largest troop and police contributing 
countries, Nepal believes that such countries deserve more 
senior level positions both at the headquarters and in the 
field based on the level of its contributions.
Excellencies and distinguished delegates, 
Nepal condemns terrorism in all its forms and 
manifestations and denounces all activities aimed to fuel 
social discord, communal conflicts, and intolerance. 
There is a need of robust global cooperation to effectively 
implement the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to 
combat and control financing of terrorism, and to fight the 
organized trans-border crimes. This underlines the urgency 
for conclusion of a comprehensive convention against 
terrorism. 

It is worrisome to see new signs of arms race through 
modernization of nuclear arms, and weaponization of outer 
space among big powers. We call upon them to divert 
precious resources from military spending to addressing the 
covid-19 pandemic and lifting the most vulnerable people 
out of poverty. 
The mechanisms of disarmament as well as the measures 
of non-proliferation and confidence building have been 
stalled. Nepal calls for general and complete disarmament 
of all weapons of mass destruction in a time-bound and 
verifiable manner. 
As the host to the UN Regional Center for Peace and 
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, we are committed to 
supporting the works of the Centre and reviving the 
Kathmandu Process for promoting regional efforts on 
disarmament, arms control, and non-proliferation.
Mr. President,
Whether it is the rising of sea levels or melting of Himalayan 
glaciers, hurricanes, storms, floods or fires, climate change 
has become an existential threat to humanity. Reports 
indicate that warmer conditions have even prompted 
animals and plants to adopt new habits and evolve new 
traits.

Nepal is home to eight of the world's 14 highest peaks 
including the top of the world- Sagarmatha, the Mount 
Everest. Sagarmatha stands as an icon of adventure 
seekers and Himalayan heritage for us. As the 
environmental concerns are growing, we need to raise 
environmental awareness. While we welcome climbers from 
around the world, we expect climbers’ cooperation to bring 
back the garbage from the high mountains to maintain their 
sanctity. 
Nepal has a number of snow-fed Himalayan rivers that are 
connected to identity and civilizations and sustain one fifth 
of the global population. Our efforts have been to accord 
due ecological diligence while undertaking development 
activities in the Himalayan region.
Nepal is at the sharp end of climate change despite its 
negligible share in greenhouse gas emissions. On our part, 
we reiterate our commitment to delivering climate-resilient 
development pathways by 2030 and net-zero emissions by 
2050. 
The principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, 
equity and respective capabilities should be at the center of 
the climate agenda to ensure climate justice. 

The Glasgow COP26 must provide a breakthrough. Climate 
ambition of developing countries must be met with easier 
access to adequate financial and technological support for 
adaptation and mitigation. It must be a gateway to greener, 
cleaner, and smarter energy transition.
Mr. President,
With just less than a decade left, the world is not on track 
to achieve the 2030 Agenda. The pandemic has strained 
our efforts to realize the SDGs. 
As we strive for resilient recovery and building back better 
and stronger, achieving SDGs should be at the center of our 
priorities.
Nepal has mainstreamed the SDGs into its national plans, 
policies, and programmes. Significant progress has been 
achieved across major sectors, such as education, health, 
gender equality and women’s empowerment.
Changing the lives of people lacking wealth, dignity, and 
human rights has been our commitment.
The Least developed countries (LDCs) are the most 
vulnerable group of countries even at the first quarter of 
the 21st century. They should be freed from the 
dehumanizing conditions of poverty and under 
development. 

LDCs and LLDCs need reliable and sustainable financing, 
partnerships, and technology transfer to overcome their 
structural impediments to benefit from globalization.
As both an LDC and LLDC, Nepal’s structural challenges are 
unique. We see our plan to graduate from the LDC category 
by 2026 as an opportunity to bring structural transformation 
and make the long-held national aspiration of graduation 
smooth, sustainable, and irreversible.
We look up to the LDC-5 to be held in Doha early next year 
as an important opportunity to renew the bond of 
international partnership. It must build on the unfinished 
business of IPOA, with a commitment to enhanced level of 
support to the graduating countries.
The development of multi-modal transport infrastructure 
and unhindered transit rights of landlocked nations are 
critical to their sustainable development. 
We call for the implementation of past decisions and 
programmes in full synergy and coherence with the 2030 
Agenda and expect development partners to increase their 
support to establish a secure, reliable, and efficient transit 
transport system for the landlocked developing countries. 
The ongoing crisis must not be a pretext for retracting from 
ODA commitments.

The development potentials of South-South cooperation in 
terms of trade, investment and technology must be fully 
exploited. 
It is time to reform global economic governance 
architecture to ensure fair and equitable representation of 
all. We welcome the steps taken by IMF and G20 on debt 
relief and debt service suspension. Nepal calls for a 
reformed and more equitable international debt 
restructuring to address the debt crisis of low-income 
countries.
WTO is not only about maintaining rules-based 
international trading order, it must also be a platform to 
enable the developing countries benefit from it with an 
enhanced level of international cooperation in the areas of 
aid for trade, technology transfer, and capacity building. 
Connectivity is lifeline for peace, progress, and prosperity. 
Connectivity forms a premise for enduring cooperation, 
deeper integration, building of trust and confidence among 
nations. Nepal attaches utmost priority to cooperation 
through connectivity and underlines the need to create a 
win-win situation between and among countries.

Excellencies and Distinguished Delegates, 
Nepal calls for concerted efforts to ensure the safety, 
security, dignity, and well-being of all migrant workers. We 
call for the effective implementation of the Global Compact 
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and underline the 
need for a more robust international governance for the 
protection, safety, and welfare of the migrant workers.
Protection of minorities and their rights makes the world 
more humane and contributes to world peace and security. 
Despite not being a party to the Refugee Convention and 
its Protocol, Nepal has hosted thousands of refugees on 
humanitarian principles. 
Nepal considers the forced eviction of citizens as a grave 
crime against humanity. We call upon the international 
community to respond responsibly and act decisively for 
refugees’ right to return to their homeland in safety and 
dignity.
Mr. President,
Nepal has chosen the democratic path to development. 
Democracy is about people and therefore democracy is 
indispensable for people’s welfare.

The constitution of Nepal accommodates aspirations of all
its citizens. Proportional representation of all sections of the 
society is at its core. It guarantees a comprehensive set of 
internationally recognized human rights and fundamental 
freedoms. The constitution establishes powerful 
commissions to promote and protect rights and interests
specific to women, Dalits, Muslims, Madhesis, indigenous 
people and other disadvantaged communities. It makes it 
mandatory to have 33% women representation in federal 
and provincial parliaments and 40% at the local level. This 
has firmed up their role in politics and development. 
We are committed to conclude the transitional justice 
process through the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
and the Commission of Investigation on Enforced 
Disappeared Persons. There would be no blanket amnesty 
in the cases of serious violation of human rights. 
As a member elected for the second term in UN Human 
Rights Council, we continue to add value through apolitical 
and impartial approach to human rights.
Mr. President, 
Nepal’s worldview is shaped by our adherence to the 
principle of ‘amity with all and enmity with none’. 

Our friendship with both of our neighbors, India and China,
remains of paramount importance in the conduct of our 
foreign policy based on the principles of Panchsheel – five 
principles of peaceful co-existence, derived from the 
teachings of Lord Buddha, the enlightened son of Nepal. 
The relevance of these principles as a framework for 
interstate relations cannot be overstated in the present 
context. 
Principles and purposes of the UN Charter, non-alignment, 
international law and norms of world peace form the basis 
of our foreign policy. 
The present government of Nepal led by Prime Minister 
Sher Bahadur Deuba is committed to conduct the foreign 
policy on the basis of sovereign equality, mutual respect, 
and mutual benefit and remains engaged with all friendly 
countries in the wider international community. 
Nepal firmly believes in the indispensability of 
multilateralism with the United Nations as its centre. We 
consider this the only way to build global understanding and 
cooperation, promote shared interests, and secure our 
common future. 
We add our voices in support of the measures and initiatives 
aimed at UN reforms. Under-representation of developing 
countries must be addressed in recognition of their growing 
contributions.

We want to see a more representative, inclusive, and 
transparent Security Council and a more revitalized General 
Assembly. Reforms must be inclusive and representative, 
accountable, and effective in its delivery. 
We consider regional cooperation arrangements important 
for building trust and confidence among nations, managing 
harmonious relations and making the best use of 
complementarities for shared prosperity. Nepal’s active 
engagement in SAARC, BIMSTEC and ACD manifests our 
ardent faith in regional cooperation, connectivity, and
integration.
Over the last sixty-five years, Nepal and the United Nations
have enjoyed a strong partnership- driven by trust, 
cooperation, and mutual respect. We thank the United 
Nations for its continued support in our development 
endeavors. 
Nepal commends the Secretary-General for bringing out a 
comprehensive report ‘Our Common Agenda’. We support 
the report’s focus on the agenda of action designed to 
accelerate the implementation of existing commitments. 
Mr. President, 
We live in troubled times. There has been dramatic shift in 
geopolitics and geo-economics in the post-Cold War era 
posing unprecedented challenges on all fronts. 

The world’s economic center of gravity is shifting decisively 
towards Asia, centered on the economic growth of China 
and India. 
At the same time, the world is becoming more complicated 
and polarized, with transnational challenges ranging from 
terrorism to climate change to food security to mass 
migration to political radicalism and extremism. 
Under the cumulative impact of all these factors, we are 
experiencing with new ways of life in the midst of confusion 
and uncertainty. 
We see conflicts in different parts of the world, these 
conflicts are more within nations than between nations. 
This has given rise to identity politics. Nations find 
themselves increasingly divided along lines of race, 
ethnicity, gender and religion. 
We must find a common ground and practice tolerance and 
harmony to confront these unimaginable problems. My 
delegation considers that democracy and multilateralism 
have no alternative to overcome the stresses and strains of 
the day. It is also the best antidote to the risk of civil conflict 
in ethnically diverse societies. 

I feel happy to share with this august audience that the 
unity in vast diversity is Nepal’s national strength. Thanks 
to the democratic culture and harmonious way of life, 
Nepali people’s resilience in times of hardships and 
sufferings has remained exemplary as seen in the aftermath 
of the devastating earthquakes of 2015, and the COVID-19 
pandemic in recent times. 
As I stand here today, my thoughts go back to 1960, when 
the first elected Prime Minister of Nepal, late B.P. Koirala, 
while addressing the UN General Assembly, said, and I 
quote, 
“As we look at the world, we find that it is the economic 
disparity between countries, as between the rich and the 
poor people within the nation, that is the source of much 
friction and tension. …….The main function of the United 
Nations at the present moment is the creation or recreation 
of a climate of confidence and trust.” 
End of quote.
Creating a climate of confidence and trust is as relevant 
today as it was in 1960. It is upon us to work together for 
a more equitable, just, fair, resilient, and sustainable world. 
In conclusion, I believe the time is now to turn the crisis 
into opportunity, despair into hope, and risk into resilience. 

The time is now to build a stronger, interconnected, and 
inclusive multilateral system grounded in cooperation,
solidarity and mutual trust. 
We must rise to our responsibility to re-build for the sake 
of the people we serve and the planet we live in. 
I thank you for your attention.