
1. Mr President, Excellencies, friends and colleagues. 
2. Let me congratulate His Excellency Abdulla Shahid on 
assuming the Presidency of the 76th session of the General 
Assembly. I also thank His Excellency Volkan Bozkir, for his 
leadership of the 75th session during an unprecedented and 
difficult year. 
3. The most important lesson from the COVID-19 pandemic is 
that multilateral cooperation is essential to overcome the 
challenges of our global commons. Only coordinated 
international action can lead us to a sustainable, inclusive, and 
resilient recovery. 
4. This is why the role of the United Nations is so crucial, 
especially for small and developing countries. 
5. The UN must empower countries to deal with the challenges 
of managing our global commons in order to build a more 
resilient future. 
6. I want to welcome and commend the leadership of UN 
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, not only over the past year 
but in putting forth a bold and visionary Common Agenda to 
reposition and adapt the United Nations for the future. 
7. In particular, I welcome his proposal for a Summit of the 
Future to forge a new global consensus.
8. Today, I wish to highlight four key areas that require our 
urgent attention: public health, climate change, oceans, and the 
digital revolution. 
9. First, the fight against COVID-19 is far from over. 
10. Access to vaccines remains the biggest problem faced by 
many countries. Our immediate priority must be to redouble 
efforts to expand access to vaccines by scaling up production 
and distribution. 
11. Singapore is a strong supporter of vaccine multilateralism. 
We will continue to support the COVAX Facility, and will 
donate our vaccines under the COVAX initiative to other 
countries with greater needs.
12. We have continued to help our friends and neighbours where 
we can, through other contributions of medical supplies, oxygen, 
and equipment. 
13. As a transshipment hub, Singapore has always played our 
part to keep essential supplies moving to where they are needed 
most. 
14. In the longer term, we need to take forward the 
recommendations of the G20 High Level Independent Panel to 
address major gaps in preparedness for future pandemics, 
strengthen multilateral support for the WHO and UN, and 
mobilise resources for our collective security – because no one 
is safe until everyone is safe.
15. This brings me to my second point: we need a sustained and 
ambitious global response to address climate change. 
16. The effects of climate change are deeply felt at a local level, 
but the solution depends on a collective response at the global 
level. 
17. For small island nations like Singapore, climate change 
remains a clear and present danger. 
18. Recent extreme weather events are stark reminders that we 
do not have time to lose. 
19. The IPCC’s landmark report has concluded that global 
temperatures are likely to rise above 1.5 degrees Celsius in the 
next two decades, and we are likely to see more intense rainfall, 
flooding and droughts, loss of sea ice, and rising sea levels.
20. The fight against climate change will be a stark litmus test of 
our ability to manage the global commons through multilateral 
action. 
21. No country acting alone can move the needle. But if we 
work together, we can make a substantial impact. If we fail, the 
consequences will be calamitous for every country and for all 
humanity.
22. Singapore has always been a strong advocate of the Paris 
Agreement from the beginning. 
23. Last year, even while battling the pandemic, we submitted 
our enhanced 2030 Nationally Determined Contribution to the 
Paris Agreement and our Long-Term Low-Emissions 
Development Strategy for 2050 and beyond. 
24. This year, we unveiled the Singapore Green Plan 2030, 
which outlines a whole-of-nation approach to sustainable 
development, and charts ambitious, concrete targets over the 
next 10 years. Among others, we will plant one million more 
trees, quadruple solar energy deployments, and reduce waste 
sent to landfills. 
25. We are also committed to working with partners in new 
areas such as green finance and clean energy solutions.
26. And we look forward to substantive outcomes at the 
upcoming UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in 
Glasgow.
27. The third global commons in urgent need of multilateral 
action are our oceans. 
28. The oceans sustain our global ecosystem; they are a 
repository of biodiversity and a buffer for climate change. They 
are also a critical artery for trade, and a source of jobs and 
livelihood for billions of people. 
29. As a tiny island state at the confluence of key global 
shipping routes, heavily dependent on maritime trade, Singapore 
is an ardent advocate for the UN Convention on the Law of the 
Sea or UNCLOS. 
30. UNCLOS is the foundation for rules-based governance of 
the oceans in all its aspects. It sets the rules for maritime 
entitlements and provides the overarching framework for the 
peaceful resolution of maritime disputes. It is fundamental to 
maintaining open trade routes and sea lines of communication. 
31. The 40th anniversary of the adoption of UNCLOS next year 
is an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to UNCLOS as 
the primary legal instrument for oceans governance, and do 
more to ensure its effective implementation. 
32. Singapore also firmly believes in the importance of 
conserving and ensuring the sustainability of our marine 
environment. So we look forward to the fourth session of the 
BBNJ Intergovernmental Conference next year, and to the 
second UN Ocean Conference to be co-hosted by Kenya and 
Portugal next year.
33. The fourth area for urgent multilateral action relates to the 
digital revolution and its impact on sustainable development.
34. The digital revolution was well underway before COVID-19. 
But the pandemic has accelerated the pace and scale of this 
revolution. 
35. Digital technologies have empowered millions of people. 
But the gulf of opportunities between digital haves and digital 
have-nots has also widened.
36. Today, 3.8 billion people remain digitally disconnected. 
37. The digital divide has prevented access to education, health 
care, and many other essential services to millions of people 
around the world. 
38. Digital transformation is not just about new technologies and 
new hardware.
39. Fundamentally, it is about improving lives and empowering 
people, especially the poorest and most vulnerable. It is about 
strengthening the resilience of our societies and economies.
40. In a nutshell, digital transformation should be about 
sustainable development. 
41. To put it differently, if we do not close the digital divide, we 
will not achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. That is 
why digitalisation poses a global challenge that requires a 
concerted global response. 
42. There are many questions related to digital transformation. 
43. How can we provide fair and secure access to digital data, so 
that data is not monopolised by the few, leaving the vast 
majority digitally disenfranchised? 
44. How can we encourage a freer flow of data across the world, 
to promote innovation and inclusive sustainable development? 
45. Can we find ways to address the pandemic of 
misinformation, which has sometimes been arguably worse than 
the pandemic itself?
46. There are no ready answers. But we clearly need to have a 
conversation about a global framework to maximise the 
opportunities and deal with the challenges posed by digital 
transformation. 
47. The goal is both simple and singular: how can we enhance 
multilateral cooperation to leverage digital technologies for 
sustainable development? 
48. There are many paths we can take: the Secretary-General’s 
proposal for a Global Digital Compact, or a new UN convention 
on digital transformation for sustainable development, or a 
framework of norms and principles. These options are part of 
the conversation that we need to have at the global level. 
49. As a small country, a vital node in the international digital 
network, Singapore has always advocated a global architecture 
that is open, inclusive, inter-operable, and multi-stakeholder. 
50. Such a global digital architecture must be shaped by a few 
guiding principles: 
51. One, the voices of small states must be heard and our 
concerns taken into account.
52. Two, digital transformation needs to be people-focused, and 
improve people’s daily lives. 
53. Three, we need to involve all relevant stakeholders: the 
government, the private sector, civil society, because it is no 
longer possible in today’s digital world to neatly draw lines 
between government, industry, and citizens.
54. Four, we have to “think digital”, which means thinking in an 
integrated, multi-disciplinary, multi-sectoral way. Complex 
problems require innovative solutions.
55. And five, we need concrete action, through identifying a 
common set of “digital development goals” and a framework for 
multilateral cooperation.
56. At the national level, Singapore is already building 
partnerships with many countries. 
57. We have concluded Digital Economy Agreements with 
several partners.
58. We co-lead the WTO Joint Statement Initiative on e commerce with Japan and Australia, which now includes more 
than 80 member economies and comprise 90% of global trade.
59. These can be building blocks in a larger global architecture.
60. At the broader level, we need determined action to close the 
digital divide, not only within nations but also between nations. 
61. There is already much work being done. But we need to give 
these efforts a stronger push, through education, training, and, 
improving digital skills and literacy across the board; investing 
in infrastructure, for universal and affordable internet 
connectivity; and expanding access to data and digital public 
goods, including open-source software and digital utilities.
62. We can do much more to improve international data 
governance, to promote inter-operability, trust, and security 
when we transact in the digital environment.
63. I have only touched on some of the issues we need to look 
at. There are other important issues outlined in the Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation. The Common 
Agenda also lays out a way forward, on a global “digital 
technology track”.
64. The next step is to take action on these proposals, and 
Singapore will support efforts by the UN to advance our global 
conversation. So that together, we can make tangible progress 
on digital transformation for sustainable development. 
65. Mr President, Excellencies, friends and colleagues,
66. As we seek to build a more inclusive, sustainable future, we 
need to give each other a hand. This is especially so for small 
and developing countries.
67. In 1992, Singapore established the Forum of Small States, or 
FOSS, an informal platform for small states to discuss issues of 
mutual concern. 
68. From a group of 16, FOSS has grown to 108 members today, 
and will celebrate our 30th anniversary next year. 
69. To mark this milestone, Singapore will launch a new “FOSS 
for Good” programme.
70. It will commence in 2022 and will focus on priority areas 
such as digital transformation and COVID-19 recovery, tailored 
to the unique challenges faced by small countries.
71. Because we believe that it is only by working in partnership, 
helping each other, that we can all reach a more resilient, more 
inclusive, and more sustainable tomorrow.
72. It is always darkest before dawn. But dawn will arrive. There 
is hope and much work ahead for all of us. Thank you.
