Mr.
President,
I
congratulate you on your election as President of the 76 th Session
of the UN General Assembly and assure you of Uganda’s unwavering
support. I commend H.E. Mr. Volkan Bozkir for his transformational
leadership of the 75 th Session, especially during such challenging
times of the COVID 19 pandemic.
I
would also like to congratulate the Secretary General, H.E. António
Guterres, upon his re appointment for the second term and thank
him for his devotion to the work of the United Nations. Your re
election is a demonstration of the confidence that member states
have in your leadership. I commiserate with all countries on the
enormous lives lost due to the COVID 19 pandemic.
Uganda
welcomes the theme of the 76 th Session of the General
Assembly. The United Nations is the appropriate forum to speak with
a c ommon voice on sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery from
the devastating impacts of the COVID 19 pandemic. This Session is
a timely reminder of the urgent need for effective multilateral action
to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda f or Sustainable
Development to realize our vision, shared principles and
commitments, to end poverty in all its dimensions and ensure “no
one is left behind As we celebrate the 76 th anniversary of the
United Nations, it requires a revitalized United Nati ons that is fit for
addressing global challenges that face us today. In this regard,
Uganda reiterates its commitment to multilateralism. We believe that
by working together, we can better respond to global crises such as
the COVID 19 pandemic and climate change and their consequences.
Mr.
President,
Uganda,
like other countries, has had to respond to the
unprecedented and multi faceted effects of the COVID 19 pandemic.
Uganda’s approach has been to prioritize the protection of human
life. To ensure a sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery, the
Government has taken deliberate and targeted decisions to continue
strengthening the capacities of the national health system and other
key sectors of the economy to respond to the impacts of the COVID
19 pandemic adequately.
However, the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences can only be effectively responded to if we act collectively. In this regard, we appreciate the efforts of some individual states, various international and regional organisations, particularly the United Nations, African Union, European Union, G20, World Health Organisation, International Monetary Fund, World Bank Group and others, in supporting Countries to respond to the pandemic. We see vaccination of all as the best way to address the pandemic. We now know that restricting the ability to get vaccines affects the ability to control the pandemic and prevents new variants from emerging.
Therefore,
we call for more action to ensure that at the centre of a
global recovery, equitable, affordable access for all to safe, quality,
efficacious, effective, accessible and affordable COVID 19 vaccines,
therapeutics and diagnostics. We commend the Secretary General’s
efforts for his continued advocacy and active engagement on
equitable access to vaccines.
On the other side, we find that the actions by some to hold vaccines at the expense of poor Countries, also referred to as vaccine nationalism, is wrong, but a good lesson for developing Countries that don’t want to innovate. It is good because it wakes up those that are asleep, waiting to be saved by others.
Uganda
is progressing in searching for cures and vaccines, which will
be achieved in a few years. We are developing a vaccine with our
own funding and the help that we need is for raw materials for the
vaccines. Therefore, we invite interested partners to support us with
the raw materials.
Mr. President,
Uganda
reaffirms her commitment to implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development in its entirety and to achieving 17
Sustainable Development Goals ( as we commence the decade
of action and delivery of Sustainable Development. We have realiz ed
now more than ever, the urgent need to accelerate our progress
towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda as a pillar in our
national response to the multi faceted impacts of the COVID 19
pandemic as we build back better and strive to achieve the
ove rarching 2030 Agenda goal of eradicating poverty in all its forms
and dimensions.
The
COVID 19 reinforces the pre existing obstacles to realizing the
Goals, structural inequalities, gaps, systematic challenges and risks.
We firmly believe that the succes sful implementation of our Third
National Development Plan (NDP III) under the theme Sustainable
industrialization for inclusive growth, employment and wealth
creation is critical in achieving 17 SDGs.
Uganda
has implemented an inclusive process to ens ure that the
people own the SDG agenda, starting with the national coordination
arrangements. As a result, the Government fully mainstreamed the
SDGs, identifying key accelerators, for instance, Industry,
Governance and Environment, based on their relative return on
investment.
As
Uganda advances the implementation of its plans, it is committed
to ensuring no one is left behind. The Government has put in place
laws
and policies to support the inclusion of vulnerable persons. For
instance, the Public Finan ce Management Act ( ensures gender
and equity responsive budgeting. In addition, the Government
increased funding to livelihood and special grants for youth and
women. Now with the new Parish Development Model, which started
in the financial year 202 0/21, the SDGs will be much more localized,
monitored and reported on up to the lowest level, thus "Leaving No
One Behind The Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment
program has also improved social security and reduced
vulnerabilities for older persons aged 65 years.
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted Uganda’s progress in some sectors but has also given impetus to the Country’s industrialization drive. The toll that the pandemic has had on jobs, hitherto promising sectors could significantly impact efforts to reduce poverty, vulnerability and inequality. However, it has awakened the discourse on how Uganda builds its systems to generate the required resilience to withstand such shocks.
As the Government fast-tracks progress on the 2030 Agenda, it has embraced the global wave of digital transformation, which presents significant opportunities. However, whereas the 2030 Agenda is strongly anchored on environmental integrity and sustainability, there are increasing effects of climate change reducing Uganda’s natural capital. Therefore, the 3rd National development Plan sets out ambitious climate actions through the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan.
Mr.
President,
Setting
our path towards the full realization of the 2030 Agenda and
the P aris Agreement requires that we urgently address climate
change, one of the greatest challenges to humanity. We continue to
witness the enormous loss of lives and property due to climate
change
related disasters globally. All of us are susceptible to these
climate change disasters. We, therefore, stress the need to strengthen
the global response to the threat of climate change in the context of
sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty through
bold multilateral actions by all. Uganda continue s to experience
prolonged droughts, melting of ice caps at its highest mountain, Mt.
Ruwenzori, floods, erratic rainfall and landslides
Recently,
Uganda experienced impacts of intensive and prolonged
droughts and rainfall, severely impacting lives and l ivelihoods. W e
share Lake Victoria, The second largest fresh water lake, with the
brotherly C ountries of Kenya and Tanzania. The lake's water level
in Uganda is measured at a place in the city of Jinja and the lowest
level of water ever recorded was in 1923 when it was 10.28metres.
Before that, the highest level recorded had been on January 1 in
1918; the record showed 11.89metres and t he subsequent high level
record was on May 16, 1964, when the water level reached 13.41
metres.
However,
since last year, the water level in the lake has been going
up. On May 19, 2020, the water level reached the new record level
of 13.49metres. Since that time, the water level has remained above
13 meters Therefore, we have asked t he people who settled too close
to the Lakeshores to move away from the Lake Shores. Staying 200
meters from the Lakeshore is the wise, correct and useful thing to do.
Uganda,
despite being a less contributor to climate change, is taking
deliberate and targeted actions to address climate change through
investments in cl imate adaptation and mitigation measures such as
increasing access and consumption of clean energy to enhance
production, and increasing forest and wetland cover, among others
in line with our ambitious Nationally, Determined Contributions.
However, mobili zation of means of implementation for climate change
remains crucial as urgent action is required to significantly reduce
emissions,
adapt to the adverse effects and reduce the impacts of
climate change.
We
commend the Green Climate Fund for its commitme nt to a 50:50
balance between mitigation and adaptation in its portfolio and ensure
that at least 50% of adaptation funding goes to particularly
vulnerable countries, including LDCs, SIDS (Small Island Developing
States) and African States. In this context Uganda reiterates its
commitment to support bold action proposals at the 26 th Session of
the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change scheduled in the United Kingdom from November 1
12, 2021, in the areas of mitigation, adaptation and finance. We,
therefore, call on the developed C ountries to fulfill their financial
commitment in line with the Paris Agreement to provide 100 billion
US Dollars annuall y by 2020 to assist developing C ountry Parties
with respect to both mitigation and adaptation with a concrete
roadmap.
As we concluded the UN Decade on Biodiversity 2011 2020, the
assessment on the progress towards the global biodiversity targets
indicated insufficient results. Uganda, just like most C ountries,
continues to experience biodiversity loss to the extent that some
wildlife and other living species are now in danger of extinction.
Cognizant of this urgency, Uganda with support of the international
community has taken specific bold action measures that include
inter alia: m ainstreaming of biodiversity conservation and restoration
in our national development policies and priorities as highlighted in
our National Development Plan 111 for Financial Years 2020/20 21
2024/2025 and Vision 2040; restoration of 64,000 hectares of
degraded wetlands to benefit 4 million farmers with a target regaining
our 1994 of 15.6% wetland coverage by 2030; re afforestation and
afforestation of over 200,000 hectares and we have prior itized more
tree planting to ensure that Uganda’s forest coverage increases from
12.4% in 2015 to 24% by 2030; s trengthening the public private
sector and non state actors’ engagement; d emarcation of boundaries
of
critical wetlands and central forest reser ves to prevent
encroachment; strengthening the legal and institutional framework
to address the challenge of illegal wildlife trade and poaching such as
repealing the Wild life Act C h ap ter 200 in 2019 with the Uganda
Wildlife Act, 2019, that provides for the conservation and sus tainable
management of wildlife and; e nforcement of fishing regulations to
address the challenge of illegal and unregulated fishing. Uganda has
acted decisively to fulfill the commitment made during the
celebrations of the 70 th anni versary of the United Nations in
September 2015 to protect the planet from degradation.
Mr.
President,
Countries in the global south have continued to stand in
solidarity with their global counterparts even during the COVID
19 pandemic by offering appropriate support to enable them
adequately respond to the pandemic. Their actions are in line
with the princ iples of South South Cooperation and support of
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In this regard, Uganda will continue to strengthen
South South and Triangular Cooperation within the United
Nations As the Third South Summi t host, I reiterate Uganda’s
commitment to host the Summit and look forward to welcoming my
fellow G77/China leaders to Kampala, Uganda, on suitable dates in
2022/3.
Mr.
President,
The
predicament of C ountries in special situations particularly, the
Least Developed Countries ( continues to date. The evidence
from the Istanbul Programme of Action for LDCs (
implementation overall assessment indicates insufficient progress
towards
achieving its overarching goal of half of the LDCs graduating
by 2020. Uganda, like other Least Developed Countries, has
continued to face numerous challenges during IPoA implementation
that include, among other things: limited productive capacities,
limited funding, insufficient physical infrastructure, commodity pr ice
volatility, climate change, biodiversity loss and disasters.
Notwithstanding the structural constraints to development faced by
LDCs, Uganda has registered progress in implementing the Istanbul
Programme of Action, in particular, national paved road ne twork
increased; accessibility to electricity and innovations as well as the
use of mobile technology for financial transactions increased. In
addition, primary school enrollment (including gender parity in
primary education) increased; maternal and i nfant mortality rates
decreased and prevalence and incidence rates of HIV/AIDS reduced.
We
should, therefore, during the Fifth UN Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, agree on the next Programme of Action that
calls for a more enhanced, renewed and st rengthened global
partnership to support graduation and smooth transition of LDCs as
agreed upon at major UN Conferences and Summits. In our view, this
Programme should contain robust means of implementation to
support the LDCs inadequately addressing the existing structural
constraints, particularly limited productive capacities, inadequate
funding, high debt level, commodity price volatility, as well as
emerging challenges like climate change, biodiversity loss and
disasters. In addition, the Programme sh ould contain a robust follow
up and monitoring framework at all levels to track its timely and full
implementation.
Mr.
President,
Terrorism continues to constitute one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Terrorism and violent extremism
continue to bring death and suffering to innocent people. Terrorist
groups such as Daesh, Al Qaida, Al Shabaab, Boko Hara m and the
Allied Democratic Forces ( continue to inflict death and
devastation. The international community must adapt to this
changing landscape. We must be unwavering in our resolve to combat
terrorism and Uganda, will continue to support and activel y
participate in global and regional counter terrorism efforts.
Mr.
President,
Our
development and transformation cannot take place without
peace and security these are prerequisites for socio economic
transformation. We should continue to give att ention to supporting a
peaceful environment, thus enabling us to concentrate on our growth
and development. T he UN should continue to support conflict
prevention and resolution initiatives undertaken by regional and
sub regional organizations like the Afr ican Union ( and
Intergovernmental Authority on Development ( This
partnership should be based on the division of labour and burden
sharing, complementarity and mutual respect. We should continue
to encourage and strengthen this partnership.
We
continue to face serious challenges to peace and security in our
region; Uganda continues to support and advance peace and security
efforts in the region. We remain actively involved in regional
initiatives such as those of the AU, IGAD, EAC, ICGLR and ar e
encouraged by the progress that we continue to make. Uganda is
committed to continuing working with our international partners in
supporting the counter terrorism and stabilization efforts in Somalia,
the political transition in Sudan, implementation of the Revitalized
Peace Agreement in South Sudan and the elimination of terrorist and
other negative forces in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr.
President,
This
Assembly made a historic pledge during the World Summit held
in 20 05. A commitment to strengthening the United Nations with a
view to enhancing its authority and efficiency. This cannot happen
without the reform of the UN Security Council. The need to reform
the UN Security Council is now more urgent and imperative than ever
before. Uganda supports the comprehensive reform of the UN
Security Council The present geopolitical realities are compelling for
a comprehensive reform of the Security Council to make way for
equitable representation.
Africa,
with more than one b illion citizens and over seventy percent
of issues on the agenda of the Council, continues to suffer the
historical injustice of having no representation at all in the
Permanent category of the Security Council and being under
represented in the non Perman ent category. It is time that we
address this long standing injustice and imbalance perpetuated in
the present configuration of the Security Council without any further
delay.
The
Common African Position on the reform of the UN Security
Council, as enunc iated in the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte
Declaration, continues to garner wide support of the UN
membership. Therefore, it is imperative that Member states
expeditiously work towards achieving progress in the negotiations on
reform in the context of the I ntergovernmental Negotiations ( so
that Africa can assume its rightful place in the Security Council.
Mr.
President,
All
countries are duty bound to promote and protect human rights
under international law and the United Nations Charter. Therefore,
we must continue to address the promotion and protection of human
rights without politicizing the issue of human rights. Uganda remains
committed to fulfilling its human rights obligation in accordance with
its constitution and international law Our commitment is from the
firm
belief that it is suitable for our people, drawn from the bad
experience and lessons from our history of dictatorship. In this
context, Uganda will be voluntarily reviewed during the 40 th Session
of the Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council in
Geneva, scheduled from January to February 2022.
Mr.
President,
The
predicament of refugees continues to this day. Uganda has
maintained its open door policy on refugees and currently, the
country hosts over 1. 4 million refugees, the largest number in Africa.
It i s in line with this spirit, that recently we took another deliberate
step to assist those in distress from Afghanistan. Our approach to
refugees is anchored in our belief that no one chooses to flee their
country or be a refugee and if they do, they must be treated with
dignity and kindness in their times of need
However, t he circumstances of the refugees and host communities
pose enormous challenges for the national authorities, which need to
b e addressed as part of international solidarity. We, therefore,
continue to call for more equitable sharing of the burden and
responsibility for hosting and supporting the world’s refugees
consistent with international commitments.
I
thank you for yo ur attention.